Title:  Reappearing Acts: A Review of Lori Emerson’s
                        
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  31 January 2018
Abstract:  
                
                A review of Lori Emerson's Reading Writing Interfaces: From
                        The Digital To The Bookbound (2014). The reviewer highlights
                    Emerson's demands that we uncover and demystify the
                        invisible interfaces governing our digital tools and
                    platforms, situates Emerson's work with the larger field of digital humanities,
                    and talks at length about the movie Big.
            
Full Body Text: 
I did not expect a book titled Reading Writing Interfaces: From
                    the Digital to the Bookbound to announce, on its first page, that it 
                    begins and ends with magic
                    
                . But Lori Emerson’s convincing argument in favor of demystifying
                    devices — as well as their architects and users — is full of parlor tricks
                as well as missing Statues of Liberty, Gob Bluths and David Copperfields . Truly, the greatest trick Emerson pulls off is
                convincing the world that the interface, a term that sounds
                like something Will Ferrell might have come up with in a Saturday Night Live George W. Bush sketch, is tied to a rich and
                far-reaching history worth exploring. Rather than 
                    simply that which opens up from one distinct space to
                        another distinct space
                    
                , the interface, in Emerson’s hands, is the site which determines the very
                nature of our approach to reading, writing, and navigating the world around us,
                often with an invisible, at times even nefarious, hand.
Thoughts on the relationship between magic and technology have inspired countless
                science fiction novels, comic books, and press releases in recent years. Was it
                Steve Jobs or a character from Warren Ellis and John Cassady’s Planetary who bragged about the ability to send 
                    a signal to reality’s operating system
                    
                ? My favorite story about the intersection between these two
                seemingly-disparate worlds is Big, the 1988 Hollywood
                fable starring Tom Hanks. The architect of the embiggening that transforms the body
                of thirteen-year-old Josh Baskin (played by David Moscow) into one that resembles an
                Academy-Award-winning adult is Zoltar, a coin-operated machine who promises to grant
                wishes. Zoltar is uncomplicated. He is efficient. He is a literal plot device, an
                animatronic fortune teller that less charitable viewers might find heavy-handed (not
                to mention orientalist, given his turban and robes and angry glowing eyes). But he
                also has a well-designed, intuitive interface: he can be operated by a child with
                minimal prompting or instruction (though Baskin does have to hit the machine a few
                times to get it started). He can only perform limited functions, but his users seem
                to find little reason to pursue other avenues of inquiry. He even provides a
                receipt: a tiny Zoltar Speaks card that lets users know their wish has been
                granted. Viewed through the lens of Emerson’s magical thinking, he is also the dream
                of many twenty-first century users of digital technology, a device of seemingly
                limitless possibilities. If only he accepted credit cards. And fit in your
                pocket.
The interface is surprisingly front and center in many parts of Big. Beyond Zoltar, there is, of course, the famous scene set in New
                York City’s FAO Schwarz (RIP) where Baskin, in the midst of providing UX advice to
                the CEO of the MacMillan Toys Company (Robert Loggia!), literally stumbles across
                the toy store’s Walking Piano and magically performs two
                musical numbers. While the first steps on the piano are preliminary and cautious,
                Baskin and the CEO quickly master the device, speeding through Chopsticks to the delight of the assembled shoppers. The CEO is so
                impressed that he gives Baskin a job on the spot. Like many viewers, Big Piano” creator Remo Saraceni sees in Big
                
                    a beautiful message of innocence
                    
                .
But what if we do not subscribe to this romantic notion of wisdom inherent in a
                child’s gaze? What if, like Emerson, we are aware of the ways in which 
                    the supposed naturalness of ubicomp-related gestural
                        interfaces is utterly misleading
                    
                ? As a kid I was amazed by how quickly this Baskin kid figured out how to play
                the piano: I didn’t have Chopsticks up my sleeve,
                because I didn’t grow up in a suburban environment that encouraged and afforded
                piano lessons. While there is some exploratory tinkering in this scene, there is no
                real trial-and-error with the device, no room for failure. These narrative
                trajectories live on in the marketing materials for new devices: for example, who
                could forget the irritating hipster star of an early Google Glass commercial, a man
                who uses his gadgets to track down a Ukelele in A Day
                book and broadcast his fast and easy mastery of the instrument (with a New York City
                skyline backdrop, at sunset no less!) to impress his significant other? Why be John
                Cusack at the end of Say Anything when you could buy a
                device that turns you into Peter Gabriel in less than 24 hours? 
The last technological interface to be introduced in Big
                remains in production limbo by the end of the film. As a kid, Baskin’s dream of the
                ultimate comic – one with a choose-your-own-adventure interface
                that allows readers to pursue a wider range of stories than you’d generally find in
                a single issue – fascinated me. As his coworker Susan notes, 
                    the kid makes his own decision
                    
                . That the comic’s target demographic will inevitably run out of stories is
                touted as a feature, not a bug: when someone asks what happens when a reader
                exhausts the options stored on the device’s computer chip, Susan replies that you
                    just sell different adventures. Instead of spending a dollar for 22 pages of
                a single story, children (and their parents!) now have the option of shelling out
                $19 for the illusion of choice .
Josh Baskin leaves before finishing his presentation on his digital comic book,
                deciding to return to the Zoltar machine and overwrite his initial wish with a wish
                to return to childhood. It’s interesting that the film chooses to stage his retreat
                at the moment when he is on the cusp of solving the problem he faced at the
                beginning of the film. The very first image we see in Big is, perhaps surprisingly, a computer screen. YOU ARE STANDING IN
                    THE CAVERN OF THE EVIL WIZARD, it reads, underneath an image of said wizard.
                    ALL AROUND YOU ARE THE CARCASSES OF SLAIN DWARFS. Called to action by the
                game, Baskin types, MELT WIZARD. The program requires a more specific
                command. The boy seems frustrated: the thermal pod his digital avatar carries in his
                hand seems to be the obvious tool of destruction, yet it ends up dying when his
                follow-up response is delayed by a request from his mother to take out the trash
                    . Baskin spends a significant portion of his time at
                MacMillan Toys designing a more engaging, more intuitive, more mobile version of
                this story; one that might, for instance, anticipate a user’s need to pause while he
                or she is being yelled at by their parents. Was the project a failure, too
                cost-prohibitive, not innovative enough? Are we expected to read in the immediate
                consideration of the economics of such a device the ways in which innovation is
                limited by market forces? Big is obviously more
                interested in imagining the possibilities of toys designed by children, warts and
                all, than in manufacturing the real thing. 

                Melt The Interface
                Thomas Padilla argues that, failure should be a goal in developing digital
                    initiatives . The poets and artists surveyed by
                    Emerson revel in various acts and performances of failure. They unlock the black
                    boxes of proprietary hardware and software and force the contents found therein
                    to misbehave. They pull algorithms kicking and screaming into the light of day.
                    They create works that stretch across all corners of our material landscapes,
                    messy portraits smeared with the fingerprints of their creators and the marks of
                    their tools of composition. Unlike most project managers, librarians, or
                    developers, artists can devote their energies to producing work 
                        that is deliberately difficult to navigate or whose
                            interfaces are anything but user-friendly
                        
                    . But as Padilla suggests, maybe there is a need for more time, labor, and
                    institutional support devoted to explorations of difficulty and experimentation
                    in design. Maybe a wider range of digital humanists can productively resist or
                    critique user preferences for the invisible if they, like the artists featured
                    in Emerson’s book, use strategies of defamiliarization to make what seems
                    natural unnatural. We’re not going to learn how to melt wizards if
                    we’re afraid to explore the possibilities of melting wizards in the first
                    place.
                Sometimes the digital interfaces of daily academic labor are very much visible to
                    us, almost frustratingly so. Instructors are often strongly encouraged or even
                    required to use Canvas and Blackboard: content management systems that seem
                    designed to punish students. If your university library has decided to invest
                    more in digital ebooks than physical copies, you have likely had a great time
                    doing research in Ebrary’s web interface, apparently invented by someone who
                    hates to read. And many digital humanists have likely heard the sounds of
                    snickering from the snarkier non-DH faculty members in the room while you’ve
                    stared with horror at an unfamiliar projector interface just before the job
                    talk, or when said interface decides all of a sudden that the commands it
                    prompts you to follow are more recommendations than directives for how the
                    display might be turned on. Perhaps we’ve used words like
                        intuitive or clean to describe our
                    preferred alternatives to these technological monstrosities. Emerson is here to
                    remind us that the bargains we make in such desperate moments are almost always
                    Faustian.
                Specifically, Emerson critiques glossy interfaces that 
                        further [alienate] the user from having access to the
                            underlying working of the device
                        
                    . She identifies the paradox at the heart of contemporary technobabble:
                    for all the rhetoric about the ways in which the boundary between human and
                        information is eradicated with every new user-friendly device, the
                    reality is one where we rely more and more on tools 
                        entirely closed off to the user
                        
                    . Some of the benefits of averting a future where The Singularity is
                    sponsored by Apple are self-evident. We like knowing where and how to get out in
                    the event of an emergency, and we are perplexed if not completely apoplectic
                    over design decisions that remove entrances, let alone exit paths: the
                    disappearances of USB ports, CD drives, and now headphone jacks. What happens
                    when I try to crank up Cinderella’s Don’t Know What You’ve
                        Got (Till It’s Gone) and it turns out my ear buds are dead?
                    Heartaches come and go, and all that’s left are the words, but now, like, the
                    words are gone too.
                Some of the sleight-of-hand tricks revealed in Emerson’s book are likely already
                    known to many Digital Humanities Quarterly readers.
                    I’ve asked my last few DH classes here at Brown to read Mitchell Whitelaw’s
                        Generous Interfaces for Digital Cultural
                        Collections (2015), an essay which implores those of us curating
                    digital objects to offer 
                        multiple, fragmentary representations to reveal the
                            complexity and diversity of cultural collections, and to privilege the
                            process of interpretation
                        
                    . Even more recently, Renée Farrar, citing Emerson, has argued that
                        individual effective resistance of pre-packaged interfaces and their
                    conventions enables both artists and general users to find 
                        opportunities to think critically in forgotten,
                            invisible spaces, and to shirk off the often unacknowledged influences
                            of user-friendly
                        
                    . There is also the longer history of critical examinations of the
                    interface, highlighted by Emerson in her introductory chapters: Mark Weiser’s
                        The World Is Not A Desktop (1994), Friedrich
                    Kittler’s There Is No Software (1995), Steven
                    Johnson’s Interface Culture (1997), among other
                    antecedents.  
                In What’s Next: The Radical, Unrealized Potential of Digital
                        Humanities, Miriam Posner suggests that digital scholars might focus
                    their efforts on creating interfaces that explicitly challenge their users: for
                    example, she describes the ways in which the design of Evan Bissell and Erik
                    Loyer’s The Knotted Line
                    asks us to question the purpose of an interface and 
                        links our assumption that we are entitled to
                            straightforward, transparent interfaces with our inability to look
                            deeply at the structures of injustice and inequality in the United
                            States
                        
                    . By examining, dismantling, and reimagining digital interfaces and their
                    aims, we can stress the ways that natural or
                        intuitive design methodologies rely heavily on false
                    (and often white, North American, and economically privileged) assumptions about
                    the realities of many users. 
            

                The Tyranny of Uncertainty
                Emerson notes that the rhetoric touting the magic of
                    twenty-first century devices, invisible interfaces, and ubiquitous computing
                    initiatives 
                        might not be so disagreeable if it didn’t also help
                            determine the shape of the future of computing
                        
                    . Channeling (or perhaps more accurately, Exorcising)
                    Arthur Clarke, Emerson, in her first chapter, Indistinguishable from Magic: Invisible Interfaces and Digital Literature
                        as Demystifier, claims that 
                        the future of computing is domineering, branded, and boring
                        
                    . We are more indebted to our interfaces than unburdened by them. Current
                    trends in computing — specifically, the current state of ubiquitous
                        computing, a dream of a pervasive Internet of
                        Things operating silently and efficiently to augment our daily
                    lives to their fullest potential — privilege 
                        the value of an interface that recedes from
                            view
                        
                    . Our iPads, smart refrigerators, and phones sense for us
                        what information we need and want, liberating us from the tyranny of
                    uncertainty . Even better, we can use the
                    time these decision-making gadgets save us to express ourselves creatively,
                    provided these forms of expression utilize applications have been approved for
                    consumption and use on Apple devices.  
                Or we can try to remember what creativity via computers could
                        mean and in fact at one point did mean, marketing be damned
                        . Emerson takes readers on a crash
                    course in digital defamiliarization, introducing us to projects that experiment
                    with multitouch interfaces (via Myron Krueger’s work from the 1970s and 1980s,
                    which predates the finger-swiping mechanics we have come to rely so heavily upon
                    in the 2000s and 2010s), poetic apps created specifically for the iPad by Jason
                    Edward Lewis and Erik Loyer (among others), projects that exploit glitches in
                    software (Deena Larsen’s Samplers: Nine Vicious Little
                        Hypertexts) and interfaces that explicitly reject or subvert
                    canonical web design principles and conventions (projects by Jason Nelson and
                    Young-Hae Chang Heavy Industries). These projects do not direct their audiences
                    to new or better uses of technology; instead more often than not, their
                    structures and perceived shortcomings serve to remind us that 
                        the Web has become so familiar to us that we’re not
                            even aware of its structures, its codes, and the way it works on us
                            rather than us working on it
                        
                    .
                You may be unfamiliar with many of the pieces of experimental literature
                    highlighted in these and other chapters. You might also be skeptical of
                    Emerson’s insistence upon 
                        the importance of digital literature as an intervening
                            force in the computing industry’s push to have our devices do all the
                            thinking, perceiving, and even creating for us
                        
                    . I too have been burned by the rhetoric of innovation. While surveying
                    work for my dissertation, which focused on poetry and digital media, I would
                    occasionally find myself shaking my head at seminal works of electronic
                    literature that were held in high regard by other audiences. I do think there is
                    still a great deal of hyperbole circulating in appraisals and defenses of
                    electronic literature, and I wonder about the negative influence of
                    institutional circuits and funding outlets who privilege particular claims about
                    its value. But I also, at times, have lacked an understanding of key contextual
                    and conceptual material in relation to particular projects, which is why I’ve
                    grown more and more appreciative of the critical and curatorial lenses of
                    authors and artists like Dene Grigar, Mark Sample and Élika Ortega (among
                    others), as well as initiatives like the Electronic Literature Collection
                    series. I don’t know if Reading Writing Interfaces
                    will succeed in converting all skeptics, but I think Emerson does an admirable
                    job of connecting seemingly-esoteric work to experiences with interfaces that
                    might resonate with many of our heavily-mediated, everyday lives.
                For example, I was particularly fascinated by Emerson’s Postscript, in which she proposes the term
                        readingwriting as a way to acknowledge 
                        the practice of writing through the network, which as
                            it tracks, indexes, and algorithmizes every click and every bit of text
                            we enter into the network is itself constantly reading our writing and
                            writing our reading
                        
                    . This unwieldy (in a good way) term is used by Emerson to argue that 
                        [w]hat is new and particular to the
                            twenty-first century literary landscape is a revived interest in the
                            underlying workings of the algorithms that are reading, writing, and
                            reading our writing
                        
                    . The reference to a return to the algorithm may surprise
                    some readers, but in fact 
                        poets have been writing with the aid of digital
                            computer algorithms since Max Bense and Theo Lutz first experimented
                            with computer-generated writing in 1959
                        
                    . Algorithms and their impact are increasingly visible to us, especially
                    when social media networks are constantly refining and rewriting theirs to win
                    favor with particular advertisers or entice new users, revisions that can
                    infuriate early adopters or raise questions about how user information had been
                    previously concealed from view.
            

                The Road Not Googled
                Google, its search interfaces, and its algorithms are the particular objects of
                    critical inquiry here: Emerson highlights several artists interested in 
                        questioning how it works, how it generates the results
                            it does, and […] how it sells ourselves and our language back to
                            us
                        
                    . For example, Bill Kennedy and Darren Wershler’s apostrophe
                        engine project, which has created poems out of the language of
                    Google and AltaVista search results, documents the impact of search inquiries
                    and parameters on language that we gravitate towards online and offline. But it
                    is also an experimentation in media archaeology across time, one that 
                        provides us with bits of material evidence that reveal
                            the ever more sophisticated workings of Google’s search algorithm
                            through the shape, the content, and the syntactical structure of the
                            statements themselves
                        
                    . It is in moments like these where Emerson is most impressive in her
                    evaluations of experimental electronic literature. While many of us may have
                    taken note of or even screencapped amusing moments of Google’s predictive text
                        (jim mcgrath linkedin followed immediately by
                        jim mcgrath obituary is a depressing story of a life
                    unlived; thanks, Google) or enjoyed parody Twitter accounts like @RikerGoogling
                    (where we see the embarrassing daily searches of Star Trek:
                        The Next Generation Commander William Riker), we generally refer to
                        Googling without recalling that the term refers to a
                    practice that is constantly changing over time and highly dependent upon the
                    person, device, connection, and interface deploying the search. Emerson and the
                    artists she highlights perform reappearing acts in which
                    the trick is revealing what we hide behind the metaphors we use to shape our
                    uses of technology.
                In addition to highlighting the speed with which our contemporary web interfaces
                    vanish behind colloquialisms, Emerson recalls the philosophical shifts in the
                    history of personal computing that inspired the closed, transparent,
                        and task oriented devices and interfaces we are familiar with
                    today . By closely examining the rise of
                        user-friendly graphical user interfaces (GUIs), the
                    pedagogical impulses guiding the creation and dissemination of the Logo
                    programming language and Smalltalk software initiatives of the 1970s and the ad
                    campaigns for the Apple Macintosh (among other texts and archival materials),
                    Emerson documents the messy recent history that preceded our sleeker, flatter,
                    dull monoculture governed by increasingly narrower principles of design. Her
                    work makes visible the contradictions inherent in Apple’s victorious 
                        gloss over the aggressively closed architecture of the
                            Macintosh while marketing it as a democratic computer ‘for the
                            people’
                        
                    . Whereas the opportunities to bridge the distance between user and
                    interface once invited a variety of designs and methods, these roads have been
                    paved over to favor the more immediate needs of businesses and consumers. This
                    history is particularly compelling to readers too young, too tuned out, or too
                    not-alive to have experienced it firsthand, and its presence here may be useful
                    to readers more preoccupied with the apparent benefits of the user-friendly
                    world we presently inhabit.
                Early in Reading Writing Interfaces, Emerson notes
                    that she is not arguing wholesale against user-friendly interfaces that seek
                        to be invisible but is instead criticizing the privileging of
                        transparency as a design mandate 
                        valued above all else
                        
                    . She laments the lost possibilities of a present governed by
                        multifunctional, generative devices for reading as well as writing or
                        producing content instead of the appliances for the consumption of
                        content we keep on us at all times . In the texts and material contexts of works produced by
                    Emily Dickinson and concrete poets like bpNichol, she finds not digital
                    antecedents but 
                        antidotes for the Interface-Free
                        
                    . 
                        Why do we lure ourselves into believing that these
                            interfaces offer us the ability to somehow transcend the interface
                            itself and not understand that they instead offer us an increasingly
                            difficult to pin down, perhaps even insidious form of control on our
                            creative expression?
                        
                    . What if we did more than wait passively for the equivalent of Zoltar and
                    his invisible hand? What if we spent less time reveling in the clean, white,
                    endless expanses of Apple and Google commercials and instead took a closer look
                    at the economic and human costs of the labor generating our devices? What if it
                    was OK to pursue creative endeavors that called attention to their present and
                    attendant material conditions, instead of wasting time writing and making
                    excuses for sententious, pretentious trash? 
                Reading Writing Interfaces has helped me to more
                    productively call attention to ideas of the interface in my academic writings
                    and teaching materials. Within my immediate institutional context as an
                    instructor in Public Humanities, it has provided me with a useful framework to
                    help students and faculty members think more about the design principles
                    motivating their digital projects (as well as my own). Beyond professional
                    applications, it points the way towards new weapons to help in the war against
                    the wizards who are transforming the digital spaces we share into
                    two-dimensional kingdoms that are white, dull, and cold as ice.
            
