Title:  The Brain Is Deeper Than the Sea: Sea and Spar Between, Computational Stuplimity, and Fragmentation
Volume:  016
Issue:  1
Date:  23 February 2022
Abstract:  
            
         	The author demonstrates how we can use fragments of classical text as a heuristic to help us interpret a poem (Nick Montfort and Stephanie Strickland’s Sea and Spar Between) that is, on the face of it, quintessentially nonfragmentary because it contains over 225,000,000,000,000 stanzas.
         
Full Body Text: 
This article discusses Sea and Spar Between, a long
            computational poem by Nick Montfort and Stephanie Strickland (2010). The poem’s length
            prevents human readers from reading it completely. I argue that although the poem’s
            global inaccessibility raises complex interpretive problems, we can surmount them by
            applying multiple interpretive modes to a single textual fragment, thereby meeting the
            fragmentary text with a fragmented critical discourse; the idea being that a more
            coherent theoretical apparatus would, in its latent totalizing impulse, be intrinsically
            unsuited to a fragment’s incompleteness. I use this technique to read Sea and Spar Between through various lenses including, inter alia, cosine similarity, affect theory, and code. I conclude
            with a website that reimagines the poem by populating its sea with language from the
            critical literature on the poem. Like Sea and Spar Between,
            this website cannot be circumnavigated by human readers and so enacts this
            article’s solution to the problem of how to read computational poems that cannot be read
            completely: to interrogate the assumptions that cause us to view unreadability as a
            problem, and to embrace incompleteness as a source of critical insight.
         

            Approaching a whole through a part of its parts
            Against a light blue background — a visual metonym for the titular sea — Sea and Spar Between consists of an immense lattice of stanzas that combine the distinguishing textual rhythms and rhetorical gestures of Melville and
                  Dickinson
               
               . The stanzas are comprised of a subset of the union of
               the words in Herman Melville’s Moby-Dick and Emily
               Dickinson’s poetry. The words are combined and recombined by the poem’s code in a
               manner that moves the language back and forth between the compressed
               interiority of Dickinson’s poetry and the expansive intensity of Melville’s prose.
               The poem’s words flicker and change as the reader’s mouse navigates the sea, like the
               water disturbed by a prow moving through waves. At the bottom of the screen is a
               search bar, where the reader can enter coordinates to move to a specific location in
               the sea; each stanza in Sea and Spar Between has, and is
               locatable by, two unique coordinates, which Montfort and Strickland conceptualize as
               latitude and longitude. The set of latitude and longitude values both range from
               0–14992382 inclusive, meaning that the total number of stanzas is 1499238222.The
                  poem can be viewed at: https://nickm.com/montfort_strickland/sea_and_spar_between/index.html.
               
                To write that Sea and Spar Between
               consists of a stanza-lattice is slightly misleading. This is partly because
               the word’s Latin root means to stand still or firm, yet
               the critical literature on Sea and Spar Between
               repeatedly emphasizes the poem’s instability. 
            
               Sea and Spar Between’s interface
               
            
            Mainly, however, consists is misleading because the poem is impossible to read
               completely and, by extension, the reader cannot definitively identify the poem’s
               constituent parts. (By impossible to read completely I
               mean impossible for a human to read completely; a
               sufficiently advanced computer could parse the entire poem.) The poem is impossible
               to read because of its scale. Montfort and Strickland write: Sea and Spar Between is a poetry generator which
                  defines a space of language populated by a number of stanzas comparable to the
                  number of fish in the sea, around 225 trillion
               . Its order of magnitude is therefore 1014, a length
               that makes Sea and Spar Between a nexus between one of
               poetry’s oldest genres (epic) and one of its newest (computational poetry), though
               here the nostos is incompletable and the hero, if there is
               one, is anonymous. To use the Melvillean language that the poem invites, its length
               transforms the reader into an Ahab surrogate, and the text into an analogue of the
               white whale, though the pursuit of the latter by the former is indefinitely prolonged
               because, as Stuart Moulthrop and Justin Schumaker write, a complete reading of the poem would take more than
                  200 million years . To appreciate the Sisyphean nature of
               reading Sea and Spar Between more fully, observe that a
               reader who has read 225 stanzas has only read 1e-10% of the poem. Given the
               impossibility of completely reading Sea and Spar
               Between, then, the question becomes whether it is possible (and if so, how)
               to extrapolate an accurate sense of the poem’s architectonic whole from its
               fragments. Although reconstructing the lost general from the extant particular is a
               common task in disciplines such as archaeology, it is an alien task to the readers of
               contemporary poetry, where the dominant genre, lyric, is characterized by structural
               intelligibility (because lyric poems are conventionally brief). Moreover, as Joseph
               Frank writes, modern poetry asks its readers to suspend the
                  process of individual reference temporarily until the entire pattern of internal
                  references can be apprehended as a unit
               . But in texts with largely unfathomable (because
               unfathomably large) referential patterns, this process of referential suspension is
               drastically extended, which effectively makes it impossible to a apprehend the entire pattern of internal references
               . In such cases, Stuart Moulthrop asks, how
                  do we choose configurations of output to serve as
                  representations of the work or objects of study?
               . One way of answering Moulthrop’s question is to look
               to classical studies. Due to the fragmentary state of much of the Greco-Roman corpus,
               classicists have also had to confront the question of how to interpret splinters of
               output from inaccessible signifiers. Although the separation of classical textual
               parts from their original wholes is due to the historical vicissitudes of textual
               transmission, whereas the separation of Sea and Spar
                  Between’s parts from its whole is due to a contingent aesthetic decision
               by its author-programmers, the consequences are identical: our tacit assumptions
               about what it means for a text to be complete are foregrounded, and we are compelled
               to explore new modes of interpretation and reading. Because fragmentation . . . hinders our understanding of . . . narrative structure,
                  particularly our ability to form any critical reading of it
               , these new modes must be open-ended. And, as Susan Stephens argues, because hypotheses about the relationship between a fragment and its whole are intrinsically non-falsifiable, critics are grant[ed] considerable latitude . . . for interpretation, which results
               in an almost open-ended hermeneutic
                  environment
               . Editing fragments, she suggests, should
               therefore be conducted along subjunctive lines as a negotiation,
                  an exploration of the possibilities rather than the transmission of dogma
               . Stephens’s emphasis on interpretive plurality
               is representative of a theoretical shift in the criticism of classical fragments. The
                  standard scholarly practise, S. Rebecca Martin and
               Stephanie Langin-Hooper write, was to understand them [i.e.,
                  fragments] as incomplete things, whose principal purpose was to serve as a
                  referent to a complete . . . whole
               . Increasingly, however, fragments are being
               valued as texts and objects in their own right (ibid.),
               rather than as the offcuts of an absent signifier, especially because fragments
               implicitly eschew the totalizing impulse of conventional representational
               modes such as naturalism, and thereby allow us to explore alternative modes that
               embrace incompleteness (ibid., 10). Because fragments eschew totalities in favor of
               the partial, the criticism of fragments can switch between multiple perspectives to
               an extent that, in other critical contexts, could be condemned
               as insufficiently rigorous. The benefit of thinking about Sea
                  and Spar Between through the lens of fragmentation, then, is that the
               poem’s main theoretical challenge (how to choose configurations
                  of output to serve as representations of the work
               ) dissolves because the work’s unreadability transforms
               from an insoluble problem into an invitation to critical multiplicity.
            I accept
               this invitation by exploring Sea and Spar Between
               through several interpretive modes. I argue that because fragments encourage
               us to move between different critical paradigms, we end up looking at them from
               various perspectives; ironically, therefore, we can see the fragment more completely
               than we could have had it been possible to view against the contextual backdrop of
               its whole. 

            Seeking a microcosm in the waves of Sea and Spar Between
               One possible response to
               the overwhelming complexity of Sea and Spar Between at
               the macro-level is to focus on its more intelligible micro-levels. For example, we
               could begin at an arbitrary stanza and interpret it in relation to its local context
               to create a cluster of significance, treating the poem as a kind of jigsaw puzzle
               with the conceptually inverted aim of disassembling the completed set into sub-sets
               of related pieces.  Let us test this approach. Assume for the sake of argument
               that the reader has pseudo-randomly entered the poem at the coordinates (22, 22): 
                  fix upon the bag-disk course
                  nailed to the spar
                  fast-fish
                  arrestless bank and rise
               
            
               (22, 22) and its surrounding stanzas
               
               
            
            We can view (22, 22) through several different paradigms. For example, as a hub from
               which spokes of stanzas radiate outwards, or as the temporary midpoint of a conveyor
               belt of stanzas paratactically related to one another, or as a volta signalling a
               pivot in thought or pitch that divides the stanzas of the upper half from those of
               the lower, or as an element in an n-tuple. Of course, these examples do not exhaust
               the possible perspectives we might adopt. As Barry Stroud writes, The only limitation on possible conceptual schemes is our limited
                  ingenuity in inventing them (1975, 92). But before selecting one of the
               above paradigms to apply to (22, 22) and its local context, the limits of that
               context have to be determined. How many of the stanzas in Figure 2 should we read?
               (There are three obvious possibilities: first, every stanza depicted within
               Figure 2, second, the row or column within which (22, 22) appears, third, (22, 22)
                  tout court.) For if we want to focus on Sea and Spar Between’s textual micro-levels, then we must
               decide how to partition the poem into micro-levels. And unless we choose to read each
               stanza as if it were sui generis and therefore completely
               unrelated to its neighbours, then our chosen micro-level must allow for the grouping
               of interrelated stanzas and the mapping of relationships between stanza-groups. The
               problem, in a nutshell, is that it is not immediately clear how to accomplish this.
                These groups should be discrete insofar as the point of collapsing Sea and Spar Between into micro-levels is to create a set of
               sub-poems that are feasibly interpretable in isolation, as opposed to stanzas that
               are interpretively dependent on their connections to stanzas around them, and the
               stanzas situated concentrically beyond those stanzas, and so on for some indefinite
               distance. So, the partitioning of stanzas will ideally be based on a system that we
               can use to distinguish nonarbitrary points at which one set of related stanzas ends
               and another begins. For example, we might group stanzas together based on
               linguistic-thematic coherence. The difficulty with formulating a partitioning system
               and applying it to Sea and Spar Between is that the
               gradation of the poem’s language is exceptionally fine; textual elements from one
               stanza bleed subtly into its neighbouring stanzas, whereupon they are minutely
               calibrated before bleeding into a neighbouring stanza’s neighbouring stanza, and so
               on. Variation occurs gradually and delicately, much like oceanographic variation
               between different bodies of water, making it difficult to identify points at which to
               nonarbitrarily separate groups of stanzas.
            For example, consider Figure 3. It
               depicts each stanza from Figure 2 as a circle or circular segment — with each
               stanza’s constituent words extending outwards from, and placed at equidistant points
               around, its respective circle’s circumference — scattered at random points upon a
               rectangle. Note that each coordinate is represented as an integer: (24, 22), for
               example, becomes 2422. The impression, bearing in mind that the placement of
               the circles is random and therefore that imbrication does not imply relatedness, is
               of a set of atomic stanzas. The most sensible textual micro-level against which to
               align one’s reading of the stanzas depicted here, then, appears to be each stanza in
               and of itself. It is difficult to see, judging from Figure 3 alone, how one might
               nonarbitrarily connect, say, the stanzas at (24, 21) and (23, 20). But when this
               process is repeated (see Figure 4), with the crucial adjustment of diagramming word
                  types, not word tokens, the set of
               twenty stanzas is replaced by a set of three stanzas.I intend type and
                     token to be read in the philosophical sense whereby a type is a class,
                  and a token is an instance of that class. For example, the phrase hello world,
                     hello world has four tokens but only two types.In other words, once
               the reader has read three of the twenty stanzas (i.e., 15% of the stanzas), they will
               have read every word type that appears in the stanza-rectangle; the remaining 85% of
               text consists solely of permutations of the tokens of those types. Figure 4 thus
               illustrates that the stanzas within the rectangle are much more similar than Figure 3
               suggests. The task of nonarbitrarily splitting the set of stanzas into subsets
               therefore becomes more difficult because as similarity increases, so too does the
               temptation to leave the entire set in situ as a textual
               micro-level in and of itself. This point can also be illustrated mathematically, and
               I want to do so to underscore the extraordinary extent to which Sea and Spar Between is indivisible, before considering what interpretive
               purchase this indivisibility affords us.
         

            A mathematical illustration of Sea and Spar Between’s interconnectedness 
            Let us examine a rectangle, with vertices located at the coordinates (100, 109),
               (104, 109), (104, 90), and (100, 90), that contains 100 stanzas. And let us place
               those stanzas within a term vector model. Say we have a stanza S that is part of a
               group of stanzas GS located in vector space VS. The number of dimensions in VS equals
               the number of unique words (W) in GS. So, VS = {W1, W2, …, Wn}. And in VS, S = {wS1,
               wS2, …, wSn}, where wSn represents the weight of Wn in S, where the weight is a
               number that, in this case, is defined by how often Wn appears in S. For example, if
               Ishmael were the 7th word in VS and occurred 5 times in S, then wS7 = 5. Repeating
               this process for every stanza in GS for every word in VS would result in a sparse
               matrix like the one depicted in Table 1. 
            
               (22, 22), its surrounding stanzas, and their word tokens.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  1st word in VS
                  2nd word in VS
                  3rd word in VS
                  4th word in VS
                  5th word in VS
                  6th word in VS
                  7th word in VS
                  8th word in VS
                  …
                  
                     nth word in VS 
               
               
                  1st stanza in GS
                  0
                  0
                  1
                  0
                  0
                  1
                  0
                  0
                  
                  0
               
               
                  2nd stanza in GS
                  3
                  0
                  0
                  0
                  0
                  0
                  1
                  1
                  
                  2
               
               
                  3rd stanza in GS
                  1
                  0
                  0
                  2
                  1
                  0
                  0
                  0
                  
                  0
               
               
                  …
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                     nth stanza in GS 
                  0
                  0
                  2
                  0
                  0
                  1
                  0
                  0
                  
                  0
               
            
            
               (22, 22), its surrounding stanzas, and their word types
               
               
            
            Each stanza can then be represented as a vector in n-dimensional space. For example, consider the following document-term matrix
               where the rows represent two hypothetical texts that can only use two words
                  (dog and cat), and the columns represent the frequency of those
               words: 
            
               
                  
                  Dog frequency
                  Cat frequency
               
               
                  Text one
                  2
                  2
               
               
                  Text two
                  10
                  8
               
            
            Document-term matrices can be represented in vector space by assigning each term a
               separate axis, and by letting the frequency of each term equal the corresponding
               coordinate value. For example, if we let the x-axis stand for cat and the
               y-axis stand for dog in the below vector space, then text one will be located
               at (2, 2) and text two will be located at (8, 10): 
            
                A vector space representation of Table 2
               
               
            
            
            
            Once texts are represented in vector space, we can calculate their similarity.
               Although the above vectors are relatively dissimilar in terms of Euclidean distance
               (vector magnitude), the angle they form is acute and they are therefore similar in
               terms of vector orientation (which is intuitive, insofar as both documents are
               comprised of the same words and differ only with respect to the frequency of those
               words). Vector orientation is the better measurement of document similarity in vector
               space. For example, though one might assume that if term z appears more frequently in
               document x than in document y by a factor of ten, then x is more concerned with z
               than y, document x might simply be ten times larger than document y, in which case
               both documents would be equally related (proportionally) to the topic denoted by term
               z (assuming z is not polysemous). Vector orientation reflects this kind of
               isomorphism better than vector magnitude. The cosine of the angle that two vectors
               form is one way to measure text similarity. As the cosine of the angle between two
               vectors approaches 1 (cos(θ) = 0°), the texts those vectors represent will
               theoretically be more similar. As the cosine approaches 0 (cos(θ) = 90°) the texts
               will theoretically be less similar. As the cosine approaches -1 (cos(θ) = 180°) the
               texts will theoretically be more opposite.  I took the 100 stanzas located within the above stanza-rectangle, computed each stanza’s cosine similarity to every other stanza, and exported the results to a spreadsheet, which can be viewed at https://github.com/moona740/Nat_Moore_MA_Thesis/blob/master/cosinebagofwords%20(1).xlsx. Note that the minimum cosine
               similarity between two stanzas here is 0, not -1, because the algorithm I used is
               based on term frequency (how often a word appears in a document, operating under the
               assumption that if two texts share a roughly similar vocabulary, and the frequency
               distribution of that vocabulary is also roughly similar, then they are roughly alike)
               and a word cannot appear < 0 times in a text. The cells highlighted in red are
               those that show a cosine similarity between 0.7 and 0.99 inclusive. There are 3046 cells in this range. But this figure does not tell us the
               number of unique instances of cosine similarities between 0.7
               and 0.99 because cosine similarity calculation is based on multiplication (the cosine
               of two vectors is essentially their scalar product divided by their length product),
               which is commutative. In other words, the spreadsheet (E) equals its own transpose (E
               = ET); the value of the cell at row x and columny is identical to the cell at rowy and
               columnx. So, to find the number of unique instances of cosine
               values in the desired range, we need to divide 3046 in half, resulting in a quotient
               of 1523. A rectangle with 100 stanzas has 10,000 ordered pairs of stanzas.100
                  ordered pairs from (1, 1), (1,2), …, (1, 100), another 100 ordered pairs from (2,
                  1), (2, 2), …, (2, 100), and so on until the 100th list of ordered pairs of (100,
                  1), (100, 2), … (100, 100), giving us 100 * 100 ordered pairs. This means
               that 15.23% of the stanzas within the rectangle highly resemble (linguistically and
               thematically), at least one other stanza also therein. What interpretive purchase
               does this data give us? It reemphasizes that even relatively distant stanzas within
               the poem’s stanza-lattice are similar. For example, the first stanza within the
               rectangle has a cosine similarity of 0.8198 with the 99th stanza. The second stanza
               has a cosine similarity of 0.8421 with the 94th stanza. The 76th stanza has a cosine
               similarity of 0.9474 with the 35th stanza. These similarities complicate attempts to
               sculpt the poem into discrete micro-levels because they show that there is a low
               correlation between Euclidean distance and linguistic-thematic gradation. Reading the
               stanza-rectangle is therefore complicated because it is less a stanza-rectangle than
               a stanza-web, with a practically infinite number of interconnecting strands. For
               example, if we took our previous stanza-web and stretched it from 100 stanzas to 1000
               stanzas (an increase of 900%), the number of ordered pairs would increase from 10,000
               to 1,000,000 (an increase of 9900%, which is an example of the curse of
               dimensionality, i.e., the problems that occur when interpreting data in high
               dimensional spaces). If roughly 15.23% of these ordered pairs were also significantly
               like at least one other stanza in the same web, then we would be left with the
               infeasibly large figure of 152,300 highly related stanza-pairs to read. 

            A possible objection considered and refuted through the relativity of scale
               One might
               make a reasonable objection here. Why is our inability to reduce the above stanza-web
               to smaller micro-levels a problem? It is already a micro-level in and of itself (if
               we ignore the 10,000 ordered pairs contained therein); 100 stanzas are not
               unmanageably large. Why not simply analyze those 100 stanzas, instead of brooding
               about how to make ever finer calibrations? After all, most literary scholarship on
               long texts rest on generalizations, which themselves rest on mobilized inferences
               from delimited, if carefully selected, parts.
            The answer to this objection
               returns us to the poem’s size and revolves around what J. H. Prynne terms the principle of scale and its working in
                  poetical composition, by which he means that very
                  small, local details can point to and complicate very large ideas or features of
                  argument
               . By extension, Prynne argues, we can use small
               textual data as primary instruments to think with, to uncover
                  and investigate connections that can extend far beyond their immediate
                  occurrence
               . As a kind of proof of concept, Prynne proceeds
               to use a single word (incense) as an interpretive key with which to unlock
                  Paradise Lost. There is nothing in Prynne’s analysis
               to suggest that he believes the inferential movement from the small to the large is a
               heuristic that should be limited to the analysis of Miltonic texts. It seems fair to
               assume that Prynne subscribes to a literary version of quantum entanglement. Two quantum-entangled particles . . . can be arbitrarily separated
                  in space whilst remaining interdependent with respect to their measurable
                  properties, such that a change in one will invariably be accompanied by a change
                  in the other, writes William M. R. Simpson . If we replace particles with signifiers then we have a
               gloss of Prynne’s vision of the poetic connection between the local and the global.
                The problem for us is that Sea and Spar Between’s scale
               puts even the local out of reach. One concordance of Paradise
                  Lost puts its total word count at 82, 860 (Matsuoka n.d.), and one
                  incense token therefore comprises 0.00120685493% of Milton’s epic.
               Implicitly, Prynne believes that 0.001% of a text is an adequate tool to uncover and investigate connections that can extend far beyond their
                  immediate occurrence
               . Perhaps, then, we should content ourselves with
               reading 0.00120685493% of Sea and Spar Between and
               dismiss our inability to read the entire poem. But recall that the algorithm
               generates 1499238322 stanzas. 0.00120685493% of 1499238322 stanzas, rounded to the
               nearest integer, is two billion, seven hundred twelve million, six hundred sixty-six
               thousand, five hundred thirty-two stanzas. At my normal reading speed, I can read
               about twelve stanzas of the poem in one minute. I would thus require roughly 43 years
               to read 0.00120685493% of Sea and Spar Between. And even
               if I did devote my life to this quixotic task, I could not take what I had read and
                  trace its . . . echoes and ambiguities of reference across
                  the entire poem, as Prynne does with the word incense, for the
               simple reason that I would still have another 99.9987931451% of the poem to read
               before I could do so. Readers of Sea and Spar Between
               cannot use the small to illustrate or endorse the large,
               as Prynne does with Paradise Lost. They are restricted
               to using fragments to speculate about the poem’s largeness. 

            An alternative method to fulfil our obligation toward the
                  difficult whole. 
               In summary, Sea and Spar
                  Between resists division into subsets because its interconnectedness makes
               it difficult to identify exactly where to nonarbitrarily split its macro-level into
               different micro-levels. Even if Sea and Spar Between did
               explicitly encourage textual partitioning, subsequent partitions would have to be
               exceptionally minute to be feasibly readable, and they would therefore have little
               extrapolative value. Prynne’s principle of scale — that very
                  small, local details can point to and complicate very large ideas or features of
                  argument — is ultimately subordinate to the principle of meta-scale
               because the micro-level of a very large macro-level makes a mockery of its prefix: 1%
               of Sea and Spar Between, for example, is two trillion,
               two-hundred fifty million stanzas. Consequently, to use the words of Aristotle,
                  as the eye cannot take it all in at once, the unity and sense
                  of the whole is lost for the spectator
               , and readers are therefore restricted to
               conjecture, using whatever they can glean from the poem’s fragments, when questions
               are raised about the poem as a totality. The poem’s readers, then, have little choice
               but to resemble those critics who Brian McHale censures for staking their arguments
               on apparently key pieces of text, which are subsequently treated as interpretive centres . . . around which to organize . . .
                  heterogenous material
               . Poems thus interpreted, McHale argues, are
                  reduced, in effect, to a skeletal structure of points that
                  yield most readily to a particular interpretive orientation
               . This strategy,
               McHale writes, leads to the reduction of a poem to a collection
                  of decontextualized key quotes, and, as a result, the bulk of the poem goes uninterpreted — unread, to all intents and
                  purposes
               . The difference is that the bulk of Sea and Spar Between is not unread to
                  all intents and purposes, but literally unreadable; the reader’s reliance
               on fragments of text is an imposed and unavoidable constraint, not a culpable failure
               to meet what McHale calls the obligation toward the difficult
                  whole
               . I write imposed as a reminder that
               Montfort and Strickland have deliberately thwarted the possibility of understanding
               the poem’s whole by restricting readers to a virtually endless series of fragmentary
               parts. We are thus forced to navigate the text in a manner reminiscent of the Pequod’s peripatetic voyage (our search for stable textual
               meaning is therefore ambiguously conflated with Ahab’s dangerous and arguably
               pointless obsession), and the conventional tools of close reading, as we have seen,
               cannot help us upon this voyage.  However, denying critics the opportunity to
               close read Sea and Spar Between as a totality might
               ultimately be an act of critical generosity if, as David Ciccoricco argues, the
                  trouble with second generation
                     digital-literary criticism . . . [is] the celebration of both the practice and the very possibility of close reading works [of] digital literature, while at the same time
                  failing to adequately articulate what close reading means, or must come to
                  mean, in digital environments
               . For by making it impossible to close read Sea and Spar Between, Montfort and Strickland not only make it
                  a fortiori impossible to celebrate the practise or
               possibility of close reading Sea and Spar Between, but also
               compel critics to articulate how close reading must evolve if it is to have any
               relevant applications to overwhelmingly distant computational texts. What we
               need is a close reading of close reading. One place from which we might draw
               inspiration for this task is the criticism of classical textual fragments. Here, I
               argue, we can find a set of provisional, flexible principles that work with, rather
               than against, the fragmentation of Sea and Spar Between.
               According to the translator Diane Rayor, one such principle is the resolution to make
               textual lacunae evoke connections, not absences, which thereby enables readers to bridge the gap between a fragment and its absent whole (quoted by Balmer [2013], 50). In the remaining sections
               of this article, I attempt to invest the fragments of Sea and
                  Spar Between with significance by meeting them with an equally fragmentary
               array of alternatives to close reading (for example, the mode I turn to next
               concentrates upon the reader’s affectual experience of the poem). In doing so, I
               suggest that the best way to interpret a text that always already comes to us in
               fragmented form is not only through using the fragment as an organizing
               critical trope, but also through the mimetic making of new interpretive
               fragments. 
         

            From the sublime to the stuplime 
            In The Brain — is wider than the Sky —, Emily Dickinson
               writes: 
                        The Brain is deeper than the sea — 
                        For — hold them — Blue to Blue — 
                        The one the other will absorb — 
                        As sponges — Buckets — do — 
                     
                  
            Montfort and Strickland invert this relationship: the poem’s sea is deeper
               than the reader’s brain, which cannot absorb the blue to which it is,
               paradoxically, both parallel (grammatically) and incommensurate (spatially). We have
               seen that conventional close reading is ill-suited to circumventing the challenges
               that this inversion poses. I want now to examine a mode of reading that may be better
               suited to the vastness of Sea and Spar Between. It is
               the mode that each of the poem’s authors recommend (for now, we will reserve
               judgement as to whether this counts in the mode’s favour or against it), though their
               recommendations differ on a subtle but profound point. We can therefore add Montfort
               and Strickland to the list of oppositions (e.g., sea and spar, Melville and
               Dickinson, longitude and latitude) that cumulatively entrench juxtaposition as one of
               the poem’s central structural principles. First I want to address Montfort’s
               recommendation: We do not consider that readers will often
                     seek out particularly apt stanzas and wish to return to them. While
                     returning to a favorite stanza is possible in our system, it may seem a curious
                     quest . . . . For some readers, the experience of Sea and
                        Spar Between will occur rather in the texture, operation, and journey
                     of reading the work as it presents itself, rather than in any particular
                     destination. Finding the free experience of reading to be better than the
                     saving of coordinates, they will soon be Done with the Compass – – / Done
                        with the Chart!
                  
            After conceptual poetry’s assault on the Coleridgean definition of poetry as the best
               words in the best order, and on the high modernist values of originality and verbal
               mastery, it is only somewhat of a surprise to read a poet predict that their readers
               will prioritize texture over text. But it becomes more surprising when we recognize
               that Montfort’s quote is from one of Dickinson’s most anthologized poems, Wild Nights — Wild Nights! The decision to use an acclaimed
               poem to buttress the thesis that Sea and Spar Between’s
               stanzas are fungible is, at best, dissonant; quoting apt words to promote the
               interpretive equivalent of drifting at sea is potentially self-defeating. For it
               might make us ask why a text that is purportedly a homage to Dickinson’s poetry would
               meet certain distinctive features of her oeuvre — originality, concision, and
               concentration of meaning — antithetically with repetition, prolix, and dispersal of
               meaning. But we should be cautious of this question because were we to truly ask it,
               then we would move beyond the textual analysis of particularly apt stanzas to
               the meta-textual analysis of texture, operation, and journey, which would
               leave us uncritically obeying Montfort’s interpretive vision in a manner reminiscent
               of some of the more obsequious crew members of the Pequod. Such obedience is already ubiquitous. The critical responses to
                  Sea and Spar Between (not excluding my own) are
               marked on the one hand by little to no discussion about individual stanzas, and on
               the other by prolonged discussion about the poem as a whole, or rather on the
               impossibility of discussing the poem as a whole (see Moulthrop and Schumaker [2016]; Aquilina
                  [2018]; Le Cor [2018]; Moulthrop [2017]). But one person who does not
               entirely agree with the paradigm of reading that Montfort advocates is the figure
               from whom one would least expect divergence: his co-author. Strickland writes:
                     Narrative fails if you can’t know beginning or end,
                     even if you do know extent. But resonance does not . . . . In the 21st century
                     a single stanza from 225, or from 225 trillion, equally,
                     may resonate, even with meme-like force. And this impression will vary
                     depending on how you happen to, and/or choose to contextualize it within wider
                     swaths or waves of reading. There can be no anticipation of an outcome, only
                     registration of it.
                  
            Montfort’s assertion that we do not consider that readers will
                  often seek out particularly apt stanzas and wish to return to them
               contradicts Strickland’s assertion that any one of the poem’s stanzas might resonate . . . with meme-like force, because readers of
               poetry typically return to resonant stanzas. This contradiction is surprising because
               Montfort’s we, unless it is royal, implies consensus. Further shattering the
               illusion of consensus, Montfort’s emphasis on the singular (texture as opposed
               to textures,
               mutatis mutandis for operation and journey)
               implies that the poem is a vehicle for a single affect. Yet Strickland’s emphasis on
               plurality (expressed in the language of the consumer warning: this impression will
                  vary) implies that the reader can autonomously dictate the text’s affectual
               impact because they can choose to contextualize their impressions
                  within wider . . . waves of reading. The contradiction seems intractable.
               On the one hand, how can a poem that is so formally and conceptually excessive play
               host to only one affect? But on the other, how could a poem so overwhelmingly large
               fail to overwhelm the reader, and how could this irresistible devastation of
               attention not be the poem’s sole texture? The answer is that both are correct at
               different points in time. Strickland is initially correct, and then, after an
               indefinite period, the varying impressions that underlie her vision of the
                  registration of experience degenerate to a single texture: fatigue.
               Strickland’s prediction that there can be no anticipation of an
                  outcome, only registration of it recalls Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s
                  small water-insect: Most of my readers will have
                     observed a small water-insect on the surface of rivulets . . . how the little
                     animal wins its way up against the stream, by alternate pulses of active and
                     passive motion, now resisting the current, and now yielding to it in order to
                     gather strength . . . . This is no unapt emblem of the mind’s self-experience
                     in the act of thinking. 
            What I have been calling Strickland’s prediction also functions as a
               prescription, and what it prescribes is prioritizing the mind’s self-experience in
               the act of reading over the act of reading. In The Function of
                  Criticism at the Present Time, Matthew Arnold praises the self-scrutiny of
               Edmund Burke (that return of Burke upon himself
               ); Strickland similarly endorses the reader’s
               return upon themselves as an object of critical reflection. In doing so, she reenacts
               the so-called affective turn by turning to the reader’s affective experience as a
               productive theoretical lens. (The affective turn names a growing fascination
               with affect in the social sciences and humanities. It is difficult to be more precise
               because affect theory is a notoriously diffuse area of
                  study, which lacks any generally agreed definition of
                  the central object
               . However, the key idea is that humans are imbued with subliminal affective intensities that . . . decisively
                  influence or condition our political and other beliefs
               . Affect theory is grounded in these affective intensities and their entanglement with discursive
               forces.) Affect theory, at first glance, seems a promising way of overcoming the
               poem’s expansion of scale by situating the effects of that expansion in an inversely
                  contracted locus: the reader’s body. Because, regardless of a text’s
               inscrutability, readers can always scrutinize their own subjective feelings (granted
               the Cartesian presumption that individuals have secure and privileged access to the
               first-person phenomenal realm, which is open to debate: see Srinivasan [2015]). Even if a text is hostile to
               intellectual assimilation, the reader’s conscious affective response to that
               hostility is, ceteris paribus, still assimilable. So, although
                  Sea and Spar Between seems affectively recalcitrant
               in its overall inscrutability, that blankness and closure invite an affective
               response, and Strickland’s prediction hence begins to seem increasingly perceptive.
               In a zone of partially unparseable poetic meanings, she denies that the reader’s
               meaning-making capacity is consequently disabled. Instead, she predicts, the
               impulses, attitudes, and emotions provoked by an unsynthesizable text will themselves
               cohere into a meaningful gestalt. The poem’s effectively infinite scale is therefore
               met, and neutralized, by the effectively infinite range of affects available to human
               readers. According to the logic of Strickland’s prediction, the frustration of the
               reader’s capacity to make meaningful claims about the textual whole stimulates
               affective states; those states are meaningful; the reader’s meaning-making capacity
               is therefore rehabilitated; experiential registration is therefore privileged over
               experiential anticipation. Strickland’s impressionism is partially borne out by the
               reader’s short-term experiential response to the poem. The only upper limit on the
               quantity of these responses is the number of people who have read the poem because
               each will have had a unique reading experience. But once the reader realizes that
               they have no hope of circumnavigating the poem’s sea, the plurality of affectual
               responses begins to converge to a deep and relentless boredom. For the longer one
               reads, the less one is able to ignore the poem’s scale and its consequences,
               including, most notably, fatigue. At this point, Montfort’s prediction comes into
               effect: finding the free experience of reading to be better than
                  the saving of coordinates . . . [the reader] will soon be Done with the Compass
                  	–– / Done with the Chart!
               .The phrase free experience imbues the reader’s
               dismissal of compass and chart with a liberating sense of amor fati, which conjures images of the reader traversing the
               poem’s sea with insouciant disregard for the impossibility of ever reaching shore.
               But if we return to the poem from which Montfort extracts his concluding quotation
               (Dickinson’s Wild Nights — Wild Nights!), we can see
               that Dickinson’s speaker is only done with navigational instruments because
               they are immobilized, which renders such instruments superfluous: 
                        
                           Wild nights — Wild nights!
                           Were I with thee 
                           Wild nights should be
                           Our luxury!
                        
                        
                           Futile — the winds — 
                           To a Heart in port — 
                           Done with the Compass — 
                           Done with the Chart!
                        
                        
                           Rowing in Eden — 
                           Ah — the Sea!
                           Might I but moor — tonight — 
                           In thee!
                        
                     
                     
                  
            Dickinson’s speaker is port-bound, and it is this confinement that inverts
               traditional symbols of movement (wind) and autonomous exploration (maps) to make them
               represent, with an almost perverse irony, their respective antitheses. Montfort’s
               prediction therefore resembles the sea in its concealment of its contents below a
               surface. Even if the reader begins to operate Sea and Spar
                  Between with a unique method, or with the aim of charting an
               experimentally nonlinear journey, or by paying close self-referential attention to
               their textural experience — thereby fulfilling Montfort’s ostensible prediction —
               those operations, journeys, or textures will eventually contract into the texture of,
               and journey through, imposed determinism: the brute reality of the poem’s scale. The
               reader thus moves from the poem’s operator to that which is operated upon, which
               places their interpretive autonomy in peril. What Montfort conceals below the surface
               of his prediction is that each particular destination is
               merely a way-stop on the journey to the poem’s final destination of stupefaction, a
               terminus that is especially inescapable if one’s method of escape depends on texture, operation, and journey. Attempts to transcend the
               poem’s size-imposed uninterpretability through tactical neglect of interpretation
               will only manage to defer the problem of scale for an interval that is inversely
               correlated to the duration of the reader’s reading session. Engaging with the poem’s
               size is the sine qua non of prolonged engagement with the
               poem. 
               Having sketched how Strickland’s prediction briefly reigns, before being
               dethroned by Montfort’s, I want now to concretely demonstrate how this process
               occurs. Suppose I am about to enter Sea and Spar Between
               and have decided to focus on how I read rather than what I read. I then observe that
               although many critics have noted that each stanza has two coordinates (denoting
               longitude and latitude), the possibilities that these coordinates open up have been
               neglected (apart from the obvious utilitarian functionality: coordinates can be typed
               into a search bar to move the reader to that location). But if we let each horizontal
               and vertical coordinate stand for an x- and y-value, respectively, then we can map
               every stanza of the poem on to a Cartesian plane. For example, here are the stanzas
               (denoted by the green dots) from (0, 0) to (10, 10) plotted in Cartesian space:
            
            
               The stanzas of Sea and Spar Between from (0, 0) to (10, 10) in Cartesian space
               
               
            
            
               A sine wave moving through Sea and Spar Between
               
            
            Then we can take a function — an equation for which any x input will yield exactly
               one y output, or y = f(x) — and plot that function on to the same Cartesian plane.
               The sine function — y = sin(x) — is an obvious choice because its shape, bearing in mind the poem’s
               location in a virtual sea, is fitting (even if it is plotted on a grid, whereas
               navigating an actual sea requires adjustment for the earth’s ellipsoid shape): 
            
               The beginning of the sine wave’s journey
               
               
            
            Then we can read the poem geometrically by structuring our path through the text in
               accordance with the wave-like shape of the sine function. We can follow the wave from
               crest to trough and vice versa along the x-axis and note the points where the sine
               wave and individual stanzas intersect (because the domain of the sine function is all
               real numbers we could do this literally ad infinitum, so the
               poem’s length, for once, poses no methodological problem). And then we could choose to
               read only those stanzas that intersect the wave, such as the stanzas at (0, 0) and
               (8, 1) in the above figure. Our journey through the text’s metaphorical sea would
               thus be determined by the movement of a sinusoidal line receding and returning along
               a metaphorical shore (i.e., the x-axis. Note that the x- and y-axes have now doubled
               their representative function. The x-axis now represents both a stanza’s horizontal
               coordinate and theta; the y-axis now represents a stanza’s vertical coordinate and
               the sine of theta). The beginning of this journey is depicted Figure 8. 
            
                An algorithm to find the most common words in the critical literature on Sea and Spar Between
               
            
            According to the sinusoidal method outlined above, we would read 16 of the first 101
               stanzas of Sea and Spar Between. These 16 stanzas are
               located at the following coordinates: (0, 0), (8, 1), (14, 1), (22, 0), (33, 1), (36,
               -1), (44, 0), (52, 1), (58, 1), (66, 0), (74, -1), (77, 1), (80, -1), (88, 0), (96,
               1), and (99, -1). What
               is the initial texture of the sinusoidal method? What journey does it initially take
               us on? These are not rhetorical questions. I invite you to answer them for yourself
               by following the instructions at: https://github.com/moona740/Nat_Moore_MA_Thesis/blob/master/Graph. But note
               the exertion of initial. The sinusoidal pattern of reading could stimulate
               hundreds of initial affectual experiences: curiosity,
               displeasure, mesmerisation by the sine wave’s endless oscillation between its range
               of [-1, 1] and so on. As Strickland correctly
               predicts, the reader’s impression will vary
               . But only initially. If you have followed the above
               instructions, then you will know that whatever affective response the poem first
               provokes will, given enough time, eventually decay to a homogenous affectual
               experience. The critical consensus is that this experience is one of sublimity. For
               example, Aquilina writes that Sea and Spar
                     Between . . . is a poetic experience that provokes the
                  sublime
               , and Hayles claims that the poem’s effect is a kind of technological sublime
               . Moreover, the editors of the third volume of the
               Electronic Literature Collection call Sea and Spar Between
               an allegory of the relationship between readers and a
                  digital sublime. Montfort and Strickland demonstrate how the massive scales of
                  computer data far exceed human phenomenology
               . Finally, Moulthrop and Schumaker argue that Sea and Spar Between explores a
                  topological sublime — a level of possibility and complexity that overloads
                  traditional cognitive structures, noting also that the poem countersigns its topological excursion with reference to an older
                  register of the sublime, namely the sea, which functions as an image of natural immensity
               . But the sublime, with its Romantic
               connotations of awe and astonishment, is an incongruous paradigm with which to read a
               poem that ultimately induces overwhelming fatigue. A more appropriate aesthetic category
               is Sianne Ngai’s stuplime (a portmanteau of stupefaction and
                  sublime), which she defines as the unusual synthesis
                  of excitations and fatigue stimulated by encounters
                  with vast but bounded artificial systems resulting in repetitive and often
                  mechanical acts of enumeration, permutation and combination
               . According to Immanuel Kant, sublimity is
               experienced when an observer confronts an overwhelming whole that precipitates a
               sense of cognitive and perceptual inadequacy . But
               for Kant, Ngai writes, the threat that this confrontation poses to the self is
               nullified when the imagination’s inability to comprehend the sublime forces the
               observer to fall back upon ratiocination as a last-gasp defensive mode of
               comprehension, whereupon reason is entrenched as a superior faculty — one capable of grasping the totality . .
                  . that the imagination could not in the form of a noumenal or supersensible idea,
                  and also of revealing the self’s final superiority to nature
               . The sublime’s initial majestic power, and the
               analytical mind’s final victory over that majesty, makes it a poor theoretical
               instrument with which to interpret a text that grinds its readers down by the mundane
               accumulation of iterative poetic offcuts. Because, as Ngai writes, the initial experience of being aesthetically overwhelmed by
               such texts is one not of terror or pain (eventually superseded
                  by tranquility), but something much closer to an ordinary
                     fatigue — and one that cannot be neutralized, like the sublime’s terror, by
                  a competing affect
               . Given that Sea and Spar
                  Between is one such fatigue-inducing text, its repeated theorization
               through the lens of sublimity has given rise to a partially false impression of its
               affective scope. The poem’s patient erosion of the reader’s attention span and
               curiosity does not confirm the self’s sense of superiority over
                  the overwhelming or intimidating object
               , or cathartically dilute the terror instilled by
               its own enormousness. Moreover, any astonishment it provokes is tempered by the
               reader’s inability to read the poem in its entirety. Ngai writes that
               fatigue-inducing texts demand new modes of thinking about what it means to be
               incapacitated by aesthetic objects, on the assumption that radically different forms of cultural production call for equally radical
               critical responses ; an assumption, incidentally,
               that this article questions in its use of fragmentation to interpret Sea and Spar Between. Stuplimity is Ngai’s answer to
               this call. The term names the affective interplay of fatigue (stupefaction) and awe
               (sublimity) that promises, but perpetually falls just short of delivering, an
               aesthetic denouement. We can see this stuplimic interplay in the language of Sea and Spar Between, where a mere 268 words combine to form
               225 trillion stanzas; a contradictory mixture of linguistic poverty and wealth that
               ultimately results, to borrow Ngai’s description of a prose-poem by Samuel
               Beckett, in a language that is paradoxically both ascetic and
                  congested, thickening even as it progresses into a narrative of
                  not-progressing
               . The reader therefore succumbs to the fatigue
               caused by the felt absence of propulsive linear narrative or hierarchical sequence,
               which culminates, if that is the word, in an indeterminate
                  affective state that lacks the punctuating point of an individuated
                  emotion
               . It seems, then, that the mode of reading
               recommended by Montfort and Strickland is one that engineers an inescapable transfer
               of stupor from text to reader. Yet by pointing to what obstructs
                  aesthetic or critical response, Ngai writes, the stuplime — much like the
               fragment — prompt[s] us to look for new strategies of affective
                  engagement and to extend the circumstances under which engagement become
                  possible
               . The poem’s title hints at an alternative
               strategy of affective engagement. Sea and Spar Between
               quietly advises the reader that when the poem entertains an apparent opposition, such
               as sea/spar, the binary is less important than what lies between it. For example,
               consider the Melville/Dickinson binary. I write above that the poem’s language moves
                  back and forth between the compressed interiority of
                  Dickinson’s poetry and the expansive intensity of Melville’s prose. But it
               is equally plausible to claim that Melville’s prose is painfully cramped in places,
               insofar as the Pequod is cramped (for example, the
               blubber-room) and Ahab is constricted by, because in thrall to, an idée fixe. Similarly, one can adduce various lines of poetry to support the
               argument that Dickinson’s poetry is centrifugal and expansive, despite or because of
               her Amherst exile: 
                        The Brain — is wider than the Sky — 
                        For — put them side by side — 
                        The one the other will contain
                        With ease — and you — beside — 
                     
                  
            We can therefore disturb the equilibrium of the Melville/Dickinson opposition with
               surprising ease, which is evidence of the heed we should pay to the poem’s titular
               emphasis on betweenness when making oppositional claims. One way of respecting the
               title’s liminality is to examine what lies between the poem’s sea (the interface) and
               its spar (the various fragmentary strategies of reading that permit the reader to
               float upon the poem’s sea): its algorithm. Because we can read the algorithm in its
               entirety, it offers us a secure basis on which to speculate about the poetry that it
               generates. In the final section of this article, I ask whether reading the finite
               code that generates an effectively infinite text allows us to imagine the poem’s
               fragments as a cohesive whole. One might anticipate that at this point the article’s
               emphasis on fragmentation will itself fragment, insofar as interpreting the poem’s
               code involves understanding the system that structures its part/whole binary, which
               is very different to working with nonalgorithmic classical text-fragments. However, I
               show that fragmentation remains a useful heuristic not only because Sea and Spar Between's code raises more questions than it
               does answers (which ultimately leaves the text in an even more fragmented state), but
               also because I use the poem’s code to double its fragments by making a duplicate
               website, which exemplifies my argument that by bringing classical literary forms and
               modern computation into dialogue, we can instigate a conversation that its greater
               than the sum of its fragmentary parts. 
         

            Sea and Spar Between’s code: the questions hidden in its answers 
            Once we look at the poem’s code, which can be viewed at https://dhq.digitalhumanities.org/vol/7/1/000149/resources/source/000149.html,
               the 225 trillion stanzas simplify down to a small set of textons,I borrow this
                  term from Aarseth, who use textons to refer to strings
                     as they exist in the text and scriptons to refer to strings as they appear to readers
                  . In a book such as
                     Raymond Quneau’s sonnet machine Cent mille milliards de
                        poèmes, Aarseth clarifies, there are
                     only 140 textons, but these combine into 100,000,000,000,000 possible
                     scriptons
                  .  which I reproduce below: 
               
               var shortPhrase = ['circle on', 'dash on', 'let them', 'listen now', 'loop on', 'oh time', 'plunge on', 'reel on', 'roll on', 'run on', 'spool on', 'steady', 'swerve me?', 'turn on', 'wheel on', 'whirl on', 'you — too — ', 'fast-fish', 'loose-fish'];
var dickinsonNoun = [
   ['air', 'art', 'care', 'door', 'dust', 'each', 'ear', 'earth', 'fair', 'faith', 'fear', 'friend', 'gold', 'grace', 'grass', 'grave', 'hand', 'hill', 'house', 'joy', 'keep', 'leg', 'might', 'mind', 'morn', 'name', 'need', 'noon', 'pain', 'place', 'play', 'rest', 'rose', 'show', 'sight', 'sky', 'snow', 'star', 'thought', 'tree', 'well', 'wind', 'world', 'year'],
   ['again', 'alone', 'better', 'beyond', 'delight', 'dying', 'easy', 'enough', 'ever', 'father', 'flower', 'further', 'himself', 'human', 'morning', 'myself', 'power', 'purple', 'single', 'spirit', 'today'],
   ['another', 'paradise'],
   ['eternity'],
   ['immortality']
];
var courseStart = ['fix upon the ', 'cut to fit the ', 'how to withstand the'];
var dickinsonSyllable = ['bard', 'bead', 'bee', 'bin', 'bliss', 'blot', 'blur', 'buzz', 'curl', 'dirt', 'disk', 'doll', 'drum', 'fern', 'film', 'folk', 'germ', 'hive', 'hood', 'husk', 'jay', 'pink', 'plot', 'spun', 'toll', 'web'];
var melvilleSyllable = ['ash', 'bag', 'buck', 'bull', 'bunk', 'cane', 'chap', 'chop', 'clam', 'cock', 'cone', 'dash', 'dock', 'edge', 'eel', 'fin', 'goat', 'hag', 'hawk', 'hook', 'hoop', 'horn', 'howl', 'iron', 'jack', 'jaw', 'kick', 'kin', 'lime', 'loon', 'lurk', 'milk', 'net', 'pike', 'rag', 'rail', 'ram', 'sack', 'salt', 'tool'];
var dickinsonLessLess = [
   ['art', 'base', 'blame', 'crumb', 'cure', 'date', 'death', 'drought', 'fail', 'flesh', 'floor', 'foot', 'frame', 'fruit', 'goal', 'grasp', 'guile', 'guilt', 'hue', 'key', 'league', 'list', 'need', 'note', 'pang', 'pause', 'phrase', 'pier', 'plash', 'price', 'shame', 'shape', 'sight', 'sound', 'star', 'stem', 'stint', 'stir', 'stop', 'swerve', 'tale', 'taste', 'thread', 'worth'],
   ['arrest', 'blanket', 'concern', 'costume', 'cypher', 'degree', 'desire', 'dower', 'efface', 'enchant', 'escape', 'fashion', 'flavor', 'honor', 'kinsman', 'marrow', 'perceive', 'perturb', 'plummet', 'postpone', 'recall', 'record', 'reduce', 'repeal', 'report', 'retrieve', 'tenant'],
   ['latitude', 'retriever']
];
var upVerb = ['bask', 'chime', 'dance', 'go', 'leave', 'move', 'rise', 'sing', 'speak', 'step', 'turn', 'walk'];
var butBeginning = ['but', 'for', 'then'];
var butEnding = ['earth', 'sea', 'sky', 'sun'];
var nailedEnding = ['coffin', 'deck', 'desk', 'groove', 'mast', 'spar', 'pole', 'plank', 'rail', 'room', 'sash'];
            
            
            When the algorithm executes, it takes these textons and inserts them into predefined
               line templates, such as the exclaimLine template:
         	function exclaimLine(n)
               {
               var a, b = n % twoSyllable.length;
               n = Math.floor(n / twoSyllable.length);
               a = n % threeToFiveSyllable.length;
               return threeToFiveSyllable[a] + '! ' + twoSyllable[b] + '!';
               }
               
            The overwhelming complexity of Sea and Spar Between’s
               trillions of stanzas is thus generated with a very simple procedure: a small set of
               textons are combined within the patterns defined by syntactic templates. In addition
               to showing us the words that comprise the poem, and the structures that these words
               must adhere to, the code also lets us see Montfort and Strickland’s explanations of
               their rhetorical decisions. For example:
         	
               // The function nailedLine() produces a line beginning "nailed to the ..."
               // In Moby-Dick, Ahab nails a doubloon to the mast, offering it as a reward
               // to the one who sees the white whale first. This line template is meant to
               // semantically mirror an extended attempt to find axial support, both by the
               // reader of our poem and within Melville's novel, where being "at sea"
               // involves trying to locate a moral compass, trying to track down a quarry,
               // trying to control the crew through bribery, and using the mast itself as
               // a pointer to the stars in 19th-century navigation.
               
            Having moved from the poem, where the prospect of drowning in its textual
               superabundance is an ever-present threat, to the poem’s code (which, at 930 lines, is
                  prima facie tractable), we might be tempted to assume that
               we are in safer waters. But that would be a mistake. For example, Montfort and
               Strickland write that:
         	
               // The array variable shortPhrase contains short phrases, almost all of 
               // which are taken from Melville's Moby-Dick:
               
               var shortPhrase = ['circle on', 'dash on', 'let them', 'listen now', 'loop on', 'oh time', 'plunge on', 'reel on', 'roll on', 'run on', 'spool on', 'steady', 'swerve me?', 'turn on', 'wheel on', 'whirl
               on', 'you — too — ', 'fast-fish', 'loose-fish'];
            However, a concordance of Moby-Dick shows that the phrases
                  circle on,
               listen now,
               loop on,
               oh time,
               plunge on,
               reel on,
               spool on,
               turn on,
               wheel on, and whirl on do not appear in the novel. Despite being told
               that almost all of the phrases in the shortPhrase[] array are
                  taken from Melville’s Moby-Dick, over half (10/19) do not appear there (see Irey [1982]). Similarly, we are told that:
         	
               // The array variable dickinsonNoun contains common nouns from Dickinson's
               // poems. We judged these nouns as common using a frequency analysis of the
               // words in the poems.
            Yet the word leg, which is present in the dickinsonNoun[] array,
               does not appear in Dickinson’s oeuvre (see Rosenbaum [1964], 432). Furthermore, we are told that the words in the
               below array were commonly used by Dickinson (see line 232 of https://dhq.digitalhumanities.org/vol/7/1/000149/resources/source/000149.html):
            
         	var dickinsonSyllable = ['bard', 'bead', 'bee', 'bin', 'bliss', 'blot', 'blur', 'buzz', 'curl', 'dirt', 'disk', 'doll', 'drum', 'fern', 'film', 'folk', 'germ', 'hive', 'hood', 'husk', 'jay', 'pink', 'plot', 'spun', 'toll', 'web'];
            
            The words that I have bolded are hapax legomena; if a word is a hapax legomenon
               in the context of an author’s oeuvre, then, by definition, it is not “commonly used”
               by that author (see Rosenbaum [1964]). Once again,
               Montfort and Strickland’s code directly contradicts their explicating comments. More
               broadly, the use of non-Melvillean and non-Dickinsonian language complicates Montfort
               and Strickland’s assertion that our poetry generator, Sea and Spar Between, was fashioned based on Emily
                  Dickinson’s poems and Herman Melville’s Moby-Dick
               . The disjunction between the authors’ self-professed
               process and their actual process shows that although the poem’s code seems like a
               ready-made solution to the many interpretive challenges that Sea
                  and Spar Between poses, it ultimately raises more questions than it
               answers.
         

            Conclusion
            I have argued in this article that one way of responding to the computational
               vastness of Sea and Spar Between is through the lens of
               a distinctly pre-computational literary category: the fragment. Because fragments are
               cut off from their original context, they resist definitive critical judgements.
               Although this resistance limits what we can and cannot say about Sea and Spar Between, it also lets us move from one provisional and
               speculative critical perspective to another (we moved from close reading, to cosine
               similarity, to affect theory, to the sinusoidal method, to the sublime, to the
               stuplime, and finally, to the poem’s code), which results, paradoxically, in a more
               complete understanding of the poem’s fragments. I want to make one final point
               about Sea and Spar Between. Montfort and Strickland
               write in the poem’s code that: 
               	 
               // If someone were to replace our words and phrases with new texts, a
               // generator with a similar appearance and similar functioning, but with a
               // new vocabulary, would be defined. That is, it is practically possible to
               // create a new generator, a remix or appropriation of this one, by
               // replacing only the data in this section. If this is done and the code
               // is not otherwise modified, the system will assemble language in the same
               // way, but it will work on different language.See lines 189–195 of https://dhq.digitalhumanities.org/vol/7/1/000149/resources/source/000149.html
               
            
            Moreover, they conclude:
            	
               // The most useful critique is a new
               // constitution of elements. On one level, a reconfiguration of a source
               // code file to add comments — by the original creator or by a critic —
               // accomplishes this task. But in another, and likely more novel, way,
               // computational poetics and the code developed out of its practice
               // produce a widely distributed new constitution.See lines 925–930 of https://dhq.digitalhumanities.org/vol/7/1/000149/resources/source/000149.html.
            
            Montfort and Strickland are clearly inviting their readers to use Sea and Spar Between as a computational poetic template, in
               the same way that Taroko Gorge  has been
               persistently remixed in homage to, or as a reflexive interpretation of, Montfort’s
               iterative poetics. Figure 9 documents my acceptance of this invitation. I took the critical literature on Sea and Spar Between (some 20,000 words) and collated it into a text document. Then I wrote a Python script that tallied the document’s most frequent words
               (excluding stop words). I took the most frequent words and inserted them into the
               various arrays within Sea and Spar Between’s source
               code. I have hosted the resulting meta-critical fragments on a website that you can
               view at www.natmoore.co.nz.  My
               hypothesis is that somewhere within the new 225 trillion fragments of text is a line
               that, due to a serendipitous combination of words and insights from the hivemind of
               criticism that the poem has impelled, offers a novel idea that could lead the
               theorization of Sea and Spar Between in particular, and
               combinatoric algorithmic poetry in general, in a pathbreaking direction. Of course,
               the odds of someone ever finding this hypothetical fragment within a figurative ocean
               of fragments is close to zero. But that is only fitting, given what this article has demonstrated: that a productive mode of interpreting Sea and Spar Between is firstly through the classical model of fragmentation, and secondly through the computational generation of new metacritical fragments. Because if we fragment a overwhelmingly large poem into a series of smaller reflexive pieces, then not only do we gain a broader, more nuanced critical perspective, but we also begin to mimetically enact the poem’s stuplimity in reverse because an expansive text and a contractive text are equally overwhelming once they expand or contract beyond the point of human comprehension. More broadly, the metacritical version of Sea and Spar Between signals the critical usefulness of replicating (as opposed to simply explicating) the source code of a computational poem; the text thereby transforms from an interpretive locus to a poetic template, and by studying the similarities and dissimilarities of the different poetic instances made by the template, we can come to a deeper understanding of the original text.
            
         
