Title:  Critical Design as Theory, Experiment, and Data: A Sociologically-Informed Approach to Visualizing Networks of Loss
Volume:  016
Issue:  3
Date:  25 June 2022
Abstract:  
            
            In this paper, I develop an online website that assists users in answering the
               question, What do you need to remove in order to erase [thing] from [your life or
               society]? through network visualization methods. This project subverts the typical data
               visualization strategy of working with extant data by encouraging users to produce data,
               demonstrating how data visualization techniques can constitute a way of thinking and
               creating rather than just analyzing and representing. However, this tool and its
               affordances are primarily a case study for a sociological approach to critical design in
               the Digital Humanities: By critically examining the tool itself (as well as the process
               that created it), I am able to pose the broader questions of (1) how does the creation
               of digital tools and projects reflect a theoretical interpretation of the social world
               and its processes, and (2) how can these interpretations constitute the data of
               sociological studies? In resolving these questions, I suggest that critical design can
               be viewed as theory, experiment, and data: designs constitute a social theory, data can
               be experimentally produced within this social theory, and encouraging reflective design
               can turn the social theories of design themselves into data.
         
Full Body Text: 

           
        
         We shape our tools and thereafter they shape us.
         —John Culkin 1967, 70
         
         In reflecting on the fraught disciplinary boundaries of the digital humanities, Lauren
            Klein and Matthew Gold write, In what has been called ‘big tent’ DH, it can at times be
            difficult to determine with any specificity what, precisely, digital humanities work
            entails [2016, intro.] Many of these cited works are from online articles or
               books which do not include page numbers for quotations.. As with any
            definitional ambiguity, others have sought to demarcate such boundaries, suggesting
            models, imperatives, and ontologies for DH work. Some researchers claim that DH is not
            the mere use of digital tools for the purpose of humanistic research or the study
            of digital artifacts, new media, or contemporary culture .
            Indeed, in positing a generative humanities  or a critical
               digital humanities  or any number of distinctions
            and prerogatives within DH work (while maintaining that the work should be
            interdisciplinary, collaborative, and exploratory), the field both narrows to fit framed
            purposes and expands with the radical possibilities of productive practices and
            processes. In their latest reflection on the discipline, Klein and Gold revise their
            notion of DH as an expanded field — a set of vectors of inquiry that are defined by
            their tensions, alignments, and oppositions — in order to argue for a DH that
            matters, one which incorporates socially oriented work and translates the subtleties
               of our research to others within the expanded field . My own experience,
            coming from a background in sociology yet watching the confluence of DH techniques and
            analyses with once-strictly anthropological or sociological research, is indicative of
            how fraught any attempt to coherently standardize such work is. And so, without arguing
            for any authoritative boundaries within DH, it is important to instead characterize the
            vector of inquiry that I engage with, positioning my project within the field by way
            of useful but ultimately unsustainable distinctions.
         This project is rooted in the principles of critical design; that is, as a project in
            which I am producing a digital tool, I am taking a critical, self-reflective approach to
            my design process that interrogates the theoretical underpinnings of my design
            decisions, an approach I am terming reflexive critical design . This specific distinction is necessary, as born from this approach is what I
            term experimental critical design, a mode of both sociological and DH research that
            looks at the potential for interrogating digital tools as theories about the social
            world. Experimental critical design recognizes the ability of digital tools to do more
            than just analyze data but to produce data; moreover, it sees these digital tools (and
            thus the theories underpinning them) to be data. After developing a framework for
            critical design, firmly positioning this work within a specific vector of inquiry, I
            will describe the digital project that I have made centered around network visualization
            and then analyze it through the lens of this critical design framework. 
         In short, my digital project Loss examines how increasingly popular and accessible
            network visualizations can be used to visualize networks of loss — that is, the networks
            of things attached to a focal object removed from a system. Leveraging the fundamentals
            of web design and the data analysis library D3 , I
            developed an online web interface that asks users to meditate on what loss and removal
            can mean for their personal lives, history, or society — and then visualize these
            effects through a series of connected nodes. From the perspective of reflexive critical
            design, I use this project to examine the question: how does the creation of a digital
            tool reflect a theoretical interpretation of the social world and its processes? And in
            developing experimental critical design, I seek to answer the question: how can the
            interpretive social theories behind this digital tool themselves constitute the data of
            sociological studies? Both questions call for a sociological analysis of the tools and
            methods that DH is producing right now, but they also call for a pedagogical and ethical
            approach to DH work: As the field grows — and interdisciplinary boundaries become even
            more fraught — DH can provide valuable insight into how digital methods can be leveraged
            to address social, cultural, and personal issues that extend far beyond the typical big
            data approach to digital tools. DH can work towards an educative, public engagement to
            collaborate with a general population increasingly engaged with digital media. Together,
            the two critical design perspectives recognize critical design as theory, experiment,
            and data: designs constitute a social theory, data can be experimentally produced within
            this social theory, and encouraging reflective design can turn the social theories of
            design themselves into data.

         Reflexive and Experimental Critical Design: A Sociologically-Informed Approach
            David Berry and Anders Fagerjord argue for a critical reflexivity  in
            DH, one in which researchers treat their work as more than just functional but
            theoretical as well. As digital methods proliferate, especially in terms of their
            accessibility, the dangers of a lack of reflexivity are evident in projects — amateurish
            or professional — that misinterpret the output, logic, or purpose of the digital tools
            that they wield. Indeed, the fetishization of digital methods — many of which come from
            or overlap with methods used in the social sciences and corporate sector — has allowed
            for an overvaluation or misinterpretation of data- and computer-driven analyses
               . In some of the most extreme cases, these digital methods
            have reproduced a digital phrenology, or they have been leveraged by malicious actors
            such as conspiracy theorists to allow for the scientization of misinformation and hate
               towards harmful political ends  . This is not to say there has not been reflection on these risks: a recent
            viral project from science and technologies studies researchers Kate Crawford and Trevor
            Paglen [2019] blended machine learning and facial recognition software in an attempt to
            demonstrate the inherent racial biases in datasets, machine vision, and algorithms —
            digital tools which power commercial products or even the work of police departments and
            high school administrations  . Nevertheless, the
            blind implementation of digital tools means that tools must be understood for their
            potential consequences, perhaps even designed to prevent abuse by bad actors. DH as a
            whole can look to engage with and produce work that reimagines digital tools as
            something less-than-empirical and objective — the product of human impulses and
            understandings of the world, rooted both in individuals’ biases, motivations, and
            ideologies. Moreover, these reimagined tools can then be turned inwards, to examine the
            self rather than the troves of ethically-dubious data now enrapturing researchers and
            celebrating the eclectic categorization and algorithmic analysis of the other
               . 
         It is only with strict interrogation of digital tools and methodologies that DH can move
            beyond producing instrumental tools that say something about inputted data and instead
            produce tools that say something about the world itself as it is being transformed and
            interpreted by technology — tools that are, in their own right, theories about the
            social world . Thus, I position myself in a critical
            DH, one that investigates the theoretical underpinnings of the employed methods and
            treats digital tools as theories themselves. In this work, the object of my criticism is
            what digital humanists term design:
         …design is a creative practice harnessing cultural, social, economic, and technological
            constraints in order to bring systems and objects into the world. Design in dialogue
            with research is simply a technique, but when used to pose and frame questions about
            knowledge, design becomes an intellectual method. In the hundred-plus years during which
            a self-conscious practice of design has existed, the field has successfully exploited
            technology for cultural production, either as useful design technologies in and of
            themselves, or by shaping the culture’s technological imaginary. As Digital Humanities
            both shapes and interprets this imaginary, its engagement with design as a method of
            thinking-through-practice is indispensable. Digital Humanities is a production-based
            endeavor in which theoretical issues get tested in the design of implementations, and
            implementations are loci of theoretical reflection and elaboration .
         In short, in the world of DH, design is a technological approach to representations of
            the world which necessarily implements (and tacitly argues for) a theory about the
            world. My work here is thus critical design, a reflexive interrogation of the theories
            underpinning the design I am attempting to implement in addition to the design itself as
            it is used to argue for a particular representation of the world. This reflexive
            critical design asks the designer to examine their own latent motivations, ideologies,
            and biases; examine how these have been translated into the design; and examine design
            itself as an act and as a principle. Reflexivity about research methods and approaches
            is certainly nothing new in the humanities, especially as critical race theory and
            gender theory have tasked readers with examining their implicit biases before engaging
            with literary material , or decolonial theories have
            argued for an archaeology in which researchers examine their position more deeply within
            field sites . Social science’s more explicit historical focus on
            methods adds to this conversation by viewing approaches to research questions and data
            — such as literary works or archaeological sites — as methods guided by a particular
            point-of-view and sociological interpretation . Further, with the
            proliferation of media studies in the social sciences, critical voices have asked for a
            deeper examination of our sudden reification of tools that many people assume to
            function without the bias of the old ways See for example:  .
         When working across academic registers, it’s important to establish a shared vocabulary:
            in this instance, design is a capacious term, as it can refer to both the design of a
            study — from the social scientific lexicon — or the design of a computational tool. In
            both cases, design is united by its generative procedures. That
            is to say, when approaching a research question with a dataset, both the research design
            and the computational design are guided by a procedural logic that makes arguments about
            how the social world functions — but in DH work, research design often is computational design, as the research methods are not distinct from the tool
            itself. Thus, we can enlist design as the term capturing the procedural logic of
            computational tools which themselves constitute the research design. Procedural
            arguments, or procedural rhetoric, consist of the art of persuasion through rule-based
            representations and interactions, rather than the spoken word, writing, images, or
            moving pictures . Therefore, to analyze the procedural rhetoric of DH
            designs is to recognize that systems and processes function as a form of discursive
            argumentation as much as traditionally understood argumentation in the form of writing
            and imagery, with computational designs increasingly coming under scrutiny from the
            critical coding perspective — what are the latent arguments built into software’s code
            ? Not only does software’s coded procedures make arguments
            about the social world, they do so at the behest of programmers and with the illusion of
            objectivity. In short, this paper views design as a set of theoretically-informed,
            argumentative procedures built into digital tools. Moreover, because these digital procedures seek to generate, capture, or analyze data, their underlying theories shape how data is generated, captured, or analyzed.
         An example of how some social science researchers have critically studied their tools to
            see their latent biases can help to elucidate the reflexive critical design perspective
            I’ve outlined above: In the aforementioned facial recognition project by , the researchers began with a set of research questions, What work do
            images do in AI systems? What are computers meant to recognize in an image and what is
            misrecognized or even completely invisible? In their case: what biases are baked into a
            software’s procedures for recognizing faces? Their next step required choosing a dataset
            to train their AI system, and, when critiquing one dataset representing human emotions,
            they were aware of the arguments implicitly made by the dataset’s taxonomical
            procedures, writing, First there’s the taxonomy itself: that ‘emotions’ is a valid set
            of visual concepts. Then there’s a string of additional assumptions: that the concepts
            within ‘emotions’ can be applied to photographs of people’s faces . When they chose a different dataset for their work, the data’s taxonomical
            procedures allowed them to see the outlines of a worldview as it classifie[d] people
            into a huge range of types including race, nationality, profession, economic status,
            behaviour, character, and even morality . That they would
            create a machine vision tool intended to classify people based on their physical
            appearances meant that their tool advocated for the worldview tacit to the data; it
            posited a social theory of what the categories of people were, that these were
            appropriate categories to use, and that a person’s categories were latent to their
            physical appearance — what does it mean to look like a kleptomaniac or a pervert
            ? Crawford and Paglen’s work demonstrated that both the
            dataset and the facial recognition software could not function without tacitly making
            arguments about how the social world functions — how human biases about physical
            appearances were translated into computational procedures, argued for by those
            procedures. 
         Reflexive critical design allows us to see the latent motivations, ideologies, and
            biases inherent to the computational processes that constitute DH’s research tools.
            These computational processes work in service of a worldview, social theory, or, to
            use the language of computer science, a model of the social world. The procedures that
            classify images make an argument about essential human traits whereas natural language
            processing procedures might make an argument about prescriptive grammar or semantics,
            and GIS procedures might make an argument about national territories or land ownership.
            In any case, without critical examination, these digital tools simply perpetuate the
            worldview that constructed them, and so long as they produce data that people find
            worthwhile, their latent biases can go uninterrogated. 
         Further, reflexive critical design allows for experimentation that creates data. For
            example, in Crawford and Paglen’s project, the researchers could leverage the outputs of
            their facial recognition software, as it was used by people online, to make an argument
            about racism in digital technology. They made their digital tool accessible, allowing
            users to submit their own photos and put the machine’s social theories to the test. In
            taking a critical approach to design that gave them an intimate knowledge of their
            software — and the inherent racial biases it modeled — they were better equipped to
            critique its output. Crucially, reflexive critical design’s capacity for experimentation
            negotiates between historical modes of criticism and emergent forms of critical making
             . Crawford and Paglen began with a traditional critique but
            then put this critique into productive action. This resulted in a project that allowed
            users to experientially engage with the critique, affectively understanding how
            technology discriminates when pictures of themselves were labelled with racist and
            sexist slurs. It was an experiment in digital design which merged criticism with
            critical making, a merger that is increasingly familiar to social scientists: in
            sociologist Chris Bail’s work on political polarization, his team created a social media
            app that put two politically-opposed members into a chatroom where they could discuss a
            given political issue anonymously . In this case, a social theory
            about anonymity, discursive identity, and political communication was proffered by the
            very processes of the app, one that could be tested by the app’s output in the form of
            textual exchanges. Social media apps are infrequently designed with such a sensitivity
            to social theory — as anthropologist Nick Seaver [2017] discusses, the logic of these
            platforms often reproduce taken-for-granted cultural norms or are uncritical about the
            ways their social engineering might affect people’s lives. 
         A disciplinary anxiety emerges: the artistry and accessibility of Crawford and Paglen’s
            work feels different than the social experimentation of Bail’s work — indeed, both are
            framed differently — but at the crux of their digital methods is a recognition that they
            are perpetuating a model of reality through procedural arguments that will result in
            some form of data that puts their model to the test, allowing for a deeper reflection on
            the software itself. These design procedures simultaneously function as research
            procedures, with designers acting as researchers inviting users (or subjects) to be
            subject to the digital design’s processes. Reflexive critical design is in direct
            opposition to the work of the corporate sector, where digital processes are deployed
            without reflecting on how those processes will affect human behavior, as the software’s
            functionality and profitability are the primary motivators, forcing the software’s
            underlying design logic to remain a trade secret . What many
            researchers of media are doing now is seeing the resulting data of the mass social
            experiment that is the internet: the experimental critical design perspective challenges
            researchers to directly engage and design the methods that have created that data.
         Finally, reflexive critical design itself constitutes data. There are a number of ways
            of thinking about how design can be used as data: First, the design’s procedures
            themselves, through a close-reading of the software’s code and processes , allows for an examination that can reveal the researcher or developer’s
            intentions and theoretical framing when they designed the software. This is similar to
            the work that Crawford and Paglen [2019] did when they critiqued the emotions dataset:
            they drew out the social theories from others’ procedural
            arguments. Now with countless computational models available online, systematic critical
            design is desperately needed to hold other researchers accountable . Second,
            when researchers such as Crawford, Paglen, or Bail make their theoretical framing
            explicit — a much more common practice in the social sciences, where these authors come
            from — such justifications can be put in conversation with the software itself to
            examine how different researchers have theorized and employed models of the social
            world, as might be done in review papers. This is a challenge, considering how
            frequently digital tools are distributed with documentation focused solely on how to use
            the digital tool rather than how to understand the implications of its procedural
            arguments. 
         The final way that reflexive critical design can be seen as data is one that has rarely
            seen use in DH or the social sciences broadly. Researchers can task people with
            developing their own designs. Researchers can pose design challenges to participants in
            an attempt to see how they might conceptualize and procedurally argue for a model of the
            social world, and their procedural arguments constitute data to be analyzed. This sort
            of thinking has gained popularity in the world of urban planning, where design
            challenges centered around tackling a central problem can be revealing of how
            participants in the design challenge think through social issues .
            It has also been employed in relation to game design, with researchers and educators
            collaborating to assist youth in designing games that address salient social problems
            . These designed games reflect both how the students
            think about systems functioning in their lives and how the medium — in this case, analog
            board games — constrain and shape their thinking in procedural ways. How people think
            about issues through software and digital processes, then, can be investigated, even if
            their designs are only manifest on paper or in interviews. The goal is not to design
            software but to understand how people would design software — how
            they procedurally argue for a particular representation of the world. Although, with the
            increased accessibility of digital tools and increasing digital literacy, some
            populations might be able to design simple games or programs articulating the dynamics
            of the social world through limited procedural techniques.
         Critical, pedagogical, and generative approaches to game design bring the principles of
            reflexive and experimental critical design into greater relief. As seen in Gilliam et
            al.’s [2016] board game design workshops, games have long been theorized to have the
            capacity to critique extant systems, teach new ways of thinking and acting, and produce
            information, data, and action   . Games are
            particularly in line with the move towards a DH that matters, as Karen Schrier
            advocates for games that are not just for change, they are change. . Theorists and researchers tout recurring
            examples of games that were critically designed and then produced researchable behaviors
            through their procedures . For example, a non-profit encouraged people to
            donate to those in financial straits by proceduralizing its worldview in a game: The
            game forced players into difficult financial decisions where sacrifice was necessary,
            attempting to demonstrate that poverty was not a fault of character but of oppressive
            systems . Researchers then studied the
            emotions and ideas evoked by the game, which showed mixed success  . The game was reflexively designed — intended to be
            pedagogical and influence thought under a particular ideology — with experimental
            capabilities such that people could measure changes in sentiment or money donated. And
            it is a data point as one of many social change games or games about poverty, one way a
            theory of poverty has been turned into a digital procedure. It is a game as a theory, an
            experiment, and as data.
         Many of those who advocate for games for social change place a great deal of emphasis on
            those procedural arguments — fixating on how processes and mechanics in games can bring people closer to one another, spark
            emotions that motivate, and literally perform research in the case of citizen scientist
            projects . However, we know that faith in processes alone is dangerous,
            as the same processes that produce prosocial multiplayer environments in online games
            also allow for cultish groupthink and potential political radicalization, or fail to
            inspire empathy for the impoverished  . Ultimately, games represent one end of the design spectrum: As highly
            interactive, often immersive tools that make arguments about the social world through a
            battery of argumentative strategies such as narratives or gameplay mechanics, they often
            unintentionally produce ways for researchers to better understand human social dynamics
            in games that were designed for play and enjoyment. On the other end of the spectrum
            might be electronic medical records (EMR) software: while no one would be playing on
            an EMR system, these interfaces have procedures that make arguments about their
            patients, medical hierarchies, and privacy — the push for health information exchange
            (HIE) software which allows for the sharing of relevant data across health and
            non-health entities such as food banks is reflective of a critical approach to health
            care software design that implicitly argues for health systems which address social
            determinants of health and gives patients more agency over their data  . Between the engaging world of games and the
            bureaucratic world of management software, there are any number of digital tools which
            can be critically examined and designed to more intentionally engage with the world we
            live in.
         While design has always been focused on how best to analyze and represent data,
            critical design brings latent social and political questions to the forefront of the
            digital humanities, homing in on a DH that matters . Social
            scientists have long recognized the ways that worldviews and social theories are
            codified into research methods, and work in the social sciences (like that of Seaver or
            Bail) demonstrates how recent studies have had to contend with the socio-political
            implications of technology’s designs and procedures. Reflexive critical design tasks DH
            researchers and designers to think about how the tools they produce and the tools they
            use assist in the production of a political reality. Just as Google search indexes
            perpetuate racist worldviews through their treatment of racial and gender minorities
            , DH researchers run the risk of creating tools — for academic or public use
            — that actively aid in the reification of a particular (and potentially dangerous)
            social theory. Reflexive critical design also opens up the pathway for experimental
            critical design: once a social theory has been established in a digital tool, how do the
            users of that tool engage with it to reproduce or subvert that worldview? Users — be
            they DH researchers or the public — create data under the framework provided by these
            tools, so their output enables the interrogation of the kinds of data the tool allows.
            This also allows reflexive critical design to understand technology in
               its use rather than just in concept. Moreover, by examining others’
            computational models addressing shared research questions or by asking users how they
            would design a computational model to approach a research question, the social theories
            baked into procedures can themselves become data for comparative analysis. This final
            form of experimentation rests on the notion that people are innately theoretical beings,
            and they will try to translate their understanding of the world into procedures, as
            people do when designing systems in video games  or HIEs.
            Ultimately, this interdisciplinary approach recognizes that digital procedures
            increasingly govern the way that we interface with reality, and thus we need to
            critically design digital procedures — in DH tools, social science experiments, social
            media, games, and even health management software — that are honest about their
            procedures, allow their procedures to be tested, and look toward others to build better
            digital systems.

         Network Analysis and Data Visualization: Networks of Loss
         Recent trends in employment, education, and technology have made the promise of large
            scale data analysis a reality in a variety of industries and research areas, motivated
            in part by the profit to be had from data mining (with the oft-repeated assertion that
            data is the new oil), a budding career-oriented student body well-versed in technical
            skills, and the proliferation of open-source software that has made mathematically
            complex and technologically taxing data analysis accessible .
            These innovations have come at a cost: setting aside the perennial fear that data
            analysis will strip more qualitatively-oriented humanities and social scientist
            researchers of job security, the acquisition of data for analysis raises ethical
            questions regarding individual privacy and rule by technology . However, while the social harms of data harvesting are not to be downplayed,
            equally important is how that data is used. There are obvious cases of data abuse — such
            as city police departments that deploy racist policing algorithms or search algorithms
            that reiterate racist stereotypes about Black women — and then there are questions of
            manipulation, disinformation, and epistemology   .
         Due to data science’s proliferation, open-access tools are more and more being
            leveraged by actors who don’t have a deep knowledge of the technology’s operations, let
            alone the statistical or social sciences background to put their results in context. In
            a time that has been labelled the post-truth era or the Misinformation Age, the
            threats posed by the — sometimes malicious, sometimes innocent — dissemination of false
            or misleading information can have damaging effects on public discourse, political
            organization, and national crises, a fact that became exceptionally clear throughout the
            course of the COVID-19 pandemic  . Considering how easily convinced people are by blatantly false and
            easily refutable science or news, any additional credibility granted to amateurish
            data engineers is in itself a heightened risk . This
            project embraces and reimagines this criticism: on the one hand, it accepts that the
            overabundance of amateur data analysis seeking to answer fraught global topics is
            dangerous and that such tools need to be augmented to prevent faux-empiricist
            manipulation; on the other hand, it develops a uniquely accessible tool that encourages
            experimentation with data science techniques from a purely personal perspective,
            prompting users to recognize the false objectivity that belies data visualization and
            instead use data visualization as a tool for personal reflection.
         I chose to engage with network analysis tools because they are among some of the most
            vague and inscrutable data visualizations, often difficult to program and used for
            hyper-specific datasets. However, they are increasing in popularity, particularly with
            analyses of social media, so they are not entirely unfamiliar to a general audience. In
            the sections that follow, I will first describe the project’s digital technology, laying
            out what this tool is. Then, I will approach the tool from a reflexive critical design
            perspective, thinking through network theories, design principles, and design purposes
            to exhume the logic of this tool. Finally, I will engage with the concept of
            experimental critical design and demonstrate how this digital tool could be used to
            facilitate experimentation in a mode that is both sociologically-informed and germane to
            the digital humanities. 

            The Project: Loss
        
         Nothing is something where something is meant to be.
         	—Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds 2019
         
         
          Loss is a data visualization website It is currently available online at the
               author’s website here: https://loss.peterforberg.com/).
             that encourages users to think through the question, What do you need to remove
            in order to erase [thing] from [your life or society]? The website allows users to
            develop their own network visualization through a hierarchical visualization of HTML
            elements. By naming, arranging, and adding nodes in the HTML document, users are able
            to seamlessly generate a visualization using the JavaScript library D3 (Data Driven
            Documents) . The website subverts the typical
            employment of D3 as primarily a way of visualizing extant data by inviting users to
            create their own networks, a task which, while increasingly accessible, is still mostly
            limited to those who have some knowledge of computer programming and who have access to
            datasets. By allowing users to create their own visualization — and their own datasets —
            Loss encourages users of the website not to just think with data or to think about
            data, but to think through data, using data visualization
            strategies not just as a way of representing the world but of actively engaging with it.
            The fact that network visualization is being used, with its veneer of empiricism, also
            necessarily interrogates the idea that datasets are always perfect reflections of
            reality. Moreover, it points to the larger question of what a network visualization even
            represents, interrogating the taken-for-granted visuals we are increasingly exposed
            to. 
         
            The Guided Tutorial
            
            text that reads "today I want to remove a thing from society"
         
         From a user experience standpoint, the design interface is rather simplistic. At this
            point, it may be helpful to navigate to the website and access the page labelled tutorial, as I’ll be walking through
            the site’s functionality. The tutorial begins with an interactive statement seen in
            Figure 1: Today, I want to remove a thing from society. In the tool, the terms thing
            and society are actually dropdown menus which allow the user to produce different
            statements, such as Today I want to remove a person from my life or a concept from
            history. Based on the user’s selections, the program asks follow-up questions which lay
            the foundation for their network. Thus, someone who decides to remove another person
            from their life will be asked about what the two people share together, which will later
            be turned into a node. Once the questions have been answered, the user is presented with
            the full tool and a preliminary version of their network of loss. An example of what
            this looks like is seen in Figure 2: On the left-hand side, there is a hierarchical
            interface akin to an ontology or file management system where users can add nodes to the
            network and give them names, sizes, and colors. This hierarchical structure can be
            manipulated, with nodes rearranged or deleted. On the right-hand side, we see the
            results of this hierarchy: when the “generate” button is pressed, the network is
            constructed and visualized for the user as a series of connected nodes which can then be
            dragged around. If the user wanted to save their network to be used in a different
            visualization software, that option is made available to them with the export
            button. 
         
            Example Network Built Using the Tool
            
            Network diagram with different types of meat
         
         The example shown in the Figure 2 is taken from prototyping the tool with colleagues and
            friends who eat meat. They were prompted with the statement, Today, I want to remove
            meat from my life. The networks developed by users in response included everything from
            restaurants to holiday traditions. This use case resonated differently for different
            people: for some the tool provided a visualization of just how much they would lose by
            going vegetarian, while for others it enabled the construction of a thorough and
            strategic plan for going meatless. In testing, people were asked to design networks that
            touched upon deeply personal systems — such as removing a loved one from one’s life — or
            systems that, while personally resonant, aren’t always easy to fully imagine — such as
            removing the institution of policing from society. Even in these use cases, the tool
            doesn’t make any assertion about whether loss is a good thing or a bad thing, nor does
            it set parameters for what should or should not be included in the network. It simply
            allows for these networks to be built and visualized. This is a decision that I made as
            the administrator of these use cases: it would be entirely possible for the tool to be
            used to ask the same questions, with different framing, in order to produce networks
            that were critical of meat consumption or policing and posed questions to guide network
            construction and interrogate people’s relationships to these systems. Such uses are
            discussed more in the later section Critical Design as Experiment.
         While Loss doesn’t take a stand on whether any given loss is good or bad, it is still
            explicit about its pedagogical design and how the project is intended to be used. The
            landing page text reads, …there is no amount of ‘big data’ that can be visualized to
            explain the very personal, individual experiences we have with systems and ideas. So
            instead of using data visualizations for rigorous science, we’ll leverage these tools to
            think through how we are implicated in systems. The aforementioned guided tutorial
            facilitates the thinking through that the landing page requests. The tutorial is not
            an explanation of the tool itself but a line of questioning that is supposed to be
            evocative of different forms of thinking. These questions ask users to think more deeply
            about their engagement with systems and contingencies, and in this way, the website
            continues to make clear the designer’s motivations for its creation and the worldview it
            seeks to present. Should users skip the tutorial, the main tool still contains a
            rotating series of prompts that reiterate systems-level thinking, with pointed questions
            that provide pathways for expanding the network they’re creating to include things like
            historical structures or emotions. There is also a brief explanation of the tool’s
            features, but once again, users aren’t instructed to visualize certain topics or assume
            certain political positions. All of this is done to intentionally be content-neutral:
            the tool prepares them for how to think about any topic of their
            choosing, not what to think about it. 
         On the technical side, the program’s functionality is fairly straightforward: users are
            essentially adding, deleting, and rearranging HTML elements using the hierarchy. These
            div — or content division — elements are comprised of two main components: their
            location and their customization. Each div — which we can understand as a node in the
            network — is placed within an HTML hierarchy, wrapped within other divs. A child div is
            located inside of a parent div. The child div knows the name of its parent based on its
            location, and this HTML information is converted into network data — the links between
            nodes — using JavaScript. The parent div knows how many children it has, which is only
            used to make sure users do not accidentally delete the entire graph. Each div also has
            customizable features — name, size, and color — that make it unique. These features are
            also translated into network data using JavaScript and used to style the nodes in the
            graph. It might be helpful to imagine the computational logic as akin to a giant
            matryoshka doll: each interior doll knows which doll it is inside, and each doll has
            unique features. Each div knows which div it is inside, and each div has unique
            features. Because the network is generated on the basis of unique names for divs, users
            can enter the same name multiple times to give a div multiple connections. D3, a data
            analysis library for JavaScript that can turn JavaScript data into charts and graphs, is
            used to convert the network data produced by the collaborating HTML and JavaScript in
            order to visualize the nodes. The source code and documentation — available online
               using most web browsers’ inspect feature — walks through how the code works, though
               it expects some background knowledge in the basics of both HTML and JavaScript. For a
               more detailed explanation of the website’s code, visit its public GitHub repository
               here: https://github.com/peterforberg/loss
            
         
         Before moving to the theoretical reasons for the project’s design, I want to explain why
            the tool’s UI and code are the way they are. First, the user interface was designed to
            be simplistic and approachable, with only a few variables (size, color, name, and
            position) that allowed for maximum creativity. In the design phase, there were other
            ideas for how the UI could look: for example, it was considered that the tool could
            begin with a monochrome screen, and as objects were removed (by being added to the
            network), the color, too, would be removed. This prototype would have more closely
            mirrored the actual process of loss, of things being taken away, but it wouldn’t have
            produced network visualizations that are familiar and easily introduced into other
            contexts. The design process included toying with other interfaces and features through
            an iterative engagement (initial designs were shared with colleagues and friends for
            feedback), but it ultimately settled on the one here for its ease of use, resemblance to
            other network visualization software, and technical simplicity — some features, like
            adding nodes via interaction with the generated network, were technically resource consumptive or
            difficult to use. 
         It should be noted that the code itself is not well-optimized, nor does it leverage
            advanced JavaScript libraries (aside from D3) to perform computations. There are a
            number of reasons for this: First, the goal was to program something with few
            dependences so that people with only an intermediate knowledge of the main web languages
            would be able to read its code. Second, as a fairly lightweight application, there was
            no need to optimize performance as ultimately, the code works. Finally, aspects of the
            code that are repetitive or mathematically simple better articulate the theory behind
            the code. For example, there are plenty of other ways to create a web app in which the
            hierarchy which generates the network leverages math to build out the network, but in
            this version, what happens computationally is what is envisioned theoretically: a parent
            node is known to be a parent because it quite literally contains its child node. They
            have a direct, computational relationship such that the computer “thinks” about the
            relationship the way we think about the relationship. Moreover, the computer “thinks”
            about the relationship the way network data represents those relationships, which is why
            the user can export the graph to a network data format. There’s a one-to-one
            relationship between computational representation, network theoretical representation,
            and the actual network relationships being represented. Thus, this software privileges
            simple, theoretically-driven computation to assist users in thinking through data, so
            the theory driving its design is what I’ll discuss next.

            
         
            Critical Design as Theory
      
          The data visualizations that led to the creation of this project are largely rooted in
            the theories of network analysis. Network analysis has enjoyed widespread adoption in
            the social sciences as a way of structurally examining the relationships between
            different entities . In contemporary uses of network
            analysis, it can be employed to better understand patterns of viral spread, social
            networks of support, or online networks of political actors see for example:   . Beyond statistical and theoretical
            implementations, network analysis has been translated into a robust form of data
            visualization that — for all of its popular uses — remains less employed if only because
            the data for network visualization is not always easy to attain and is rarely bundled
            together with other data. Due to the diversity of network visualization’s applications,
            it is at times difficult to know what precisely is being represented with a given
            network. The nodes of the network are often straightforward — representing human
            agents, organizations, or creatures — but the links between each of these nodes can
            represent a variety of relationships. Some links are clearly defined: they might show
            the transmission of diseases or check to see if two nodes are friends on a social
            media platform. Other network visualizations strategies actively delineate the changing
            definitions of links and nodes in the visualization, such as in the project Anatomy of
            an AI System which sketches out the various international relationships required for
            the production of an Amazon Echo . This non-computational
            network visualization ambivalently defines the relationships between a variety of types
            of nodes which range from actors such as companies to concepts such as geological
            processes. These two drastically different approaches to network visualization — one
            with very clearly defined sets of nodes and links, computationally generated, and one
            with ambiguous categories of nodes and links, qualitatively designed — demonstrate the
            potential for network visualizations to be used for projects that go beyond limited
            datasets and ask us more broadly to interpret the relationships presented in
            visualizations. Indeed, many visualizations fall somewhere in the middle, simply showing
            relationships between nodes, a term which can take on a multiplicity of meanings.
         While network theory and network analysis remain useful backdrops to network
            visualization, they are intimately focused on structure and
            regularity, embracing an empiricism that might distinguish itself from the Amazon Echo
            approach, which engages with networks in all of their shifting complexity. Loss
            embraces this ambiguity of links, nodes, and networks to take a figurational sociology
            approach to network visualization which recognizes that attempts at structured analysis
            might fall short of capturing the complexities of networks by focusing on a more limited
            notion of what belongs in the network. Figurational sociology, developed by Norbert
            Elias, recognizes the risks of empiricism in representing complex human behaviors: In
            response, the figurational approach criticizes the move towards social scientific essentialism that …blurs the procedural character of social
            phenomena by presupposing the existence of permanent structures subjacent to change
            . Adopting a perspective that recognizes historical contexts,
            power, and the need for multi-level analysis, figurational sociology benefits from its
            focus, …on the understanding of the structures that mutually dependent human beings
            establish, and the transformations they suffer, both individually and in groups, due to
            the increase or reduction of their interdependencies and gradients of power . Elias’s framework was mostly concerned with how to negotiate the
            chasm between analysis of individuals as people subordinate to a large social system and
            as the very agents who worked to construct those social systems, superordinate to their
            forces. While it too has a penchant for structuralism, in modern applications,
            figurational sociology wraps in a constellatory logic that attempts to capture a more
            robust picture of systems by drawing out the idiosyncrasies of social dynamics that pure
            structuralism would flaunt. This negotiation between structure and adaptation, between
            individual experiences and social systems, between history and anachronism, makes
            figurational sociology a more appealing approach. At its core, it is about the
            configuration of individuals and structures as they collectively produce the social
            world in dialogue rather than as one determines the other. 
         The language of figurational sociology is suited for network visualizations — often
            referring to webs, linkages, dependencies, and networks — and a revival of
            figurational sociology has come about in conversation with network analysis, which means
            that there are visualizations that describe the relationships between actors in social
            configurations . Adding to figurational sociology’s lexicon, it is
            important to imagine both individual and social experiences and structures as being
            encounters, assemblages, and precarious . Anthropologist Anna Tsing’s
            wide-ranging work on the global networks of the matsutake
            mushroom trade develops in language what this project would aim to develop in
            network visualizations, as she discusses encounters — sometimes fleeting but still
            important — between unexpected actors, assemblages of perhaps apparently unrelated
            systems and events, and the general precarity of the social world in a changing economy
            and ecology. She, too, employs a constellatory logic that lets disparate subjects
            converge to create something in their relationships to one another — in their
            configurations. 
         The figurational approach, especially as it recognizes the strength of phenomenology,
            tries to unpack these assemblages, encounters, and systems for what they are, revealing
            their role in our daily lives and applying structure and systematic analysis where there
            once was story, but Tsing’s work is evidence for how we tend to mask these analyses with
            a deeply individual narrativization of complex systems. Reflexive critical design,
            especially for a DH that matters, tasks designers with self-reflection not just
            because reflexivity helps explain the analytical framing of their work, but also because
            it elucidates the political procedures of their work — as evidenced by the ways that
            authors have demonstrated their desire to alter social behavior or critique racist
            technology. Certainly, this project’s procedures are grounded in assisting users to
            unpack their tendency towards individual narratives and think in terms of configurations
            and systems, networks of related and contingent subjects who might sometimes be
            invisible to individuals. The theoretical framing of figurational sociology is employed
            procedurally, in the design of the website, to accomplish a goal that has political
            implications. Imagine that this tool was employed not in its currently content-neutral
            format but instead in a format that asked users to imagine a world without policing,
            Amazon, or sexism: what would we need to remove to take down these institutions,
            corporations, and prejudices? A simple alteration of the website’s language, with a
            little more background provided on each subject, can quickly turn Loss into an
            explicitly political project. Indeed, the project was designed to be employed in such a
            way, so this is no stretch of the imagination.
         The procedures of a digital tool, especially when used to educate and allow users to
            produce more content, thus become an ethical and pedagogical practice. Historian Joan
            Wallach Scott characterizes ethical practices as those in which people strive to reduce
            the gap between reality as it is and reality as it ought to be . Loss
            asks people to imagine a world of social consequences and contingencies, thinking
            through the responsibilities of an interconnected world in which the loss of something —
            such as a person, institution, or idea — has effects that ripple out. In other words, it
            aims to instill an ethical practice, asking users to think about the world as it is and then how it might or ought to
               be following a change in its configuration. This is inherently pedagogical,
            especially considering the way that the tutorial and guiding questions are framed. Not
            all digital tools take a pedagogical or ethical approach: they present the world as it
            is, or they experiment on people without revealing the purpose for the experimentation,
            but in order to establish a DH that matters, we need to recognize that procedures, in
            representing a worldview, can also represent an imaginary that is to be resolved with a
            new way of thinking — one that the tools can hope to instill. If John Culkin’s summation
            of Marshall McLuhan’s work is correct — We shape our tools and thereafter they shape
               us  — then we need to recognize how these tools can be used to educate for
            social change.

            Critical Design as Experiment
        
         In the current design of the website, a small About page invites users who have made
            a network that they enjoy to submit it. One can imagine how a tool like this can be used
            to produce data that can be recirculated and analyzed, recognizing the data for how it
            was produced. If the tool was to be introduced in a classroom environment with a
            specific prompt, such as What does it take to remove policing from society?, then
            students could think through the various ways that policing is implicated in their
            lives, and each student’s developed network would represent a valuable data point in a
            larger narrative about policing. Computationally, the tool is simple enough to edit that
            one could port it to their own website and alter the tutorial such that the tutorial
            prompts become a research question: one could code the prompt to state Today, I want to
            remove social media from my life, edit the follow-up questions, and distribute the
            website to people as part of a research study on social media use. As experiment — and
            perhaps as experimental pedagogy — Loss allows for the production of more data that
            can be used to interrogate such questions across different topics. This speaks directly
            to the fact that network data is often difficult to come by — but that is a
            fundamentally different type of network data. The data used in large scale analysis
            seeks statistical rigor through uniform structure. This data would reflect very
            different types of networks that can be leveraged in different ways, analyzed
            qualitatively in addition to quantitatively: why did people choose to include certain
            items in their network, why were certain items connected, what do these connections
            represent, has the use of this tool changed the way that they were thinking about a
            given issue? Each of these questions becomes another entry point for data analysis when
            examined through this lens.
         This pathway might seem circuitous — arriving at qualitative data analysis through the
            techniques of quantitative, big data approaches — and that’s because it is. Approaches
            designed for large scale analysis can be applied to other settings, and the development
            of these quantitative techniques can make qualitative analysis more robust. If a large
            enough group of people use this tool to respond to the same prompt, then it is entirely
            possible that that data could be collected and analyzed. Through data cleaning and
            natural language processing techniques, the various individual networks could be
            concatenated to make one larger network, and it would be possible to ask new questions:
            what nodes appear across participants, what nodes receive the largest size, are nodes
            consistently connected to the same central node across participants, and were most
            participants thinking more about their own lives or about wider society? Of course, such
            analysis needs perpetually to return to the data’s source and thus the theoretical
            framework of the tool: it was a tool designed to produce data under a specific framing,
            and so all data should be treated in relation to that framing. Here, a convergence of
            research techniques seeks to break interdisciplinary boundaries: with qualitatively
            generated data designed in such a way as to be able to be analyzed quantitatively, we
            can further dismantle the distinction between these techniques and see the possibilities
            for arguments that leverage multiple forms of analysis to demonstrate their claims.
            Further, by anticipating big data through a qualitative design, this skirts the
            ethical dilemmas that accompany data-mining. If data is to become more restricted to
            protect privacy, then now is the time to start imagining alternative — perhaps more
            traditionally experimental — ways to ethically source data. As an experiment, Loss
            allows for the customizable generation of network data that can be employed in research
            settings to produce quantitative and qualitative analyses that speak to one another.

         
            Critical Design as Data
        
         Finally, the reflexive, critical interrogation of the design of Loss allows for three
            different types of data. First, Loss itself is data. As a freely available, publicly
            hosted platform accessible on GitHub and with annotated code, researchers who are
            reviewing network visualization strategies can do critical readings of the code that
            comprises Loss. In the same way that mathematicians have scrutinized digital tools to
            see how they run statistical analyses or computer scientists have critiqued different
            programs to see which ones most effectively complete a given task, DH researchers can
            critically compare the code of a program like Loss to see how it posits and
            procedurally argues for a social theory . Comparative critical
            coding is not only valuable to researchers seeking to understand the social
            ramifications of code, but it can assist designers in producing better coded tools. And
            analysis of Loss as a digital tool doesn’t have to be confined to its code: a vital
            component of software is its other aesthetics, such as data visualization’s visual
            repertoires, which work in tandem with procedural arguments to facilitate argumentation
            through multiple rhetorical vectors .
         Second, this paper is in itself a datapoint in a larger conversation about network
            analysis and another conversation about the use of digital tools for ethical and
            pedagogical practices. Most network analysis tools are developed from purely
            mathematical perspectives, and theory is then applied to the results of that math by
            outside researchers who had no hand in shaping how the tool functions. This paper is
            different in that the data — Loss itself — comes from a theoretical interpretation of
            what networks mean. As a case study in the design of digital tools, this is something of
            an auto-ethnographic understanding of how it is that I, as a designer of network
            software, translated my social theories into a tool designed for network analysis. This
            is different from saying that this is a theory paper: this is a design paper, a design
            document the likes of which are rarely circulated because most digital tools are not
            developed under specific, self-critical theoretical frameworks. Perhaps it is reductive
            to call this data, but in the under-utilized world of critical design, researchers are
            often looking for interlocutors whose work they can examine for its handling of biases
            and latent assumptions . Quite literally, the process of
            design becomes data for investigation.
         Finally, Loss offers one way of employing data visualization techniques to grapple
            with the questions of loss, removal, and figurational thinking. It is a specific
            strategy for both analyzing and communicating people’s experiences of loss and removal,
            but it is certainly one of many ways to procedurally address systems. The website
            recognizes this, writing, We are increasingly able to recognize systems for what they
            are, but they remain difficult to capture in their entirety. Moreover, each person
            experiences these systems differently. This is an open question: how would you think
            through loss and removal? How would you visualize it, communicate it to others? It then
            gives users the space to express their strategies for visualizing loss, though this
            information is not collected, merely used as a primer for the tool to come. Under the
            framework of experimental critical design, one could imagine asking participants to
            design an online tool that imagines loss — while I was building this tool, people who I
            shared my prototypes with had their own ideas for how one could go about visualizing and
            playing with the concept of removal. The divergent perspectives on how to procedurally
            represent loss are a final way in which critical design can constitute data; the process
            of design, opened up to many interlocutors, becomes a way of getting at people’s social
            theories of the world.
         It’s important to reiterate that under the critical design as data perspective, it is
            the design itself that is data: the design of Loss, the design-document and theory
            behind Loss, and the ways that Loss could be leveraged to access other people’s
            design ideas, which then become data. In recognizing that designs are social theories,
            we can use designs to access theoretical dialogues — among designers or any group of
            people. This is inherently sociological: by using the design frameworks offered by
            digital humanities, researchers can obtain data about people’s understanding of the
            social world. 

         Conclusion
         This paper has precariously moved across an assortment of disciplines, leveraging
            theory, methods, and designs from anthropology, sociology, digital humanities, science
            and technology studies, history, and data science to evaluate a tool designed with no
            definitive disciplinary home. One could imagine going to the website and posing the
            question, What would it take to remove critical design from academia? The resulting
            network would likely reveal the disciplinary anxieties that the turn to the digital has
            allowed to foment. As digital tools become ubiquitous across fields of study, it is not
            the job of the DH researcher or the sociologist or the computer scientist alone to
            critically examine the tools that they use and produce (though they should), but it is
            the job of the entire academic community to have a critical eye for the social
            ramifications of technology that is found in classrooms, corporations, and people’s
            personal devices.
         Loss is an articulation of how a sociological theory can be implemented in a digital
            tool. The joint resources of digital humanities’ emphasis on design and the social
            science’s emphasis on theoretical frameworks allowed for a self-critical examination of
            how Loss attempts to implement its social theory through procedural argumentation. And
            as a tool for experimentation, Loss could be leveraged to produce new data that would
            challenge the theory presented in its original design. Critical design allows for a
            deeper interrogation of the theories that structure our digital designs, the data they
            produce, and how both the designs and their theories become data for investigation as we
            strive to develop better tools — in viewing Loss through this lens, its design must
            become defensible so as to justify the arguments it procedurally makes and the data it
            procedurally produces. Where this paper diverges from other perspectives is in its
            leveraging of digital humanities design ideas — like procedural rhetoric — to approach
            sociological questions. As a sociologist, I’ve often compared the work of interviewing
            and content analysis to the work of a critical close-reader — in each case, the
            sociologist extracts social meaning by examining the rhetorical strategies of language
            or visualization found in interview transcripts or online posts. Now, it is the same —
            social meaning is extracted from a close-reading of procedure and procedural rhetoric to
            understand how social understandings are systematized. 
         While there are prominent examples of digital tools that are designed with a critical
            reflexivity, standard practice in the digital humanities, as well as data science and
            the social sciences, is to employ tools that go uninterrogated. Further, DH has stayed
            closer to critique than to design, typically employing tools designed for other fields
            or general use. This has limited how DH is able to be productive: both how it is able to
            produce theoretically-rigorous, content-specific tools and how it is able to produce its
            own data for investigation. Loss is certainly not pathbreaking in its design nor its
            theory, but it is a proposition for both DH and sociology, a proposition for
            productively designing tools that are made to generate data not available elsewhere,
            data that springs from a robust design intentions.
         Corporate tools face the scrutiny of the market to establish themselves, but academia
            is not gifted with a talent for creating viral, widely-used digital platforms. Tools are
            used for hyper-specific purposes, they become obsolete or unsupported, or they’re
            designed without a strong enough team from different fields. For a DH that matters,
            academia must recognize the necessity of interdisciplinary collaboration as opposed to
            market competition, the collective power of designing socially-empowering and productive
            digital tools. And academia shouldn’t forget its place in education: As the digital
            divide in businesses and schools grow, DH can more concretely position itself as public
            discipline engaged in digital pedagogy and committed to digital literacy that can
            overcome the tendency of technology to further segregate people based on class, race,
            and education . DH can seek a mutually-beneficial relationship with the
            public: designing tools for public use that can be leveraged by researchers to collect
            ethical and unique data while also remaining engaging and educative, tools that people
            would enjoy using and might even find useful and instructive.
         Design as a whole needs to rethink its approaches to data, ethics, and education. If
            digital tools are reshaping society, we need to be critical in our design of tools. If
            data is the new oil, then we shouldn’t become the new oil barons, chasing data at any
            cost. This is not to limit the work of researchers but to suggest that there are
            productive affordances of digital design that can open up new methods and strategies for
            analyzing and producing data while effecting social change.
         
