Title:  Tesserae Intertext
               Service
Volume:  016
Issue:  1
Date:  04 February 2022
Abstract:  
            
            The Tesserae Intertext Service Application Programming Interface (TIS-API) enhances
               the machine-accessibility of the intertext discovery capabilities of the Tesserae
               software. Instead of requiring inputs through a human-accessible webpage, the TIS-API
               accepts inputs according to a web development standard. Two case studies demonstrate
               the contributions of the TIS-API to computer-assisted literary criticism,
               particularly in increased software development and maintenance flexibility as well as
               in easier integration of Tesserae software into research workflows. Those interested
               in integrating the TIS-API into their digital projects can find documentation at https://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu/docs/api/. For exact implementation
               details, the source code is available at https://github.com/tesserae/apitess.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            The term intertext is used to name a passage of text that gives evidence of
               one author using another author’s words. Scholarly consensus indicates that
               intertexts exist (
                for Latin literature, see 
                for Greek literature, see ).
               While there is great variation in the motivation for the use of an intertext, perhaps
               the reuse signals an author’s erudition or enhances the effect of an expression. For
               example, when Vergil in his epic Aeneid describes the
               sound of a horse galloping across the fields:
            quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit
                        ungula campum (Aeneid 8.596).
                  The horses’ hooves shake the soft-soiled plain with four-footed
                  thunder.
            He is adapting a line from his epic predecessor Ennius:
            . . . summo sonitu quatit ungula
                     terram. (Ennius Annals 8.264)
                  The horses’ hooves shake the earth with great thunder.
            With this recollection, Vergil is reusing available poetic materials, demonstrating
               familiarity with his predecessor Ennius, and inviting the reader to compare the
               parallel passages.
            Various attempts have been made at computer-assisted intertext discovery (, , , ) Plagiarism detection has some similarities
                  to intertext detection. Both tasks fall under the more general field of text
                     reuse., but none have made a conscious effort to standardize
               machine-accessibility of the intertext discovery process and results. This paper
               presents the Tesserae Intertext Service Application Programming Interface (TIS-API),
               which specifies the rules of machine-accessibility for the intertext discovery tool
               known as Tesserae.
            We argue that machine-accessibility to Tesserae’s capabilities, as provided by the
               TIS-API, is an enhancement to the existing Tesserae software. We first demonstrate
               that the TIS-API does, in fact, make Tesserae’s capabilities machine-accessible by
               showing how the TIS-API is designed on standard principles in the web development
               community, and by walking through an example of how the TIS-API can be used to
               conduct a Tesserae search in a machine-accessible way. Two case studies further
               explore how the TIS-API enhances the Tesserae software. The first case study
               demonstrates how the TIS-API aids collaboration among members of the Tesserae project
               team, particularly in the implementation of the new Tesserae website interface. The
               second case study demonstrates how someone outside of the Tesserae project team sees
               value in the TIS-API for making the software easier to integrate into research
               workflows that aid reproducibility in literary criticism research.
         

            Tesserae
            The Tesserae Project develops software for discovering intertexts, with particular
               focus on the intertexts that appear in ancient Greek and Latin literature . The project’s main tool, called Tesserae (https://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu/), accomplishes this by analyzing and
               comparing two texts for regions of word reuse.
            For example, in order to find intertexts between Vergil’s Aeneid and Lucan’s Bellum Civile, Tesserae goes through both works
               line-by-line to find where pairs of words occur in lines from both works. Because the
                  Aeneid precedes the Bellum Civile in publication, we
               can assume that theAeneidserved as a source text from
               which the later poet could draw upon for poetic raw material. Accordingly, the
               results from this Tesserae search can help us find places where Lucan may have
               borrowed words from Vergil (see  for examples).
            Given the highly inflected nature of both ancient Greek and Latin, Tesserae also
               allows for matching by stem. This allows for finding examples of Lucan reusing
               Vergil’s words in different grammatical and morphological forms. It is also useful to
               exclude common words, that is stopwords, from Tesserae searches, on the grounds that
               the reuse of common words signals not so much Vergil’s influence on Lucan as much as
               the common language available to the poets in composing their respective works. In
               summary, when Tesserae is given (1) two texts to compare, (2) a manner in which to
               compare the words of the texts (i.e., by exact word match or by stem), and (3) a list
               of stopwords to ignore, instances of text reuse can be found, which in turn can serve
               as evidence of intertexts.
            Originally conceived of as a command line tool, the advent of the Tesserae website
               interface in 2009 (https://tesseraev3.caset.buffalo.edu/) made the delivery of its intertext
               discovery capabilities much more human-accessible .
               However, this same interface made machine-accessibility difficult for two main
               reasons. First, the submission of Tesserae searches relied on user input via web
               forms. Second, the results of the Tesserae searches were returned as an HTML webpage.
               While these two reasons did not make the Tesserae results impossible to access
               automatically, they did present difficulties with the automatic submission of search
               queries and the parsing of results because there were no guarantees that the input
               forms or the results webpage would remain unchanged. Any tools built on the Tesserae
               site looking and performing in exactly one way would most likely fail in the face of
               website updates that changed the input forms or the layout of the search results. The
               lack of a machine-accessible design created a situation in which Tesserae could be
               difficult to integrate with other digital projects, short of installing and hosting a
               standalone instance of Tesserae.
            The TIS-API eases the burden of integrating Tesserae’s intertext discovery
               capabilities into other projects by permitting queries to Tesserae’s database of
               texts, submission of Tesserae search requests, and retrieval of search results — all
               in a machine-accessible way. The TIS-API was designed, developed, and deployed at the
               SUNY University at Buffalo, in collaboration with developers at the University of
               Notre Dame, where backend libraries on which the TIS-API relies were developed. The
               University of Notre Dame also developed a web frontend powered by the TIS-API,
               demonstrating one instance in which the TIS-API eased the burden of integrating
               Tesserae’s intertext discovery capabilities into new software. As an important
               perspective from outside of the Tesserae Project, a researcher at the Quantitative
               Criticism Lab (University of Texas at Austin) has tested and commented on the
               TIS-API.
         

            TIS-API Design
            Following standard practice for machine-accessible communication across the Internet,
               the TIS-API was designed according to the five REpresentational State Transfer (REST)
               principles , . Since the
               basic rules for communication over the Internet are already defined by the HyperText
               Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the five REST principles provide further guidelines on how
               to use HTTP for effective machine-to-machine communication.
            The fundamental assumption of the five REST principles is that the only thing a
               machine can request from another machine is a resource (Figure 1).



            
               Diagram of the fundamental communication pattern in REST. The machine on the
                  left, known as the client, makes a request for a resource. The machine on
                  the right, called the server, responds to the client’s request. The
                  language used between the computers is known as HTTP.
               
               An image of a laptop and a file with arrows pointing from one to the
                  other
            


            In the original vision of the five REST principles, a resource typically took the
               form of a webpage or some multimedia asset, like an image. For Tesserae’s
               intertextual discoveries, one resource would be the discoveries themselves — the
               results from a Tesserae search. Other resources, such as text information and search
               options, aid in the production of those discoveries. 
            Starting from these basic assumptions about resources, the first REST principle is to
               have a name for every resource (Figure 2). 



            
               First REST principle: every resource that a server makes available must have a
                  name. One resource that the TIS-API makes available is the catalog of texts that
                  Tesserae has access to, which can be accessed by the name /texts/.
                  Furthermore, metadata for each text in the catalog can also be requested.
                  Therefore, the TIS-API assigns a name to each resource. In the example figure, the
                  name “0” is associated with Aeneid, the name 1
                  is associated with Bellum Civile, and so forth. Note
                  that these example names are not the ones used in the actual deployment currently
                  running through the Tesserae project.
               
               An image of a file
            


            This allows one machine to make a request on a specific resource from another
               machine. For example, the name http://www.buffalo.edu/ refers to the resource that is the main web page
               for the University at Buffalo. The TIS-API specifies naming conventions for the
               resources necessary to carry out Tesserae searches. For example, the naming
               conventions require that /texts/ be part of the name for resources referring
               to texts available in a Tesserae database. More examples of names and the TIS-API
               naming conventions will be shown later in the paper.
            The second REST principle is that the way one specific request behaves for one
               resource is similar to the behavior of the same request on a different resource
               (Figure 3).

            
               Second REST principle: requests should behave similarly across resources. In
                  this example, the client has requested a resource named /texts/a. In
                  response, the server provides information on a. When the client requests
                  for a resource named /texts/b, the server responds in a similar fashion,
                  except that it provides information on b instead of on a.
               
               Two images of a laptop and a file with arrows pointing from one to the
                  other
            


            Within the rules of HTTP, there are various requests that can be made. One common
               request is GET, which requests retrieval of the resource. Going back to the
               University at Buffalo main web page example, a computer requesting a GET for http://www.buffalo.edu/ is asking another
               computer to retrieve the University at Buffalo main webpage. The TIS-API specifies
               that requesting a GET for <webhost>/texts/ (where <webhost>
               is replaced with the URL referring to a server on which the TIS-API is installed)
               will retrieve information about the texts available in a Tesserae database.
            The third REST principle is that modification of a resource is mediated through
               instructions, which are called representations (Figure 4).





            
               Third REST principle: modifications to a resource are mediated through
                  instructions, known as a representation. When a client requests that a Tesserae
                  search be run, the TIS-API modifies the parallels resource by appending
                  newly found intertexts. What intertexts should be added to “parallels” is
                  determined by the representation that the client sent (shown as the blue icon),
                  which contains instructions specifying how the search is to be run.
               
               an image of a laptop and a file with arrows pointing from one to the
                  other
            

            For the TIS-API, this principle is highlighted particularly in the way Tesserae
               searches are submitted. To submit a Tesserae search, a machine must request a POST
               (like GET, POST is one of the requests that can be made through HTTP) on the
                  <webhost>/parallels/ resource and provide Tesserae search options in
               a particular format. The particularly formatted search options would be a
               representation to which the third REST principle refers.
            The fourth REST principle is that representations are self-descriptive. Admittedly,
               the TIS-API does not conform to this principle directly. However, one way in which
               the TIS-API adheres to the spirit of this principle is in the search results
               resource. Search results resources are defined to contain the search options used to
               produce the results available in the resource. In this way, it would be possible to
               know exactly what options produced these results (Figure 5). This also enables
               caching of results, which can lead to a better user experience in the form of reduced
               search times.




            
               Fourth REST principle: representations should be self-descriptive. Although the
                  TIS-API is not strict in following this principle, one way in which it practices
                  the spirit of this principle is in the server response to a request for search
                  results. The representation used in submitting the current search (shown as the
                  blue icon) is given as part of the server’s response.
               
               an image of a laptop and a file with arrows pointing from one to the
                  other
            

            The fifth and final REST principle is that application state information should not
               be stored; instead, it should be passed as a representation. To unpack the meaning of
               this, it is important to consider another assumption about the REST principles: when
               one computer communicates with another computer, the two are in a server-client
               relationship. The server is the computer that holds the resource that a client wishes
               to make a request on. As a result, the client always initiates contact with the
               server. Application state refers to a step in some process that the server and client
               navigate together.
            A common server-client application is online shopping. The first step is for the
               client to submit a set of items to purchase; then, the server needs to calculate
               various things (like whether the items are in stock, how much the order will cost,
               taxes to collect, and other business-related tasks); then, the client needs to
               provide authorization to pay for the purchase; finally, the server should notify the
               client that the order has been placed and that the purchase has been billed.
               According to the fifth REST principle, neither the client nor the server should store
               information specifying which step they are on. Rather, the exchange of information
               they conduct as part of that process should specify which step they are on.
            The TIS-API exhibits compliance with the fifth REST principle in the way it handles
               Tesserae search submissions (Figure 6). 

            
               Fifth REST principle: application state should not be stored in the API. In the
                  example of running a Tesserae search, the application is expected to 1) run a
                  search as specified and 2) display the results. The TIS-API separates these two
                  states of the application into individual requests, thereby avoiding the need to
                  store application state either on the client or the server. Instead, the
                  application state is mediated by representation: the client knows how to request
                  search results based on information the server has given (shown as the red icon).
                  Note that the client is not required to immediately request search results;
                  because it is not tied to an application state, it can make other requests, such
                  as requests for certain texts or for a new stopwords list, before requesting the
                  search results.
               
               two images of a laptop and a file with arrows pointing from one to the
                  other
            


            For the Tesserae search application, the client first submits a Tesserae search; the
               server then needs to run the search and store the results; finally, the client should
               be able to access the results. Since Tesserae search may take longer than a user is
               willing to wait, it seemed important to design the search application in such a way
               that the client would not be stuck waiting for the server to respond with search
               results. Designing the application so that the server would first respond to the
               client with the resource name for completed search results not only freed the client
               from waiting on the server but also made storing application state in either the
               server or the client unnecessary. The client can make a request on the completed
               search results, and if the server responds that they aren’t ready yet, the client can
               wait to make a request later.
            The previous points demonstrate that each of the five REST principles were considered
               in certain aspects of the TIS-API. While these examples do not describe all the ways
               in which the five REST principles were employed in the design of the TIS-API, these
               examples should serve to substantiate the claim that the five REST principles were
               important considerations during the design of the TIS-API. Because of this, the
               TIS-API provides machine-accessibility to Tesserae’s capabilities.
         

            Tesserae Search via the TIS-API
            Though claims of machine-accessibility can be made through the REST principles, it
               can be more convincing to show machine-accessibility by walking through the process
               of submitting a Tesserae search through the TIS-API (see Figure 7 for a high-level
               workflow of the process). For those who prefer directly reading the behavior
               prescribed by the TIS-API instead of going through this example, the TIS-API
               documentation site is available at https://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu/docs/api/. For those who want to know
               exact details about how the TIS-API was implemented, source code is available at https://github.com/tesserae/apitess.

            
               A high-level overview of the workflow used to submit a Tesserae intertext
                  search through the TIS-API. This image is also used at https://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu/docs/api/getting-started/workflow/,
                  where a similar workflow is described.
               
               And image of a workflow visualization
            
         


            Anatomy of a Tesserae Search Query
            To start the discussion of how the TIS-API can be used to perform a Tesserae search,
               the component parts of a Tesserae search query should be reviewed. Although the
               details for the Tesserae search process have already been described , the focus here is to have a simplified but strong
               conceptual grasp on the parts involved in a Tesserae search. By understanding what
               the building blocks are for defining a search, it will be easier to understand how
               each of these blocks are addressed by the TIS-API. The aspects of the Tesserae search
               input discussed in this paper are:
            
               source text
               target text
               type of feature used to find matches
               stopwords
            
            To frame the discussion of these inputs, it will be helpful to state what the
               Tesserae search is supposed to do: the objective of Tesserae search is to find
               intertexts between two works. Thinking of Tesserae search in this way, it becomes
               immediately obvious that two works need to be specified in the input. Because
               Tesserae was originally developed as a tool for intertext detection, a relationship
               between the two works is assumed: namely, that one work influenced the other. For
               this reason, a Tesserae search query is formulated in terms of a source text
               (i.e., the work that influences the other) and a target text (i.e., the work
               that was influenced by the other).
            Another aspect fundamental to specifying a Tesserae search query is defining what
               counts as an intertext. For purposes of the Tesserae search algorithm, an intertext
               is defined by the matching of at least two features between two passages, where one
               passage comes from the source text, and the other passage comes from the target text.
               Thus, it becomes necessary to specify which type of feature to compare when looking
               for matching features.
            One feature type is the lemma type, which can be thought of as a dictionary headword.
               When looking up the definition of a given word in the dictionary, it is sometimes
               necessary to change the spelling of the word to find the correct entry. For example,
               the definition for the word love in I love to swim is found in the
               dictionary under the lemma love. In this example, no spelling change is
               necessary to find the lemma. However, the definition for the word loves from
                  He loves swimming is also found under the lemma love. It is
               necessary to remove the final s from loves in order to find the
               lemma.
            If lemmata (the plural of lemma) are used to search for intertexts, only passages
               that share at least two different lemmata will be considered a potential intertext.
               For example, suppose we have the following passages (again):
            
               I love to swim
               He loves swimming
            
            Note that passage 1 contains the words love and swim, both of which
               also look identical to their lemmata. Passage 2 likewise contains the lemmata
                  love (from loves) and swim (from swimming). From this
               information, it can be seen that a Tesserae search searching for intertexts based on
               the lemma feature would find that these two passages are a potential intertext.
            A final aspect to consider in this simplified conception of the inputs to a Tesserae
               search is the matter of stopwords. Often, there are features we believe will be
               unimportant in determining whether one passage refers to another. For example, we may
               find common words like articles and prepositions to be irrelevant. In this case, we
               would like a Tesserae search to ignore passages that match only because of articles
               and prepositions. To specify features that we think are not interesting, we can use a
               stopwords list to prevent those features from being counted when determining whether
               two passages are a potential intertext.
            Knowing now that a source text, a target text, a feature definition, and a stopwords
               list are important options to specify in a Tesserae search, it is clear that these
               options will need to be specified to the TIS-API when submitting a Tesserae search
               query.
         

            API Concepts
            Before discussing how to use the TIS-API to perform Tesserae search, some terminology
               and conventions should be noted. First, the meaning of TIS-API should be more
               carefully stated. The TIS-API, in its strictest sense, is a set of rules that defines
               server behavior in response to client requests. An implementation of the TIS-API,
               therefore, is code that, when run, behaves in accordance with the rules that were
               defined. When this code is running, we can say that a computer is running an instance of the TIS-API. Since the code allows a
               computer to follow the rules of the TIS-API and since the deployed software exhibits
               the behaviors defined by the rules of the TIS-API, the use of “TIS-API” can slip from
               its strict sense into a more inclusive (and therefore ambiguous) sense that may
               denote either the rules, the code, or the deployed software.
            The angle brackets (<,
               >) convention used in resource names should also be explained explicitly.
               Just as earlier in the paper, the angle brackets (<,
               >) denote a placeholder; the word(s) within the angle brackets hint at what
               should replace this placeholder. For example, as seen earlier,
                  <webhost>/texts/ specifies a name for interacting with text
               resources. However, the name does not literally contain <webhost>;
               rather, <webhost> should be replaced with an identifier to a running
               instance of the TIS-API. For example, if https://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu/api is the URL to a running instance of
               the TIS-API, https://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu/api/texts/ (note that /texts/ has
               been added to the URL) is the name referring to the text resources available in that
               instance.
            Finally, the term endpoint should be defined. Note that the initial part of
               the URL is largely irrelevant to the defined behavior for the TIS-API. In other
               words, whether https://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu/api or https://www.tis-api.com is used to work
               with texts, the TIS-API will respond in a similar manner — and it would behave
               exactly the same if both web hosts had the same text information in their respective
               databases. Therefore, the part of the name that distinguishes behavior is what comes
               after the web host’s identifier. These distinguishing patterns that come at the end
               of the URL are known as endpoints. By convention, these endpoints are referred
               to not by their full URL; rather, they are referred to by the portion of the URL that
               comes after the web host’s URL. For example, /texts/ is the TIS-API endpoint
               that deals with texts.
         

            Using the TIS-API to Run a Tesserae Search
            With a clear picture of Tesserae search options as well as the vocabulary used to
               express APIs, it is possible to consider how the TIS-API can be used to build and
               submit a Tesserae search query. The first endpoint to consider is /parallels/,
               which accepts Tesserae search requests. By performing a POST request on the
                  /parallels/ endpoint and providing the Tesserae search options in a
               particular machine-readable format, a Tesserae search query can be submitted. Exact
               details on this particular machine-readable format can be found by consulting the
               documentation; for purposes of this paper, it is sufficient to know that the
                  /parallels/ endpoint accepts Tesserae search query submissions.
            Ignoring the specifics of the Tesserae search query submission format for the
                  /parallels/ endpoint, earlier discussion has shown that a source text, a
               target text, a feature to search by, and a stopwords list must be specified. The
               TIS-API can be useful in choosing these options.
            Since Tesserae can perform intertext discoveries only between texts already in its
               database, we can only reference a source text and a target text already in the
               Tesserae database when submitting a Tesserae search. How does the TIS-API provide
               access to information about texts in the Tesserae database? As mentioned earlier,
               text information can be obtained at the /texts/ endpoint. Again, there are
               specific details about the /texts/ endpoint that may be useful (such as
               querying the Tesserae database for texts written by a particular author) which can be
               found by consulting the documentation. But for purposes of this paper, it is
               sufficient to know that the /texts/ endpoint can be used to discover what
               texts are available to be used as a source or target text. From the information
               returned by performing a GET request on the /texts/ endpoint, identification
               codes used by the database to refer to specific texts can be obtained. These
               identifiers can specify a source and a target text in the information submitted in a
               POST to /parallels/.
            Although the TIS-API does not specify a convenient endpoint for determining which
               search features can be specified, the documentation does specify valid options.
               Furthermore, the TIS-API defines that when an invalid option is given, the response
               will include information indicating invalidity of the request.
            The TIS-API, however, does have a /stopwords/ endpoint that can be useful in
               choosing a stopwords list. Recall that stopwords lists are often composed of items
               that appear most frequently in the language. Given the appropriate information (as
               defined in the documentation), the /stopwords/ endpoint consults the Tesserae
               database and returns the most frequently appearing features (Figure 8).

            
               Diagram describing steps taken to obtain stopwords.
               
               Image of a laptop and a server
            


            In other words, the /stopwords/ endpoint can be used to collect the top N most
               frequently appearing features, where N is a number that can be specified. That list
               can be used as the stopwords list given to /parallels/ when submitting a
               Tesserae search query.
            It has been shown that the TIS-API provides the /parallels/ endpoint for
               submitting a Tesserae search query, as well as the /texts/ and
                  /stopwords/ endpoints to aid in choosing Tesserae search options. To
               retrieve search results, the TIS-API specifies the /parallels/<uuid>/
               endpoint, where <uuid> is replaced by a search submission identifier
                  (UUID is an acronym for Universally Unique IDentifier, which refers
               to a string of letters and numbers used to identify something). The identifier for a
               particular search can be found in the response data given by the /parallels/
               endpoint on a successful query submission. In particular, a URL that ends in
                  /parallels/<uuid>/ will be specified. In other words, a successful
               Tesserae search submission will provide the URL to retrieve the search results.
               Importantly, that URL is transmitted in a standard, machine-readable way.
            For search queries that involve very small texts, going directly to the URL as soon
               as the response from /parallels/ comes back may permit retrieving the search
               results immediately. However, when longer texts are chosen, Tesserae search may take
               more time to complete. In that case, results would not immediately appear. Instead,
               requesting a GET at the result URL would yield a response indicating that the
               resource is not available. To ensure that the search has been submitted, the
                  /parallels/<uuid>/status/ endpoint, which retrieves status
               information on the search submission (such as whether the search is in process or if
               it failed), could be used. When the status indicates that the search is complete, it
               would be possible to go to the results URL and find the search results.
         

            Case Study: Running Search on the New Tesserae Website
            Having seen a theoretical use case for the TIS-API, it seems worthwhile to consider a
               practical use case for the TIS-API as well. To this end, we present the new Tesserae
               website, which is available at https://tesserae.caset.buffalo.edu/ (Figure 9 shows what the website looks
               like at the time of writing when displaying results). This example demonstrates how
               the TIS-API, though designed for machine-accessibility, can still be used to simulate
               the traditional human-accessible experience that Tesserae has offered and that its
               user base in classics scholarship (of widely varying technical comfort) has become
               familiar with.

            
               Various parts of the new Tesserae website communicate with the API.
               
               Image of a screenshot
            

            In order to perform a Tesserae search, the user first needs to choose source and
               target texts. The new website displays the source and target text options in dropdown
               menus, found in the top left part of the interface (see Figure 10). Behind the
               scenes, the website uses the “/texts/” endpoint to find what texts are available for
               comparison from the TIS-API. It then populates the dropdown lists with the
               information received from the “/texts/” endpoint. The user can then select source and
               target texts with these dropdown menus. In the example image (Figure [uiscreenshot]),
               the user has selected Vergil’sAeneidas the source text
               and Lucan’s Bellum Civile as the target text.

            
               Along the top-left of the page are drop down menus that communicate with the
                     /texts/ endpoint.
               
               Image of a screenshot
            

            
               The widgets in the bottom-left of the page communicates with the “/stopwords/”
                  endpoint to create a stopwords list.
               
               Image of a screenshot
            


            The user might also wish to have stopwords for the Tesserae search. On the new
               website, the number of stopwords to be used can be specified under the Advanced
                  Options (see Figure 12). Behind the scenes, the website uses the parameters
               specified under Advanced Options to calculate a stopwords list using the
                  /stopwords/ endpoint. In the example image (Figure 13), the user has left
               the slider bar under Stoplist Size at the default of 10 stopwords. The example
               image further shows that the stopwords will be calculated based on the corpus
               available to the TIS-API, as shown by the selection under Stoplist Basis.

            
               The button labeled SEARCH at the middle-left of the page sends the query
                  to the /parallels/ endpoint. (In this image, the search button is greyed
                  out because the query has already been sent.)
               
               Image of a screenshot
            

            
               The majority of the screen has been populated with the results of a search,
                  obtained from the /parallels/<uuid>/ endpoint.
               
               Image of a screenshot
            



            To submit the Tesserae search for processing, the user simply hits the SEARCH
               button (see Figure 12). This action causes the website to submit the search
               parameters to the /parallels/ endpoint. Once the search is complete, the
               website automatically calls on the /parallels/<uuid>/ endpoint to
               retrieve the results of the search and displays those results on the main part of the
               interface (see Figure 13).
            One tangential benefit of defining the new website’s functionality in terms of the
               TIS-API was development flexibility. Because the TIS-API defines expected behavior,
               the website developer could work on the website at the same time that the API
               developer was implementing the expected behavior. This allowed for important feedback
               informed by the website developer’s user experience. That feedback resulted in
               additional behaviors (e.g., paging of the search results, more detailed search status
               information) that improved the API and website together. As the two efforts came
               together for deployment of the new Tesserae website, the integration of the website
               with the TIS-API implementation required relatively little work (deployment itself,
               along with making sure that the user interface looked right, took most of the
               development time). This demonstrates the utility of the TIS-API internal to the
               Tesserae Project. Other digital humanities developers may want to consider this
               benefit when deciding whether they too can afford to improve their software’s ability
               to integrate with other software.
         

            Case Study: Harnessing the TIS-API for Research
            While the new Tesserae website demonstrates the advantages of the TIS-API for members
               of the Tesserae Project, it is also important to establish the advantages conferred
               to researchers not directly affiliated with the project. This section describes one
               such researcher’s experience with the TIS-API.
            For writing his 2017 article Measuring and Mapping Intergeneric
                  Allusion using Tesserae for a special issue of the Journal of Data Mining
               and Digital Humanities on Computer-Aided Processing of Intertextuality in Ancient
               Languages , one of the co-authors of this article found
               himself in the position of downloading the results of multiple Tesserae web searches
               in order to analyze not just an intertextual comparison of two authors, but rather an
               intertextual comparison of one author (the Latin epic poet Lucan) against several
               authors representative of a specific genre (the Latin love elegists Propertius,
               Tibullus, and Ovid). The searches had to be conducted individually and care needed to
               be taken to ensure that each search used the same parameters, including stopword
               lists and cutoff scores, among other settings. Moreover, the author needed to be sure
               that this consistency in parameter selection could be maintained between sessions,
               with sometimes weeks or even months passing between searches. At the time, these
               factors were documented by the author in research notes, but from testing the
               TIS-API, it is clear how this process could have been improved had the new set-up
               been available: a similar paper written now could document the exact TIS-API calls
               for all of the author-to-author comparisons in a script with parameters specified
               upfront as constants.
            This enhancement to the research process made possible through the TIS-API could be
               seen as a variation on software development’s DRY — don’t repeat yourself — principle
                  . In programming, DRY argues for a reduction of duplicate
               code to increase writing efficiency, reduce opportunities for errors to be
               introduced, and decrease maintenance costs. The TIS-API allows for analogous benefits
               in a research context: searches can be formalized and then run and rerun without
               duplicative effort. To paraphrase Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas’s oft-cited definition of
               the DRY principle, the TIS-API makes it possible for every Tesserae search to have a single, unambiguous, authoritative representation
                within a study.
            Accordingly, code-based calls to the TIS-API should be considered now a best practice
               for researchers needing to aggregate the results of multiple Tesserae searches, as
               for example papers such as . That said, even with
               respect to research making use of even a single Tesserae search, the ability to
               document the request in the form of an API request is valuable. This is because, no
               matter the number of searches, being able to document explicitly decisions made and
               actions taken in the course of gathering data plays an important role in making that
               research reproducible. In other words, code-based calls to the TIS-API improve
               researchers’ experience by making decisions explicitly documented at the time of
               data-gathering, rather than as an afterthought. It has been argued that researchers
               should aim for well-documented and reproducible workflows as part of a critical
               digital humanities . It can also be argued that academic
               developers can support researchers in reaching this goal by making it easier to
               incorporate their software tools into research workflows. The TIS-API is a move in
               this direction.
            One final point about using Tesserae searches in research workflows: at present,
               running, say, dozens or hundreds of Tesserae searches using the web form could be
               seen as a labor-intensive proposition, enough so as to be a disincentive to exploring
               research questions demanding this volume of web-form entry. Accessing the TIS-API
               through a script, on the other hand, greatly improves the researcher’s experience by
               reducing the labor of specifying Tesserae searches, which in turn reduces the risk of
               inconsistent querying and related errors that add more labor in data checking and
               correction or even having to rerun completed but unusable searches. With this in
               mind, one can imagine that availability of the TIS-API, by reducing the difficulty of
               collecting and collating multiple searches, will encourage more large-scale
               Tesserae-based studies.
         

            Future Work
            For all of the benefits made possible through the TIS-API, we recognize that the API
               could be improved. One improvement in particular we are considering is a way to
               document which version of the software produced a given set of results. This will be
               important as software development continues on Tesserae’s core functionality. While
               such development aims to improve Tesserae results, those improvements would come at
               the cost of reproducibility. It is possible that the development improvement would
               cause results obtained through one set of parameters on a given date to be different
               from the results obtained through the same set of parameters on a different date. By
               explicitly documenting which version of the Tesserae code produces a given set of
               results, reproducibility of results could be guaranteed while also permitting
               incremental improvements to Tesserae’s core software.
            It will also be interesting to see how the TIS-API serves the growing movement within
               digital classics to provide better interoperability between collections and tools
               emerging from different projects within the field . Such
               cross-project collaborations within digital classics hold much promise for enabling
               new modes of inquiry across well-known editions and newly digitized works.
            Beyond digital classics, we hope the TIS-API will serve as a helpful point of
               comparison for other digital humanities projects. A future in digital humanities
               where larger questions can be answered through the aggregation of data from multiple
               sources will be more easily realized when individual projects provide an API to make
               their data more machine-accessible. The considerations made in the design and
               implementation of the TIS-API, including the adoption of REST principles and the
               analysis of Tesserae’s intertext discovery process, can serve as inspiration for
               other projects as they make decisions on how to design and implement their own
               APIs.
         

            Conclusion
            The TIS-API enables machine-accessibility of Tesserae intertext discovery
               capabilities. Machine-accessibility is achieved by following the software industry
               standards known as the REST principles, which encouraged thinking about Tesserae’s
               capabilities as resources and considering how to act upon those resources. In
               particular, the REST principles are evident in how Tesserae’s texts are made
               available, how stopwords are computed from Tesserae’s text collection, and how
               Tesserae search is implemented without saving application state either in the client
               or the server.
            Making Tesserae machine-accessible yields two main benefits. First, it allows for
               parallelizing development efforts in the Tesserae software, as evidenced by the
               simultaneous development of both the TIS-API implementation and the new Tesserae
               website. The second benefit is in the promising possibilities for those not
               affiliated with the Tesserae project. Specifically, the ability to document search
               procedures exactly should lead to improved scholarly practices in computational
               literary criticism. We expect that other digital humanities projects can likewise
               reap benefits from upgrading their software with machine-accessibility.
         

            Acknowledgments
            This work was made possible by NEH Digital Humanities Advancement Grant
               HAA-258767-18. PJB acknowledges the support of the Quantitative Criticism Lab and the
               Institute for the Study of the Ancient World while conducting this work. 
         
