Title:  #BlackScholarJoy: The Labor, Resistance and Joy
               Practices of Black Women Graduate Students 
Volume:  016
Issue:  3
Date:  22 July 2022
Abstract:  
            
            Black graduate students from all disciplines, particularly Black women, who may otherwise be isolated in our respective institutions, have taken to the digital as a space to resist the marginalizing ways of the Academy as it exists. We fight, but we also care for each other, promote transparency about the graduate school process, lift as we climb, build professional networks and friendships alike. We utilize the digital in innovative ways to transform our separate experiences into collectives. Blogs, podcasts, Instagram accounts, twitter threads, digital writing groups, and more all serve as methods of resisting and engaging in carework. This essay will explore the various ways Black graduate students have decided that the revolution will not be televised -- but it will be online. 
         
Full Body Text: 

            
         …come celebrate
         with me that everyday
         something has tried to kill me
         and has failed.
         -Lucille Clifton, won’t you celebrate with me
         
         Black women graduate students who go online in search of community and infrastructure
            that they may lack on campus often become unlikely digital humanists. My own ability to
            identify myself as a digital humanist was a direct result of crafting, curating and
            cultivating years’ worth of content about graduate school for current and prospective
            Black woman graduate students on my blog, Black Girl Does Grad School
               (BGDGS), and on Twitter. I have
            chronicled my journey into the academy since August 2016 on BGDGS, but this work has only recently become a part of my scholarly intervention.
            It practices a form of Black digital feminism, which communications scholar Catherine
            Knight Steele argues centralizes agency and our ability to prioritize ourselves in
            digital spaces . Our digital media making is as Moya Bailey argues, a form
            of self-preservation and harm reduction that disrupts the onslaught of the problematic
            images that society perpetuates . We invest in each other, and use social
            media not just for activism, but for celebrating. 
         Regardless of discipline, Black woman graduate students exist in abundance online and
            use Twitter, Instagram, blogs, vlogs and podcasts to spill the tea on all aspects of
            graduate life. An entire network of Black graduate digital content creators exists, who
            produce resources on everything from wellness and finance, to practical skills like
            abstract and grant writing, to spaces for personal narratives. We take to the digital as
            a space to resist the marginalizing ways of the Academy as it exists. We fight, but we
            also care for each other, promote transparency about the graduate school process, lift
            as we climb, build professional networks and friendships alike. We utilize the digital
            in innovative ways to transform our individual and often isolated experiences into
            collectives. Blogs, podcasts, Instagram accounts, twitter threads, digital writing
            groups, and more all serve as methods of resisting and engaging in carework. This essay
            will explore the various ways Black women graduate students have decided that our revolution will not be televised — but it will be
            online .
         Historian and digital humanist Jessica Marie Johnson writes in a 2014 blog post, my
            feminism is a fury and fierce joy. It is an ACTION . Her exploration of
            her personal brand of feminism, which is derived from the thinkers of the Kitchen Table
            press, The Combahee Collective, her mother and ancestors, is the spirit of abolition,
            futuristic, and digital. Johnson, who would go on to write more about the
            intersections of Black feminism and digital humanities in articles such as, Alter Egos
            and Infinite Literacies, Part III: How to Build a Real Gyrl in Three Easy Steps, and
            4DH + 1 black code / Black femme forms of knowledge and practice," becoming a leading
            force in Black digital humanities, offers important ways to think about Black women's
            digital futures. Alter Egos and Infinite Literacies, Part III, details the beautiful
            ways Black women self-make online. The digital, she argues, is a way to write oneself
            [the Black woman/girl's self] visible . It is a tool for witnessing and
            mourning . And the digital allows the space for our feminism to reflect
            life: messy . 
         Because this article takes seriously the bonds formed by Black graduate students and the
            collective work we do in digital spaces, the primary sources that provide evidence for
            my claims (which take the form of articles, tweets, blog posts, and more ephemeral
            digital media, such as Instagram Live videos) reflect my experience building networks on
            Twitter, via blogs, and connecting with other content creators for other engagements:
            webinars, podcast episodes, and digital writing groups, to name a few. In the years
            since beginning my journey to the doctorate, Black women graduate students online have
            been integral to my success: they have sent me care packages during difficult moments in
            the program, they have forwarded my name for opportunities because they saw my tweets on
            the topic, we have held weekly pandemic watch parties using Twitter hashtags like
            #KorraKickback and #CrystalGemCrew, and we have organized together to support each
            other’s individual ventures, appearing on each other’s blogs and podcasts and online
               summits. I extend gratitude to Dr. Tamara Wilkerson Dias and Dr. Autumn Adia
               Griffin, two Black Twitter friends who had recently finished or was finishing their
               graduate programs, for sending encouraging gifts during my comprehensive exams. Black
               women graduate students and early career scholars have forwarded my name for specific
               writing opportunities, some of my first in academia. Steven Nelson, Mary Shelley and
               I began a pandemic watch of Avatar: The Last Airbender, which
               grew to include more people, in particular Black women graduate students who needed
               moments of levity as we attempted to finish our programs during a global health
               crisis. As more folks gathered, we continued to watch more shows together, changing
               the hashtag each time for Legend of Korra, She-Ra and the Princess
                  of Power, and Steven Universe. And Allanté Whitmore of
                  Blk + In Grad School has been particularly diligent about
               including Black women graduate students on her podcast and during her year Grad
               School Success Summit. Simply put, the sources critical to this project were
            selected because of their personal impact on me — my personal orientation towards what
            qualifies as academic work, as well as, my well-being as a person. Though one may
            dismiss the value of personal connections as the premise for a scholarly study, I will
            note that collectives, particularly those who center marginalized people, take seriously
            (Black) feminist ethics seriously. Think of the Combahee Collective, FemTechNet, and more recently the digital
            project and online community curated by digital humanities scholar and historian,
            Jessica Marie Johnson, and scholar of Afro-Latinx literature, Yomaira C. Figueroa, Electric Marronage. These
            collectives are intentional about developing digital havens of care while promoting
            rigorous intellectual inquiry and centering joy, tasks which I find present in the
            online networks Black women graduate students have created. 
          This essay also takes cues from digital autoethnographic methodologies used by theorist
            Moya Bailey to self-reflexively examine my own place in this network of Black graduate
            students and how we occupy and use online spaces . The essay draws from the
            multi-modal nature of Black Studies and uses narrative to underscore salient pieces of
            theory, as personal narrative is important to both Critical Race Theory as well as Black
            Feminist Theory. Anecdotes, as many like to call storytelling and narrative, are at
            the heart of Black digital humanities. If, as Brock writes, all technologies are
            culturally and socially shaped, then it follows that the stories which create our
            cultures and social realities are integral to how we use technology and how our use of
            these technologies reshape them . Therefore, the stories and shared experiences
            that unite Black women graduate students inform how we have used technology to resist,
            work, and celebrate together.

         The Unintentional and Additional Labor of Hypervisible Online Discourse
         This section examines the carework Black graduate students practice towards each other
            online, but also the necessity of labor implied therein. We congregate in a corner of
            this digital satellite counterpublic, as André Brock would call Black Twitter, for
            communal support, but we also exhibit characteristics of resistance, as well as joy
             . We gain a collective energy from navigating questions of
            professionality and respectability in the physical Academy, but online as well,
            particularly in the way we choose to signify, knowing our conversations are hypervisible
            and subject to surveillance  . This makes our online presences
            susceptible to additional labor — whether intentional as we extend carework to our
            peers, or unintentional as colleagues use our online presences as instructional.
         Susan Brown’s contribution to Elizabeth Losh and Jacquelyn Wernimont’s edited volume Bodies of Information: Intersectional Feminism and the Digital
               Humanities  [2019], offers an important insight to the way work is often parceled
            in the Academy. Brown here points to the fact that women and femme scholars are often
            saddled with additional service labor unlike their male counterparts. This includes, for
            example, serving on diversity committees, panels on status of gender (or race) in the
            Academy/one’s given field, or doing work for university projects that may not count
            towards one’s tenure file. However, Brown’s argument does not quite address the
            intersections of race with this statement. Scholars of color often shoulder the extra
            emotional labor of service positions related to their racial or ethnic identities, as
            well as providing mentorship for undergraduate students that come to them in search of a
            professor that can understand them. These additional services begin as we take on
            professional roles as part of our graduate training.
         Black women often find themselves in positions representing both women and scholars of
            color as well as facing misogynoir — prejudice toward Black women specifically — in and
            outside of the classroom . Legal scholar and critical race theorist
            Kimberlé Williams Crenshaw aptly describes, spaces meant for Black people are often
            posited towards Black men, and spaces meant for women tend to be for white women [1991].
            Black women find ourselves often as the sole representative of either or both Black
            people or women, leading others to believe that we represent all of either or both Black
            people or women, ignoring the heterogeneity of both groups. As Patricia Hill Collins
            [1991] informs us, Despite the common challenges confronting African-American women as
            a group, individual Black women neither have identical experiences nor interpret
            experiences in a similar fashion. The existence of core themes does not mean that
            African-American women respond to these themes in the same way .
            While many Black women graduate students are unified by common themes of gendered racial
            violence, difficulty navigating controlling images of Black women based stereotypes,
            such as perceptions about our anger, and the resulting frustration and fatigue of
            consistently managing this visibility and invisibility, our experiences are unique and
            individual  .
         These common themes, however, impact the way early career Black women scholars work and
            it is imperative that we understand the dual nature of how many of us approach it. For
            some, Black studies methodologies and Black life is critical to the core of our
            intellectual inquiry — those who study Black history, literature or cultural
            anthropology, humanities scholars, for example. For students of the hard sciences, as
            engineering Ph.D. student and creator, Allanté Whitmore, has noted, it may be more
            difficult to combine issues of race with their objects of study. In a recent
            #ShareTheMic event in collaboration with the graduate wellness and lifestyle blog,
            @PhDBalance, Whitmore spoke to the feeling of being torn: being either
            an engineer or someone whose life is impacted by issues of
            race. The academy encourages, forces, us to compartmentalize when
            Black feminist theory tells us that multiple truths may exist at once. We are not able
            to separate out our identities, in the same way that Black women are both Black and
            woman at the same time without needing to choose which comes first.
         Black graduate students produce astounding amounts of additional labor, in addition to
            those detailed earlier, particularly those with visible social media presences. The work
            does not end when one leaves the classroom or the lab; it continues on as Black graduate
            students use Twitter, blogs, vlogs and podcasts to do the work of providing incoming
            graduate students with infrastructure and ourselves with support and care. The labor
            continues beyond even this, as many of us take on the work of restorative justice,
            abolition, fights for living wages and unionization efforts. The question that plagues
            many a department and university remains how to recruit a more diverse campus climate;
            however, if Black graduate students are self-organizing and creating infrastructures for
            ourselves in academic spaces because there is an extreme lack of resources available on
            the part of the institution, then perhaps recruitment is not the underlying issue. Black
            graduate students take to the digital to coach each other through working under the
            conditions of systemic institutional violence. That is why, in
            part, these digital networks exist. 

         Resistance as Labor
         Often, the spaces Black folks occupy online are seen and viewed as resistance. A fair
            assumption to make given that much of online activism finds its origins with Black folks
            — Black women, femmes and queer folks, in particular . Consider, for
            example, #BlackLivesMatter, which was originally coined by Patrice Cullors, Opal Tometti
            and Alicia Garza, has become the rallying cry of the new millennium; #MeToo originated
            with Tarana Burke, sparked the movement for accountability and recourse for those
            accused of sexual assault; and #BlackGirlMagic, which began as Black Girls Are Magic,
            founded by CaShawn Thompson, asks us to continually consider the ethereal essence of
            being a Black girl. Works by Feminista Jones, Kim Gallon as well as Moya Bailey, Sarah
            J. Jackson and Brooke Foucault Welles, foregrounds the digital activist labor done by
            Black women  . Resistance is labor. 
         When Black graduate students take to Twitter, for example, to form community bonds and
            to push back against the oppressive confines of the Academy, our resistance is labor 
              . Black women faculty are
            underrepresented in higher education, and thus experience hyper-visibility and
               attention, pressure to over-perform, and social isolation . Shanna Benjamin, Roxane Donovan, and Joycelyn Moody
            (2016) also write that, In addition to tokenism effects, other institutional and
            structural barriers work independently and collectively to hinder Black women faculty’s
            academic success, including excessive service/caretaking expectations, student
            opposition and hostility, devaluing/undervaluing of research, and experiences of
            gendered racism and racialized sexism . It is out of the scope of Benjamin, Donovan and Moody’s work, but many of
            the concerns they present as obstacles for Black women faculty begin early in the
            graduate student career as Black women graduate students navigate classroom environments
            as teaching assistants and power dynamics in working with their advisors. 
         Black women, for example, are often expected to take on extraordinary amounts of extra
            uncompensated service labor, which can include anything from mentoring BIPOC students;
            to directing centers or programs; and to being asked to split our time between various
            Diversity, Equity and Inclusion committees and panels to represent one of the handful of
            Black women at our institution. And while it must be said that many of us do love and
            cherish the work we do to support our students and fight for better campus environments
            for all, much of that work goes unnoticed, unappreciated, and does not count towards
            tenure and securing a job. This is in addition to the assumptions of incompetence and/or
            superheroism in respect to Black women in these spaces  . As Bailey, Jackson, and Welles write, Black women have found Twitter to be a
            productive tool for highlighting misogynoir, sharing survival strategies and calling
            both intra- and intercommunity members to account . We use the digital, therefore, to speak truth to power .
         The threads from the June 2020 hashtag movement, #BlackInTheIvory, co-created by Joy
            Melody Woods and Dr. Shardé M. Davis shows in stark relief exactly what Black woman
            graduate students, but also Black professors and other academics in particular, face in
            the Academy. Woods and Davis’ hashtag encouraged Black academics to put a name to acts
            of racism they have endured in academic spaces, inspired and fueled by the collective
            rage that is moving us toward calls for system change. In an interview with NBC, Woods
            says:
         If we're calling for the firing of police officers who put their knees on the necks of
            black people physically, then we should be calling for firings and suspensions of
            faculty who metaphorically put their knees on the necks of black graduate students. Some
            of the actions they have done, and you'll see this on the thread, they have landed
            people in psychiatric facilities ... You say you want solidarity, well, we have the
            collective knowledge and evidence now and white folks can no longer look away. 
          Many of the stories, including my own, appear to be individual or isolated incidents;
            when considered together, they illustrate the insidious nature of the racist 
            infrastructure on which the Academy is built, deliberately crafted to keep Black folks
            out. #BlackInTheIvory told stories of tenure denials (see also #TenureForPaul ), failed examinations, and racist remarks both overheard in departments and said
            to Black scholars. Since its inception, #BlackInTheIvory became contested ground
               vis-à-vis who had the claim to the hashtag as intellectual property — a dispute in and of itself showcases the difficulty Black graduate students
               have keeping a claim on their work.  While the aftermath of outpouring of
            stories was fraught, there was a moment in which Black scholars chose to speak up as a
            particular method for resistance. 
         #BlackInTheIvory points to many of these challenges, as Woods and Davis note in an
            interview with The New York Times, but journalists Harmon,
            Mandavilli, Maheshwari and Kantor write, The stories of exclusion, humiliation and
            hostility were all too familiar. But the difference was that they had mostly been shared
            behind closed doors [2020]. Not entirely true — many of these stories have been shared
            on social media. Perhaps whispered and without naming individuals, but they stories have
            gotten around the internet. Though some hashtag user did point to this truth: the
            precarity of many of our situations, including graduate students who will soon go on the
            academic job market, simply cannot afford to speak out for fear of recourse, which could
            be anything from denial of a job, which impacts financial security, to continued
            harassment, on and offline. As @ADBoyntonII tweets: Being #BlackInTheIvory is knowing
            that these tweets are only a tip of the iceberg. Many of us are too vulnerable to risk
            telling the whole truth. The tweet in its entirety is reproduced below, published with
            the express permission of the original author.
         The work Joy Melody Woods is doing with #BlackInTheIvory is but one way Black graduate
            students are using the digital as platforms for activism, advocacy, resistance and
            support. And while #BlackInTheIvory is indeed resistance work, it is also a form of
            catharsis for those who can and do engage. This is perhaps not entirely what Brock
            speaks of when he describes libidinal economy, however, the impulse underlies the energy
            needed to execute a movement like #BlackInTheIvory. At its core, this resistance work
            remains labor.

         Choosing Joy and Refusing to Shrink
         How then do we think about the relationship Black people have to joy, technology, labor
            and resistance? The fact remains that we should not let our circumstances steal our joy.
            As I wrote in 2017, early in my graduate school journey: I deserve a quality life: 
         As often as you can, I think it’s worthwhile to list out things you can do to pick
            yourself up when you’re sad, things that you love doing because it feeds your soul, and
            just things you need to do to feel like a functional human. When it feels like nothing
            will make you feel better, just looking at list of things that make you smile reminds
            you that, at some point, all of this made you happy. During finals season, I’m going to
            make sure I come back to this list, so I can do things that center me and bring me a
            little peace. I deserve to have a quality life, and I am the only one who can ensure
            that for myself. [blackgirldoesgradschool.com, 2017]
         Even early in my graduate school journey, as early as 2017, my goal was to maintain my
            own joy because I realized that I owed the Academy nothing and I am my own person. That I believe is part of the resistance. In an essay from The Source of Self-Regard, Toni Morrison writes of some of the
            silencing challenges of Afro-American art/literature, one which forces us our art to
            only be valuable if compared to Eurocentric art . In a similar manner,
            the Academy seeks often only knowledge by Black scholars if it is presented in a way
            that mimics Western, imperialistic ideals. Choosing joy for Black scholars is the act of
            choosing to be whole in spite of what the Academy would rather us be: finding delight in
            self-expression when our voices are often interpreted as combative or aggressive,
            reveling in the reaction of the intended audiences of our work rather than the critiques
            of those who would intentionally misunderstand it, wearing our hair however we please in
            spite of the pressure of respectability .
         So if the arguments and claims I have staked so far are true: 
         1. Resistance is labor.
         2. Joy is resistance.
         Then…
         3. Joy must also be labor.
         It is, unfortunately, work, for Black people to remain joyous and retain joy for
            ourselves, particularly in moments of acute strife, such as the moment in which I write
            these very words — the summer of 2020. 2020 will be forever known globally for the
            Coronavirus; Black people will remember it as the summer in which we were driven to
            protest in the midst of a pandemic to demand justice for George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery
            and Breonna Taylor and, and, and…. As Lu and Steele write in Joy is Resistance,
            adapting strategies of song, signifying and storytelling online, Black users affirm
               that joy, too, is a meaningful way to subvert oppression and extend the resilience of 
            Black oral culture . However, all of these strategies are
               active; they are things we must do and work towards to get to
            and remain in joy. This does not account for the ways in which we should be able to sit
            in our joy, to simply exist and be. Under this conceptualization, joy is labor.
         In the spring of 2021, I was able to teach a course at my institution centering Black
            women in the digital and future, examining questions of fantasy, digital culture, and
            what could be. It attracted many students, particularly Black women undergraduates,
            looking for a space in which they could be intellectual rigorous about issues of
            personal concern and importance to them while also feeling safer than they might in
            other spaces. The uniqueness of the course was also indebted to its digital nature; we
            organized via Blackboard, our content management system, utilized a class Tumblr blog
            and Discord channel for communication and had weekly Zoom meetings for discussing
               content. The students were tasked with writing three blog posts for our class
               Tumblr blog, Blk Girls in the Future: https://blkgirlsinthefuture.tumblr.com/
             It enabled students to engage at their own pace, on their terms, and allowed for
            more freedom of expression. In particular, students enjoyed digital functions
               where they could make asides without interrupting the person speaking, even if that
               person was them: the chat box in Zoom and in the hashtags at the bottom of their
               Tumblr posts. The hashtags in particular were useful rhetorical devices to express
               their full feeling about a given text without breaking the “scholarly” flow of their
               argument in the body of the text. The chat box allowed them to engage with enthusiasm
               during guest speaker visits without speaking over our guest. 
         
         This course demanded a lot of me: I was called upon to think not just about how to make
            a classroom digital, but how to craft a unique digital classroom from the ground up. It
            was a situation that did not call for translation but imaginative speculation and
            creation. Joy became a defining characteristic of how I built that digital classroom
            with my students, which meant letting them use digital tools the ways they felt were
            intuitive which would lead to greater self-expression, offering more space for
            reflection with themselves and their peers. There is always much to learn from
            discipline, but more, I think, from freedom. As much as I learn from my Black woman
            graduate student peers as a young professor and thinker and writer, my ability to be
            insatiably curious with my students continued to push me further.
         I argue, in the vein of Brock and Steele, that the digital ought to be a place of joy as
            well. As Black people, we find the ability to hold joy in tandem with pain. Lu and
            Steele argue that the use of particular technologies offers Black folks the ability to
            find and celebrate joy in the face of Black death: Black users share and cultivate joy
            in ways that counter and resist the seemingly omnipresent images of Black Death that
            surround us (831). Where we congregate to celebrate and be. I
            argue that there ought to be a space in the digital for Black folks, particular Black
            graduate students, some of whom go on to become professors and teachers, to go without
            doing the labor of educating about race. Remember: resistance is labor.
         Black Digital Humanities scholars such as André Brock, Catherine Knight Steele, Moya
            Bailey, Meredith Clark and more have written about the ways Black folks use these types
            of digital platforms as ways of recreating public spheres for them. They argue that
            Black folks have always used and created and played in the digital, molding it until it
            serves us. In creating these spaces that are meant for us to simply exist but that are
            also public, Black graduate student creators have given others a window into our
            experiences. We shift from simply being Black online to doing labor online by creating
            these platforms, spaces and resources for others like us because only a select few in
            positions of power are interested and invested in our advancement. The result: we
            creates the spaces and support networks we need ourselves.
         To that end, for many scholars, racial justice is work they must do in addition.
            Whitmore’s podcast Blk + In Grad School, which has been helping
            scholars of color to and through their academic journeys since 2017, is in many ways
            periphery to her scholarship, but imperative for her wellbeing. The podcast, which has
            expanded into a digital network of several thousand followers on Twitter and Instagram
            and come to include an annual graduate school preparedness summit has formed
            collaborations with other Black digital content creators in graduate school, including a
            directory of Black graduate students blogging, vlogging, podcasting or using any means
            of digital methods to document their graduate school experience. Whitmore uses digital
            methods to create infrastructure to support Black graduate students; a strong act of
            resistance when one considers the myriad of ways academia gatekeeps. And yet, for all of
            the important infrastructure and networking labor Whitmore does in providing a place for
            Black graduate students to retreat, find and support each other, as the Academy stands
            established currently, none of this work will “count” in the eyes of a search committee
            or tenure committee. We, Black graduate students, know the worth of this work, however,
            and will attempt to continually lift it up.
         Whitmore with Blk + In Grad School and Woods and Davis with
            #BlackInTheIvory are only two of many instances where digital resistance work manifests
               in addition to scholarship, in a manner that creates
            additional labor. During the 2020 uprising in Minneapolis following the murder of George
            Floyd, which spread nationwide in the midst of a global pandemic, graduate student
            Vanessa Anyanso began collecting donations to buy and run supplies for protestors and
            other organizations
               https://www.startribune.com/i-m-in-danger-just-living-in-america-for-black-community-floyd-s-death-brings-more-grief-and-trauma/571242852/
            , using Twitter and Instagram to amplify her calls for money. At the time of this
            writing, Anyanso has donated nearly $20,000 worth of supplies. Dr. Autumn A. Griffin has
            turned to her follower base gained as a blogger and podcaster for her and Tiffany Lee's
            co-created and co-run website Blackademia, a network geared
            towards Black folks in academic spaces (not simply graduate school and higher education)
            to fundraise for support of various activist and community oriented organizations,
            including Anyanso's supply campaign — by selling bookmarks. While it may be tempting to
            dismiss such an act as “not digital humanities,” we must also remember the root of the
            word: digital — of or relating to the fingers. Do-It-Yourself, crafting and other
            prototyping and creative practices/making are at the core of digital humanities .
            
         This is why the work of André Brock becomes exceptionally important. Brock’s Distributed Blackness: African American Cybercultures, which
            investigates the quotidian and libidinal pleasure of being Black online, inspires this
            work, as it will call for Black graduate students to pursue joy and being without
            negating the driving desire to present and show up online in particular ways. Brock
            argues the libidinal can be understood as pathos — similar, but distinct from affect
            . It is an energy that can be communally experienced through communicating
            culturally specific or shared experiences and contexts. While he also theorizes about
            joy, particularly in the digital, he rejects the need that it be for resistance
            purposes. Libidinal economy allows for us, Black people, to simply be . To
            sit in our emotions because we are human and we are entitled to them and for no other
            reason. This is, to circle back to the thesis of this article, at the core of why many
            Black women graduate students are turning to creating digital networks: we want to
            retain our joy.
         The digital gives us space to lean into and feel the messiness of our identities and our
            politics. As Bailey, Jackson & Welles describe for participants in the #YouOKSis
            hashtag, there is a feeling of catharsis associated with sharing stories and sparking
            conversation that may, hopefully, effect social change online [2020]. Black women
            graduate students often begin our forays into the digital as a means of self-making or
            finding a personal catharsis — but when we exhale, publicly, we often find many others
            releasing their stories and burdens as well. It's a shared experience that has always
            defined the feminisms of women of color — it simply also occurs now in the digital.

         Conclusion
         In the midst of digital resistance movements and finding solidarity through shared
            feelings of disenchantment with the possibilities of higher education exacerbated by a
            global pandemic, joy has been in short supply. Black women’s participation in resistance
            efforts — whether it be antiracist demonstrations, actions against gender violence,
            living wage campaigns, etc. — challenge the impartiality and objectivity the Academy
            would have us believe we must uphold. The Academy is not neutral. The Academy is not
            exempt from oppressive practices. And as its Black graduate students are shining a
            mirror up to the gatekeepers so as to show every fault line and crack in the Ivory Tower
            as we know it, we still make space for those who will come after us.
         Digital practices like the ones I’ve explored here are often the brainchildren of Black
            women and queer graduate students, following a pattern of activism and advocating for
            our people that has existed for centuries. If we listen (or read) carefully, we will see
            that conversations about living wages for graduate students, the ability to find
            supportive mentorship, pedagogical innovation, restructuring our tenure system,
            responding to racism in the classroom, creating physical spaces for ourselves, our
            wellness in spite of working within an institution promotes productivity over health are
            all taking place online every day. Necessity breeds innovation.
         Where we conclude is with the realization and acceptance that Black women graduate
            students are doing the work of dismantling, learning and unlearning in the digital that,
            hopefully, will help scholars envision a new means of knowledge production that makes
            space for that which has existed at the margins of the institution. We are doing the
            work of resistance, which includes tending to our joy and prioritizing celebration, but
            also giving ourselves the freedom to be ourselves online, and making room for freer
            generations to come.
         
