Title:  The Ebook
               Imagination
Volume:  016
Issue:  1
Date:  18 February 2022
Abstract:  
            
            While popular histories of the ebook start in the 1990s, inventors were working on
               the form since at least the 1940s. In this article, I offer a media archaeological
               analysis of digital publishing patents to develop the ebook imagination, or the
               desires of readers and inventors for the future of reading on screen. Through an
               analysis of a corpus of 98 patents relating to ebooks, I demonstrate how the ebook
               imagination focused on the aesthetics of the book over focusing on replicating paper
               via a screen, which would later lead to the success of Amazon's Kindle in 2007.
         
Full Body Text: 

            
            
            During the 1940s, Ángela Ruiz Robles, a teacher from León, Galicia, had a prescient
               vision of publishing’s future: Her Enciclopedia Mecánica would increase children’s
               access to affordable interactive educational materials. Her 1962 sketch (Figure 1)
               featured a device with three slots for lessons presented in scrolls. Students would
               insert the scrolls, browse the content and then answer questions on each lesson
               through rotating disks immediately below each scroll. Just as with a combination
               padlock, correct answers would result in positive haptic feedback. The Spanish Patent
               and Trademark Office granted Ruiz Robles two patents   for the device. El Ferrol Artillery Depot built a prototype based on the 1962
               patent and in 1971, the Technical Institute of Applied Mechanical Experts explored
               the cost of manufacturing 10,000 units at 50-75 pesetas (around $1 in 1971) per unit
               but the initial start-up cost of 100,000 pesetas ($1,410) was prohibitive . Both Ruiz Robles and her invention languished in relative obscurity
               until around 2007, when the importance of her work was recontextualized by the launch
               of the Kindle and an exhibition of her work at Museo Pedagóxico de Galicia in 2008
               .  Histories of Ángela Ruíz Robles’s recovery as an ebook pioneer
                  remain in Spanish  
               Following this rediscovery, Ruiz Robles was honored by the Spanish Patent Office
               , a Google Doodle , a
               festschrift , a Madrid street name
               , and El Museo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología’s acquisition of her
               archives . 
           
           
            
               Ruiz Robles’s mechanical cartridge system. Adapted from 
               
            
           
           
           

            The retroactive recognition of Ruiz Robles’ inventions reveals a 60-year gestation
               period for the e-reader to shift from a patentable idea to mass-produced commodity.
               Patent filings speculating about the future of reading on-screen accelerated
               following the establishment of the terminal-mainframe computational paradigm in the
               1960s but, as with the case of Ruiz Robles, inventors were conceptualizing digital
               publishing before the emergence of the personal computer. Patents map amateur and
               professional ambitions for the book’s future alongside the development of the digital
               computer. Previous histories of digital publishing often overlook this evidence base,
               creating a distorted narrative focusing on what appear to be a few outlier early
               devices rather than a concerted effort by several companies to create a functionable
               e-reader. As a corrective, in this article I offer a media archaeological analysis of
               digital publishing patents to develop the ebook imagination, or the desires of
               readers and inventors for the future of reading on screen. Borrowed from
                   I demonstrate that while patent filings confirm
               the theoretical existence of e-readers long before the technology was commercially
               viable, unfortunately this early work often fixated on replicating the book as an
               object, overlooking vital issues in recreating the reading experience such as
               developing high quality screens. These innovations can only be traced through efforts
               led by other industries, demonstrating the ebook’s success relied on a convergence of
               adjacent technologies rather than an inevitability of early prototypes. 
            Erkki Huhtamo introduced media archaeology as a way of studying recurring cyclical
               phenomena that (re)appear and disappear and reappear over and over again in media
               history, somehow seeming to transcend specific historical contexts . Media archaeology as a methodology celebrates historical cul-de-sacs and
               counterfactuals as a way of challenging conventional chronological narratives of
               progress. It is therefore an ideal approach to the historical analysis of digital
               publishing, where important evidence exists outside of these linear narratives.
               Individual patents may appear fanciful in retrospect, but collectively they reveal a
               sustained effort to map linear reading onto contemporary time-based media
               technologies. Through treating media history as cyclical, Eric Kluitenberg positions
               media archaeology primarily as a critique of progress , a
               rebuke to patent scholarship’s dominant emphasis on evolutionary models of
               technological development. While previous case studies of patents as evidence for
               technological developments reveal hierarchal networks of inventors  , a media archaeology-informed approach
               instead emphasizes discontinuities within patents. Each generation reconceptualized
               the ebook based upon their own technological horizons shaped by their understanding
               of screen technologies. 
            The ebook imagination was shaped by long-running, contradictory desires to accurately
               replicate the printed book in digital form while improving upon its perceived
               limitations. The Kindle and competing platforms focused on mundane remediations of
               print. While this was more successful than experimental forms of digital publication,
               there has been a growing resentment towards the perceived stasis of ebooks such as
               the former CEO of Hachette, Arnaud Nourry’s dismissal of the ebook [as] a stupid
               product [because] there is no creativity, no enhancement, no real digital experience
               . Nonetheless, the simplicity of ebooks for consumers belies the complex
               infrastructure underpinning a seamless user experience. I have previously termed this
               ‘ebookness,’ or the development of the ebook as a suite of interconnected services
               rather than a straightforward product . This service-oriented approach
               to ebook platforms emerged in a pragmatic response to the challenges of encouraging
               readers to buy e-readers. Conversely, the hypothetical design documents that embody
               the ebook imagination documents what ebooks could be. Ebookness responded to the
               specific demands of the market (cheap content, always-on connectivity, social
               reading), while the ebook imagination presented an opportunity to reimagine reading
               on-screen. As I demonstrate in this article, designers struggled to move out of the
               codex paradigm in conceptualizing these new devices and disappointment around the
               Kindle paradigm has inspired designers to continue to consider the future of the
               ebook. My case study of early ebook patents reveals the tensions between a
               speculative vision of the future that is tied to nostalgia for print. Inventors were
               unable to push beyond this dichotomy to create a feasible technology that replicated
               the affordances of paper with comparable screen technology. 

               Methods
               This article traces the development of the conceptual ebook drawing upon visual
                  and textual evidence from granted patent applications to show how it was bound by
                  the screen technology conventions of its day. I searched for patents with the
                  words ‘electronic book’ in the title or abstract filed prior to 2000 in both the
                  United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) and Espacenet patent databases.
                  I cross referenced these search results with United States patents featuring
                  classification number 345/901 or electronic book with display. The results
                  included applications from countries including Japan, France, Germany, and the
                  United States. I then followed citations in the ‘prior art’ of each of these
                  applications to identify further relevant patents that did not appear in the
                  initial search. While I noted all applications, my focus here is limited to
                  Anglophone applications due to my language constraints although I consulted
                  technical drawings from other languages. This returned a corpus of 98 applications
                  ranging from 1893 to 2000 filed by both individual inventors and large media
                  technology companies. Since the metadata requirements for patents were
                     updated repeatedly during the twentieth century, it’s not possible to
                     accurately break down the solo inventors from the corporate employees.
               
               The search and cross-reference facilities of the two patent databases
                  significantly shape my dataset. For example, the formation of United States patent
                  subclass 345/901 reveals the subjective nature of reconstructing a history of
                  digital publishing through patent filings. It is a cross-reference art
                  collection, or subject matter that is not specifically provided for in a
                     particular subclass that emerges between classes . Cross-reference art collections reveal the instability
                  of patent classifications, which are constantly updated to account for new
                  research fields . Older patents are often re-classified, as in the
                  case of 345/901, where the earliest patent in the class is from 1979, but the
                  parent class, ‘345’ was only introduced in 1993 . Discrepancies between national digitization programs further re-enforce the
                  perceived dominance of Anglo-European inventors. For example, the Indian patent
                  database, InPASS, features only 23 total patents granted prior to 1990 despite a
                  richer history of intellectual property protection dating back to the Patents and
                  Designs Act of 1911. Conversely, the USPTO has a digital copy of all extant
                  patents starting with Samuel Hopkin’s 1790 patent for manufacturing potash. 
                     Two fires at the United States Patent Office during the 1800s destroyed an
                     unknown number of patents filed prior to the introduction of the current number
                     sequence in 1836. Despite offering access to facsimiles for all granted
                  patents, full-text search on the USPTO website is only available for those
                  published since 1976. Patents filed prior to 1976 must be discovered through
                  citations or limited metadata, which excludes the inventor’s name and patent
                  title. These geographical and historical weaknesses ensure a comprehensive history
                  of ebook patents is beyond reach.

                  Patents as Evidence
                  Beyond tracing the desires of ebook inventors before 2000, this article offers
                     a blueprint for using patents in contemporary publishing research. Scholars
                     have developed sophisticated overviews of the sociological structures of the
                     twenty-first-century book trade   , but less is known about the technical infrastructure
                     underpinning contemporary publishing. We know more about hand presses and
                     distribution networks of the fifteenth century than Amazon’s warehouse network
                     or the digital asset management system of large publishers .
                     These blind spots emerge from the secrecy of large technology companies
                     responsible for the creation, distribution, and reception of books and their
                     digital equivalents. Public disclosures via patents reveals what Amazon, Apple
                     and others intend to develop for the publishing industry. The USPTO archive
                     also includes a range of patents filed by publishers including Elsevier and
                     printing technology companies such as Konica Minolta  . Analysis of publishing adjacent filings can reveal the
                     corporate research and development driving contemporary publishing otherwise
                     closed off from scholars and complement other forms of archival and oral
                     history research into digital publishing 
                      . This does come with a major limitation,
                     however, as patent filings do not necessarily indicate the direction of travel
                     for a company as many corporations choose to apply for defensive patents just
                     in case a technology later becomes viable. 
                  The modern international patent emerged in the 1970s after the ratification of
                     the Patent Cooperation Treaty in 1978 and the shift to electronic support
                     mechanisms to relieve the increasing burden of processing patents .
                     By 2000, the USPTO offered public access to patents published since 1790 via
                     its website. The resulting HTML version of a patent is rigidly structured to
                     enable efficient searching and browsing of documents for relevant information
                     including inventors, classifications, and claims. Researchers have explored the
                     potential for quantitative analysis of the rich data contained in patent
                     databases   . For example, Manuel Trajtenberg proposed assessing the flow of knowledge
                     as indicated by citations as first-hand evidence of the path-breaking nature
                        of the original patent . There are caveats to this
                     approach. Patents granted before 1976 are only available as facsimiles with no
                     metadata, requiring manual consultation of citations. Where citations are
                     easily traversable, they might not be the result of influence: examiners can
                     introduce citations in the equivalent of a peer reviewer suggesting additional
                     sources. Citation networks are therefore of limited value compared to richer
                     visualization techniques such as mapping co-inventors or affiliations . Tim Lenoir and Eric Giannella argue that there is still
                     value in analyzing citation networks with caution as the ‘noise’ can offer an
                     opportunity for using patents as a vehicle for studying the coevolution of
                     social and technical phenomena embodied in technological platforms . My initial search of citation networks within the corpus
                     suggested the geographical and technological discontinuities were too strong
                     for such analysis to meaningfully trace a linear development of ebooks. Since
                     there is no direct chain of influence, an archaeological approach examining the
                     fractures and discontinuities is more useful. 
                  Mario Biagiolo argues that the patent’s power emerges from its form: the idea
                     of the invention did not emerge through a process of abstraction but through
                     one of inscription — not by thinking it up but by writing it down . Inventors were free to imagine a technology if it was accompanied
                     with a sufficiently convincing narrative for how it could be implemented,
                     facilitating speculative applications. Viewing patents as discourse separate
                     from socio-economic constraints encourages analysis through a
                     media-archaeological framework. Erkki Huhtamo developed the concept of
                     unrealized ‘dream machines,’ or discursive inventions (inventions that exist
                     only as discourses)” that “can be just as revealing as realized artifacts
                     . The shift from depositing physical prototypes to
                     textualization enabled experimentation, but the system still favored physical
                     objects. Despite the rigid linguistic conventions of the patent, the move to
                     textualization encouraged more radical theoretical designs. At the same time,
                     Hans Radder notes Patentable inventions need to be material. [...] An
                     important implication is that conceptual or theoretical inventions cannot be
                     patented . The current patent system was established by the
                     arrival of the personal computer, offering limited protections for software.
                     Algorithms and software fell into a grey area where it was unclear if they
                     could be patented without a material form. G. Con Diaz documents the
                     work-around: the computer was viewed as an embodiment of the program, and it
                        received patent protection in lieu of the program itself . The
                     issue affected the trajectory of early digital publishing patents since any
                     innovation in process or software was accompanied by an implementation in
                     hardware. If software was the intended focus, inventors would create
                     speculative hardware to fulfill the criteria. 
                  The development of electronic book patents does not follow a strict linear path
                     through citations but instead reflects a disjointed history of experiments and
                     failure. Major technology companies including Apple, Hewlett Packard and Xerox
                     worked on e-readers during the 1990s, but other than Apple’s doomed Newton
                     hardware series, no commercially viable product came of this experimentation
                        . The relative boom at the turn of the millennium was driven
                     instead by either start-ups (Softbook and NuvoMedia) or companies with a longer
                     history of digital reference publishing (Franklin Electronic Publishers).
                     Amazon’s Lab126 hardware engineers led by Gregg Zehr exploited the fragmented
                     history of ebook patents to claim substantial innovation in a series of four
                     utility patents documenting the Kindle 1 filed in March 2006   . Zehr and his collaborators were keen to
                     position the Kindle as an innovative mobile computer rather than limiting its
                     appeal as an e-reader, leading to citations of mobile phones, personal digital
                     assistants, and innovative display technology. The longer history of the ebook
                     can only be found through a deeper search of the USPTO and Espacenet archives. 

                  The First Ebook?
                  Identifying the first ebook is a tricky proposition, relying on an individual’s
                     interpretation of the meaning of ‘electronic’ and ‘book,’ reflecting Michael R.
                     William’s claim that there is no such thing as ‘first’ in any activity
                     associated with human invention. If you add enough adjectives to a description
                     you can always claim your own favorite . Rather than attempt
                     to identify the first e-reader, my aim here is instead to demonstrate the
                     longer history of the conceptual ebook and explore why earlier attempts were
                     unsuccessful. Nonetheless, locating the terminology’s origins is useful. The
                     term ‘electronic book’ dates back at least to the late 1970s and transformed
                     from general nomenclature for reading on screen to linking specifically to
                     e-readers and consumables designed for that hardware by the 2000s. These
                        sources were discovered via the Oxford English Dictionary entries for
                        ‘electronic book’ and ‘e-book.’ Following my previous definition of
                     “ebookness,” I restrict my definition of the electronic book to the latter,
                     where specialist portable hardware (commonly known as e-readers) determines
                     access to text rather than more general models of text retrieval including
                     desktop systems such as the Memex. In the 1978 premiere of The Hitchhiker’s
                     Guide to the Galaxy radio play series, Ford Prefect, companion to the
                     protagonist Arthur Dent, introduces the eponymous book in the first episode of
                     the radio play as a sort of electronic book. It’ll tell you everything you
                        want to know. That’s its job . The Hitchhiker’s Guide is
                     encyclopedic and therefore easier to conceptualize digitally than fiction or
                     narrative non-fiction. Reference guides remained the dominant form of ebook
                     rather than for entertainment or leisure until the late 1990s. The first
                     instance of ‘electronic books’ in print appears in Harvey Poppel’s speculative
                     short story for Harvard Business Review set in the 1990s where by the
                     mid-1980s most American families owned or lease some form of home electronic
                     information center with a provision for ebooks . While Poppel
                     focuses on consumable goods rather than hardware, the article was concurrent
                     with David Rubincam’s patent submission for an ‘electronic book,’ filed in 1977
                     . 
                  It is no coincidence that three sources independently coined the term
                     electronic book in the late 1970s since, as Paul Ceruzzi notes, by 1977, the
                     personal computer had matured with a strong and healthy industry of
                     publications, software companies, and support groups to bring the novice on
                     board . During this time, the ebook imagination flourished
                     while the technology remained commercially unviable. For example, in 1978 the
                     Read Only Memory (ROM) storage for a single book cost around $300 per unit to
                     manufacture. An experimental device produced by the US military, computer
                     scientists from the University of Colorado, and Texas Instruments avoided these
                     limitations by creating a separate ROM with an indexed dictionary containing
                     between 2,000 and 4,000 words account[ing] for 90% of most texts . An algorithm generates a numbered list of words present in a book
                     which are used in lieu of the word in text. The project team concluded that
                     effective compression alone would not compensate for infrastructure that was
                     too immature at time of the project report in 1989 to develop beyond the
                     initial research . Likewise, the lithium-ion
                     battery was developed in the early 1990s but did not appear in e-readers until
                     NuvoMedia co-founders Martin Ebenhard and Marc Tarpenning released the
                     second-generation Rocket eBook in 1999 . 
                  Infrastructure and storage would remain insurmountable costs until the
                     mid-2000s, so inventors instead filed speculative patents. Nonetheless, the
                     broader reshaping of computing from terminals to home computers encouraged
                     speculation about the benefits of the personal computer, tying together
                     previous strands of innovation on reading mechanically and on-screen. The
                     ebook imagination extends beyond the development of the technology, constantly
                     existing at the intersection of the inventor’s contemporary understanding of
                     mechanical reading and the book, which is evident in how inventors portray
                     their theoretical devices through the figures in their patent applications. 

                  Experiments in Print-Digital Hybridity
                  Early inventors conceptualized print and mechanical reading as a hybrid form
                     that would improve upon its constituent parts. Rubincam’s landmark patent
                     established the experimental nature of early ebook design, where tropes of
                     print met contemporary digital form. E-readers promised to replicate the
                     tangible materiality of the printed page rather than attempting to simulate the
                     page itself. This focus emphasized the form of the book over its accessibility
                     as a technology, leading to several technological cul-de-sacs. Figure 2
                     visualizes the appearance of bookish features – cover, spines, and verso-recto
                     spreads – as well as use of keyboards in the corpus of 96 patents’ technical
                     drawings. Only 39 patents include at least one of these features, since many
                     patents extend back to the microfilm and projection era, and several of the
                     more recent patents provide only flow charts and schematics. The Euler diagram
                     shows the extent of inventors’ interest in the book as opposed to hardware
                     tropes. The relative lack of patents including keyboards or other mechanical
                     references to digital culture demonstrates an interest in privileging the form
                     of the book. Where patents include bookish elements, this mostly relies on page
                     metaphors rather than engaging with the bound nature of the book. 
                 
                 
                  
                     Euler diagram showing relationship between four aesthetic features of
                        ebook prototypes
                     
                  
                 
              
                  To illustrate how this shaped patent design, we can examine the differences
                     between Michael Lebby, Thomas Blair, and Gary Witting’s patent for an
                     electronic book for Motorola (Figure 3) and John Harkins and Stephen
                     Morriss’s Personal Electronic Aid for Maintenance (PEAM) patent assigned to
                     Texas Instruments (Figure 4). Lebby et al embraced metaphors of bookishness
                     including page turn mechanisms and updatable title pages bound with a leather
                        or leather-like material so as to simulate a leather bound book . There are still external signs of computation, such as the ports on
                     the spine which are never developed further in the patent specification. To
                     protect their claims, Lebby’s team included representations of their device
                     with multiple pages and a flattened bifolio display. The patent lacks detail of
                     how the more complex version would work, with the authors noting turning of a
                     last page of the plurality of display page triggers the subsequent pages to
                     begin on the first page of the plurality of display pages . The patent documents one of the most complete remediations of the book, but
                     it lacks detail on implementation, especially given the immaturity of the
                     technology required to create multiple responsive paper-like screens at the
                     time. Conversely, the Texas Instruments patent, Apparatus for delivering
                     procedural type instructions, mimics the document through replicating the
                     attaché case, a consequence of the project’s origins within the US military.
                     The prototype ignored the trappings of the codex to emphasize non-linear
                     traversal of documents. The attaché case has connotations of collections of
                     papers to be sorted but the actual device is more conventional in design. 
                  
                  
                  
                     Motorola's Book-computer hybrid featuring a cover and several
                        auxiliary ports. Adapted from 
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     Texas Instrument’s Attache case model of the ebook. Adapted from
                        
                     
                  
                  
                
                  While the ebook imagination explored the aesthetics of books, actual
                     implementation trends towards generic mobile computing design tropes.
                     My visual analysis of a range of e-readers launched between 1990 and
                     2013 shows ebook hardware became more homogenous in design to reflect a
                     convergence towards the touch screen in the wake of the iPhone’s success in
                     2007 . This reflects a larger shift within the ebook
                     imagination where the conceptual e-reader became less bookish over time as the
                     design paradigm for portable computers, smartphones and tablets became more
                     established. Nonetheless, despite the emphasis on these new forms of computers,
                     the ebook imagination never managed to emerge fully before the mid-2000s as
                     inventors prioritized the overall form of the device over the most important
                     e-reader technology: its paper-like screen. 

                  Overlooking Screens
                  Why did several companies invest in e-readers only to not release a commercial
                     product? Partially, this was due to a lack of institutional memory and
                     knowledge of competitors’ failed attempts. The genre of patents is partially
                     responsible as inventors are expected to demonstrate novelty rather than track
                     down predecessors and the focus on tangible objects encourages experiments with
                     form rather than function. Nonetheless, part of the early ebook imagination’s
                     failure rests on an inability to move beyond form when designing e-readers.
                     Creating book-like e-readers allowed designers to experiment with form, but the
                     direct presentation of reading material was a greater concern and challenge:
                     How can digital technology replicate, or even improve upon, paper? Paper is a
                     sophisticated, low-cost technology, while remaining easy-to-use and durable. At
                     the turn of the twentieth century, microfilm offered one pathway towards a
                     post-print reading machine. See  and  for a
                        summary of microform publishing. The work of modernist Bob Brown and
                     his Readies is well recited within histories of digital publishing despite the
                     presence of earlier microfilm-based reading machines   
                     . The New York Stock Exchange’s ticker tapes, 
                     which constantly scrolled to offer updates on stock prices, inspired Brown to
                     conceptualize a reading machine using microfilm. The medium appealed to Brown
                     as he saw a parallel between developments in time-based media and speed
                     reading. Brown opened his manifesto by acknowledging that The written word
                     hasn’t kept up with the age. The movies have outmanoeuvered it. We have the
                     talkies, but as yet no Readies . His bold vision
                     argued writing must become more optical, more eye-teasing, more eye-tasty, to
                     give the word its due and tune-in on the age. Books are antiquated word
                     containers. Brown proposed instead reading will need to be done by a machine;
                     microscopic type of a movable tape running beneath a slot equipped with a
                     magnifying glass . Brown considered a patent but
                     never filed for one, preferring to leave his device as part of an adjacent
                     literary ebook imagination, also featuring The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy
                     . If Brown had decided to file a patent for the Readies, his
                     success was far from guaranteed. Developments with microphotography and
                     microfilm led to a flurry of other patent filings during the early twentieth
                     century, starting with Chenoweth and Rogers’ Memorandum Holder patent, which
                     used scrolling microscopic print attached to a pair of glasses to allow users
                     to view their notes at will .
                  While the preceding inventions were never launched commercially, time-based
                     media was the inspiration for several patents that were adapted for market
                       . Like Brown’s Readies, inventors
                     such as L.J. Stoyanoff of Perceptual Development Lab, understood the power of
                     microfilm for speed reading. The Lab launched an implementation of the
                     technology described in his patent, A Device for Reading Training, in 1957,
                     called the ‘PerceptoScope’ . The machine facilitated
                     speedreading through a pair of films in overlapping relationship for unison
                        projection, a text film and a fixation film . While
                     acknowledging that competing devices were available, Stoyanoff suggested the
                     PerceptoScope was less expensive. Just like the Readies, the PerceptoScope
                     relied on the user’s familiarity with time-based media and restricted reading
                     to a strictly linear process. As a result, even at a lower cost, the device
                     filled a niche in reading rather than offering the full affordances of the
                     codex. Bootstrapping reading on-screen to time-based technologies was fleeting
                     and largely disappeared once screen technologies were better equipped to
                     maintain a static image. 
                  Other inventors wanted to offer a more accurate remediation of the book.
                     Microform viewers were often too bulky to be useful as portable book
                     surrogates. Bradley Fiske, a US Navy officer and serial inventor of devices for
                     military and civilian use, worked on a portable microphotograph reader
                     throughout the 1920s and 30s . Fiske envisioned readers using a
                     series of retractable lenses to view text at a smaller scale with one hand
                     while adjusting the position of the microprint with the other. His first patent
                     , filed in 1920, describes a device intended principally as a
                     substitute for books, magazines, pamphlets, newspapers, or any other vehicle by
                     which printed words are read at the present time [….] to secure economy of
                     paper. The emphasis on the economy of paper diverged from Bob Brown and
                     Vannevar Bush’s privileging of speed-reading and non-linear traversals
                     respectively to instead replicate the page in a reduced format: a core feature
                     of successful e-readers. Fiske iterated on the design over the 1920s   , which worked to reduce both the complexity and
                     size of his reading machine. He was renowned for his devices and Bob Brown
                     corresponded with him when considering the development of the Readies for
                     advice on the patent process . Matts Lindström describes
                     Fiske’s print reduction mechanisms as an early form of ‘micromedia,’ or
                     various technologies of reproduction and representation on the smallest
                        possible scale, beyond the very limits of human perception . Micromedia only re-emerged with commercial e-reader hardware, but on an
                     even smaller scale than Fiske envisaged. The introduction of optical media such
                     as the CD-ROM enabled inscription at the nano-level, only visible through a
                     microscope and able to contain much more information than previous micromedia
                     . The various experiments in portable microfilm readers
                     never overcame the limitations of the medium, and it was only with the
                     combination of nanomedia and more appropriate optical technology that the ebook
                     could succeed. Microfilm, ticker tapes and other facsimile-oriented platforms
                     demonstrated the possibility of a post-print codex mechanical book but it would
                     require a paradigm shift in visual reproduction technology to fully explore 
                     these possibilities. Luckily, the rising popularity of the television during
                     the first half of the twentieth century led to investment in various forms of
                     display screen technologies that would provide an ideal platform for developing
                     the ebook imagination. 
                  
                  
                     Text as rendered by (left-to-right) LED, CRT CC-BY Selçuk Oral.
                        Wikicommons. https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=1213863,
                        LCD, and electronic paper.
                     
                  
                 
                  During the twentieth century, three screen technologies dominated visions of
                     reading on-screen: CRT (1858), LCD (Liquid Crystal Display, 1888) and LED
                     (Light Emitting Diodes, 1907). Figure 6 shows a visual comparison of the three
                     technologies alongside electronic paper, the screen technology used by most
                     major contemporary e-readers. Nick Montfort and Ian Bogost state in a CRT,
                     patterns of electrons are fired at glass that is coated
                     on the inside with phosphors. These glow to create the visible picture. The
                     screen image is not drawn all at once, but in individual scan lines . A color CRT screen displays colors through clustering
                     red, green, and blue phosphors as shown in Figure 6. The technology was
                     integral to the uptake of televisions and early computing but was limited for
                     mobile consumption due to its bulky nature. The fast trace powering CRTs made
                     reading on-screen for an extended period difficult as the screen could refresh
                     up to 60 times per second to avoid so-called image burn-in. Inventors only
                     specified CRT as the primary display medium when the patent application was
                     based around the terrestrial television network through extending teletext
                     . These sub-optimal conditions would be offset by the large
                     audience who already had televisions at their disposal. The application of
                     so-called liquid crystals such as cholesteryl benzoate that can exist in an
                     intermediate state between a crystalline solid and a normal liquid to screens
                     in the 1960s offered a solution to CRT’s limitations . LCD
                     screens encapsulate liquid crystals that are manipulated by two polarized films
                     to produce images. The liquid crystals do not emit light, which instead must be
                     provided through a reflexive surface or light source behind the screen. LCD
                     screens were more appropriate for electronic books as they were cheap and
                     portable, with lower requirements for illumination. LED displays relied instead
                     on arrays of individual lights. Alphanumeric LED displays most commonly appear
                     as segmented matrices (as shown in Figure 6) where strips of LEDs combine to
                     form text and numbers for electronic calculators and digital watches since the
                     late 1960s . This success encouraged Russell Andrews and
                     colleagues from the Stewart-Warner Corporation to file a patent for an
                     LED-based Traveling Message Display and William Brooks filed a similar patent
                     for Variable Message Displays . The technology had limited scope
                     for longer-form reading as the pixel density was too low to scale to represent
                     a whole page and its influence waned as other displays became cheaper. 
                  Since the patent system encourages making broad claims, unless the display was
                     part of the claims, inventors would avoid specifying exact screen
                     configurations. For example, Theodor Heutschi’s Electronic Device, Preferably
                     an Electronic Book, filed in 1999, states: The display preferably provided as
                        an LCD-display . Even when aspects of the screen were central
                     to the patent’s claims, the inventors remained vague with specifications. Lebby
                     et al.’s patent for Motorola provides minimal detail on implementation: the
                        plurality of displays is made by any suitable method or technology . It was not until the arrival of electronic paper that ebook
                     inventors became interested in screen displays beyond such generalities. 
                  Innovations in screen technology happened outwith patent filings connected to
                     electronic books, as inventors were more interested in the device’s form. These
                     core technologies were instead developed by third parties for adjacent uses.
                     The misplaced emphasis of inventors, ignoring the screen, led to the stagnation
                     of the ebook imagination in transition to commercial products. This
                     experimentation, and early commercial failures, coalesced to demonstrate the
                     importance of screen technologies for the future of the ebook. When the Kindle
                     and Sony PRS-500 launched with electronic paper screens in the mid-2000s, the
                     devices exploited technology developed entirely outside of the ebook
                     imagination. Visions of full-color, high-definition, constantly-refreshing
                     bendable screens have remained in the realm of science fiction and largely out
                     of the patent literature. This inspiration can be seen in Phillips and E Ink’s
                     collaboration to create what they termed Radio Paper in 2003. Radio paper
                     would couple the development of organic and plastic transistors to create
                     screens flexible enough to fold and roll up […] with wireless Internet
                        access, by 2005 . The ambitious goal is still beyond
                     commercially available technology a decade and a half later, but it remains an
                     active goal with substantial research and development investment from the
                     now-defunct Amazon subsidiary LiquaVista, who received 240 patents for
                     technology featuring electrowetting before being shut down in 2018. 
                  Electronic paper was superior to other technologies but took longer to become
                     commercially viable. Early implementations of electrophoretic displays, the
                     most common form of electronic paper, date back to the 1970s, when
                     contemporaneous developments in Matsushita Electric Industrial Company and
                     Xerox Palo Alto Research Centre (PARC) arrived at the same conclusion  . Electronic paper was designed for
                     static visual display rather than time-based media such as CRT, which is
                     sub-optimal for reading since a static image does not need to be refreshed,
                     requiring a constant light and power source. A ‘bistable display’ electronic
                     paper screen instead maintains a consistent image indefinitely without drawing
                     further battery power. Electronic paper was developed simultaneously by the two
                     companies for different ends. Matsushita saw the potential for advertising
                     where screens need to be adjusted sporadically but otherwise remain stable for
                     long passages of time. Conversely, Sheridan led the development of Xerox PARC’s
                     Gyricon technology as the display for its eponymous computer prototype. The
                     technology remained dormant until the mid-1990s when Xerox PARC restarted its
                     ‘electric paper’ through a subsidiary, Gryricon LLC, run by Nick Sheridan,
                     between 2000 and 2005.  Details of internal research and development at
                        Xerox PARC around ‘second generation electric paper’ can be found in Box 18
                        of the Mark D. Weiser Papers, M1069, Dept. of Special Collections, Stanford
                        University Libraries, Stanford, Calif.. Xerox PARC patents from this time
                        include . The company focused on digital
                     signage rather than electronic books. E Ink, a spinoff from MIT, was the first
                     to explore electronic paper’s potential for digital publishing. Philips, the
                     Dutch electronics company attained an exclusive license to E Ink’s technology
                     until the mid-2000s, but once the promise of ‘radio paper’ failed to
                     materialize, other companies including Sony and Amazon licensed the technology
                     to develop their own e-readers. 
                  Unlike other parts of the ebook imagination integrated into ebookness, the
                     vision of a paper-like display technology remains in flux. Dedicated e-readers
                     were largely replaced by smartphones and tablet computers. Since
                     electrophoretic displays are optimized to not refresh, e-readers struggle to
                     compete with other mobile computers’ versatility. Despite the lack of major
                     breakthroughs a decade after the Kindle’s launch, research and development labs
                     still continue to prototype more sophisticated ebook display technology.
                     Electrowetting is currently the most viable solution. The technology was
                     unveiled by Philips in a 2003 letter to Nature by a team that would later spin
                     off to Liquavista, which was acquired by Samsung before an eventual takeover by
                     Amazon. Robert Hayes and B.J. Feenstra hyped the technology by suggesting our
                     display principle utilizes the voltage-controlled movement of a colored oil
                     film adjacent to a white substrate . The use of fluid
                     allowed for faster refresh times and more complex color arrangements where
                     electrophoretic technology is largely stuck with sixteen shades of grey.
                     Replicating the strongest benefits of both paper and screens remains out of
                     reach within current technological paradigms. Nonetheless, despite the general
                     move to a more pragmatic model of ebookness, the ebook imagination remains
                     strong for next-generation electronic paper as the ideals of Radio Paper
                     remain unfulfilled. The near simultaneous announcement of bendable screen
                     phones from Samsung and Huawei in February 2019 demonstrates how elements of
                     this idealized form of electronic paper dating back to Xerox PARC remain
                     pervasive despite the diminished use of dedicated e-reader . Inventors such as Pei-Yu Chiou and his colleagues at University
                     California-Los Angeles continue to patent electrowetting techniques and related
                     technologies that, alongside bendable screens, have the potential to create
                     something more akin to ‘Radio Paper’ that might convert ebook sceptics . The ebook imagination has outlived the mainstream acceptance and
                     subsequent ambivalence around dedicated e-readers, demonstrating the continued
                     yearning for a more sophisticated form of reading on screen. 
               

               Conclusion
               Sony and Amazon’s appropriation of electronic paper was pivotal to the transition
                  of the ebook imagination from the conceptual ebook based on time-based media or
                  facsimile to a more nuanced response to the affordances of the printed codex. The
                  display technology provided the most accurate simulation of print while requiring
                  minimal battery power. The decision encouraged the rapid adoption of ebooks, but
                  the reliance on a technology originally designed for digital advertising created a
                  divide between the ebook imagination and commercial hardware. An evolutionary
                  approach to histories of ebooks prioritizes a series of commercial hardware
                  releases at the expense of a longer, more diverse history of experimentation . The
                  dominance of Amazon, Apple, and Kobo has created a homogenized version of the
                  ebook with a standardized hardware interface. The ebook imagination as evidenced
                  in patent filings reveals how diverse inventors attempted to create an alternative
                  using the most prominent technologies of the day. Ruiz Robles saw the educational
                  use of interactive mechanical devices, while Brown and Stoyanoff wanted to explore
                  the connection between time-based media and speed-reading. These functions have
                  been incorporated more broadly into ebook reading software such as the Kindle’s
                  Word Runner function, albeit eluding dedicated hardware due to the constraints of
                  electronic paper. 
               While previous scholarship on the development of ebooks focused on shifts in
                  publishers’ workflows and the emergence of e-readers, I have demonstrated a
                  longer, often cyclical, history of reading on-screen that extends beyond the
                  digital computer to earlier innovations in screen-based media. Patent filings
                  recording the ebook imagination could not predict the Kindle’s successful
                  combination of electronic paper, lithium-ion batteries, and 3G cellular
                  technology. Their greatest strength remains documenting an iterative process of
                  developing the mechanical book from microfilm to the emergence of portable
                  computers in the 1980s. The evidence of ‘failed’ inventions that never made it to
                  market contradicts the dominant narrative within histories of the ebook that laud
                  the Sony Data Discman or Kindle as necessary interventions in publishing’s natural
                  evolution. The patents discussed in this article instead show a longer history of
                  experimentation that mirrors the medial affordances and limitations of their
                  historical context. Reclaiming these lost histories emphasizes the role of
                  marginalized figures including, but not limited to, non-Anglophone women such as
                  Ángela Ruiz Robles who designed her mechanical encyclopedia for educational
                  purposes rather than the market-driven vision of Amazon and its competitors. 
               Moving towards a cyclical rather than linear understanding of digital publishing’s
                  historical development allows scholars to recontextualize the ebook’s supposed
                  plateau since the late 2010s. Despite the maturation of e-reader hardware since
                  the launch of the Kindle in 2007, ebooks are often seen as inferior to print
                  publications, partially due to a perceived unfulfilled potential. This is the gap
                  between ebookness (the current state of the technology) and the ebook imagination
                  that is still driven by futuristic depictions of digital reading as found in
                  science fiction and patent filings. As long as hardware does not match the
                  expectations of these depictions, the malaise will continue. It is more profitable
                  to reverse this thinking and return to the cyclical nature of innovation and
                  previous failures to determine the overall feasibility of the technologies and the
                  constraints that have held inventors back. A more grounded approach to this
                  history and the current state of ebooks shows the pragmatic approach is better
                  than the fantastical. 
               In this article, I have also proposed a new approach to the study of the history
                  of digital publishing. Werner and Kirschenbaum conclude that the largest
                  challenges [for researching digital publishing] may not be technological but
                  legalistic . Examining patents for imagined
                  but not actualized e-readers demonstrates the upside of the legalistic
                  underpinning of digital culture. Future historians of the early twenty-first
                  century book trade will benefit from exploring the USPTO’s rich database further.
                  For example, there are over 10,000 Amazon patents, revealing shifts in corporate
                  priorities. The scarcity of evidence for the history of digital publishing prior
                  to 2000, both physical and virtual, requires alternative approaches to remaining
                  evidence rather than reverting to positivist corporate histories. Through casting
                  a wider net, more stories such as Ángela Ruiz Robles may demonstrate alternative
                  pathways to the current model of digital publishing. A more inclusive perspective
                  on the history, and future, of digital publishing is vital to moving beyond the
                  current impasse of antagonism between print and digital consumption. As I have
                  outlined here, the rich history of the ebook imagination is often limited in
                  technical specifications and with its clear own limitations, but it offers
                  alternative visions to the corporatized platforms currently dominating the book
                  industry. 
            

               Acknowledgements
               This research was made possible by the generous funding from the Carnegie Trust’s Research Incentive Grant and the 2018 Bibliographic Society of America McCorison Fellowship for the History and Bibliography of Printing in Canada and the United States. I am also grateful for thoughtful suggestions from Alan Galey, Claire Squires, Jim Mussell, John Maxwell, and the two anonymous reviewers for Digital Humanities Quarterly
            
