Title:  Nutha Planets: On Telos and Digital
               Blackness
Volume:  016
Issue:  3
Date:  22 July 2022
Abstract:  
            This short reflective essay meditates on how/why digital Blackness need not strive to
               recover or repair humanity for Black peoples. It questions the teleological drive for
               building Black digital archives and technologies motivated by representational
               politics. The foray performatively suggests otherwise by leaning into Sylvia Wynter’s
               (2007) notion that such folding into the figure of the human — overrepresented by
               Western Man — snuffs polyvalent and polysemic pluralities for Blackness.
         
Full Body Text: 
I don’t know where to pinpoint a start to my work in digital humanities. Maybe it began
            on instant messaging platforms like AIM or MSN Messenger, truncating, puttying, and
            shaping language for new platforms. Maybe it was in re-watching early viral videos —
               Chocolate Rain still is and always will be a bop — and
            thinking they related to something that might mean identity. Or perhaps it came earlier
            with the affective thrill on hearing the distinct buzz of a dial-up internet connection,
            so foreign a sound whirring through Caribbean breeze. I know it wasn’t in a classroom,
            or — no offense Mavis Beacon — learning how to type, or formatting a resume in MS Word
            ’95. See, the appeal of the digital to me, an inside chile growing up in
            Trinidad (face usually in a book or screen) never was assimilation into some larger arc
            of intellectual or technological progress or change; one thing that drew me in to
            thinking about the ways digital technologies culture us or how we culture them was
            possibility. And I don’t mean possibility in the discovery or recovery
            sense: I refuse the idea that the goal of Black digital technologies and their uses
            remains building some Black canon of texts, some particular archive of artifacts, a
            catalogue of ways of being in the world somehow authentically emerging from Black
               experience. I also refuse the notion that Black digital humanities might
            help us find some place among the long arching shadow that is the figure of the “human,”
            even as snuff videos stay circulating of cops killing us with pleas for humanity on
            social media. I suppose possibility, to me, conjures constant shift(in’)-forms. 
Following Black feminist scholars and activists who take up approaches to digital
            humanities situated in a Wynterian theoretical genealogy, like Tara L. Conley and Ashley
            Greene Wade for example, I understand digital technologies and media for their viral
            potentials to undercut the overrepresentation of man as Western bourgeois male subject,
            as human 
            . But my hope in virality lies not in building a single
            vision or static versions of what might mechanize responses to Sylvia Wynter’s call for
               new genres of being human
            . Nah, I believe that virality inherently offers — through
            distribution — constant space for mashing up contexts, artifacts, identities, and the
            very frameworks on which settler-colonial, racial capitalist projects lie. We need not
            construct or overrepresent sub-genres of what being human while
               Black might look like by digital means and watch them appropriated toward our
            own demise. The plurality of Wynter’s call (in genres, rather than genre)
            suggests that Black studies might offer the digital the idea that no single human
            or humanistic metric, discipline, or idea may measure or signify Blackness
               in toto. #BlackGirlMagic, #BlackBoyJoy, #BlackLivesMatter, none need
            look or mean one way because Blackness don’t need to look one way. Magic, joy, whatever
            don’t have to matter according to normative (affective) scripts. Difference
            — which Achille Mbembe reminds us Blackness signifies in extremity — rather, suggests we
            could augur n/other planets: places, terrains, digital geographies where reiterative
            negation of otherhood might help us fever dream something different . Together, by using digital media to turbulently disturb,
            spread, alter any received sense of what we are or could be in the continued heat of
            racial capitalism, let’s dream nutha planets.
