Title:  Digital Humanities Inside Out: Developing a Digital
               Humanities Curriculum for Computer Scientists in Singapore 
Volume:  016
Issue:  4
Date:  05 August 2022
Abstract:  
            
            This article explores the pedagogical challenges and opportunities of bringing the
               Digital Humanities into a STEM-orientated and Singaporean educational context.
               Teaching DH from the inside out — to computer scientists rather than humanists — has
               allowed us to see more clearly neglected areas of DH pedagogy that are in need of
               greater attention. Our experiences have shown us that if DH is to thrive as a field
               beyond traditional humanities departments in the U.S. and Europe, we need to better
               articulate and theorize the connections between humanities and computer scientific
               epistemologies. When teaching non-humanities students, in particular, we have found
               it necessary to pay more attention to humanities research methods and projects
               grounded in humanities research questions. In developing a curriculum that reflects
               our Singaporean context too, we have found that diversity in global DH should go
               beyond simply broadening DH’s cultural scope but must involve a more open and global
               engagement with computational, cultural research that may not identify disciplinarily
               as DH.
         
Full Body Text: 

            
            The recent history of the humanities in American and European universities is one of
               neglect. Governments have shifted towards an instrumentalization of education
               policies, which has included the accelerated expansion and promotion of tertiary
               education in STEM subjects, partly due to competition with the growing economies of
               Asia. An influential 2011 report on STEM education and employment from the U.S.
               Department of Commerce argues that science, technology,
                  engineering and mathematics workers play a key role in the sustained growth and
                  stability of the U.S. economy, and are a critical component to helping the U.S.
                     win the future
               . There is a general
               perception that this strategic focus on STEM has been detrimental to fields beyond
               its scope, particularly to the humanities. Rarely does a semester go by without a
               prominent academic declaring that the humanities are in crisis, and some have even
               predicted the death of these venerable disciplines altogether. (See  for a good summary of the issues.) 
            It is not without a certain irony, then, that one may note that many governments in
               Asia are, in contrast, investing more than ever now in the humanities, arts, and
               social sciences. The reasons are complex, but a general need for fostering greater
               creativity, innovation, and entrepreneurship among their populations is an important
               factor. In the last twenty years, China has established several liberal arts
               universities and has forged partnerships with liberal arts programs at U.S.
               universities, such as Duke and NYU , as did
               Singapore by fostering a collaboration between its established, flagship national
               university and Yale in the form of the liberal-arts model that was Yale-NUS College
                  . Taking inspiration from institutions like MIT, there
               are also a growing number of specialist science and technology universities with
               integrated arts, humanities, and social science programs throughout Asia. The
               prestigious Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT) are perhaps the oldest examples of
               adopting this MIT model . Recent examples from China
                  also include Southern University of Science and Technology (also known as SUSTech,
                  founded in 2009) and ShanghaiTech University (founded in 2013). More
               recently, in 2009, MIT itself helped establish the Singapore University of Technology
               and Design (SUTD) to advance knowledge and nurture
                  technically-grounded leaders and innovators to serve
                  society needs, with a focus on design, through an integrated
                     multidisciplinary curriculum and multidisciplinary
                  research
               . 
            The very different political and institutional situations facing the humanities
               worldwide ought to influence the debates and challenges surrounding the digital
               humanities (DH). However, disciplinary discussions about DH generally assume an
               academic audience located in American or European institutions and, until recently,
               have rarely reflected the potential global diversity of the field. In this
                  regard, see  and . Less remarked upon, perhaps, is that, institutionally, the
                  what question in DH pedagogy usually speaks to researchers and
               students in a specific, normative setting: humanities departments and
               units, while the how question usually pertains only to teaching methods
               relevant to students pursuing humanities degrees in these departments and units —
               ignoring the fact that both of these questions about DH could actually have very
               different answers in different institutional contexts. An approach to these questions
               that is disciplinarily more inclusive can therefore offer lessons for DH that are not
               normatively circumscribed by the specificities of the most commonly encountered
               scenario. 
            This paper is a step in that direction: we discuss our efforts and those of our
               colleagues to establish a DH program at SUTD in Singapore, and we address the
               challenges and rewards of introducing DH to undergraduate students pursuing STEM
               degrees. This academic environment is unusual for a DH program, but, given that it is
               becoming more common in Asia, rethinking the question of how to teach DH from the
               perspective of this setting allows us to critically appraise current pedagogical
               methods as well as reconsider what DH is or can be, particularly in its relationship
               with the humanities and computational science. 
         

            1. SUTD and the Digital Humanities Minor
            SUTD is Singapore’s fourth publicly funded university, and, in its first seven years,
               the university was run in collaboration with MIT, which helped to develop its unique
               degree programs and curriculum as well as to establish research centers, such as the
               SUTD-MIT International Design Centre (IDC) . SUTD has
               five pillars that offer degree programs that cut across the traditional fields
               of architecture, engineering, and computer science: Architecture and Sustainable
               Design (ASD), Design and Artificial Intelligence (DAI, introduced in 2020),
               Engineering Product Development (EPD), Engineering Systems and Design (ESD), and
               Information Systems Technology and Design (ISTD). Humanities, Arts, and Social
               Sciences, or HASS, is a disciplinary cluster independent of these pillar
               programs that offers elective courses to students throughout their undergraduate
               degrees as well as two core courses in the humanities and social sciences that they
               take in their first year. For a perceptive analysis of SUTD’s early years and
                  its MIT collaboration, see ; . HASS subjects constitute 22% of our student’s curricular exposure,
               slightly less than at MIT (25%) due to the specific requirements of Singapore’s
               Engineering Accreditation Board.
            In establishing SUTD’s pillars, MIT introduced a level of integrated
                  multidisciplinarity that is not found in MIT’s schools, which follow
               traditional disciplinary divisions, such as architecture, engineering, computer
               science, etc. The HASS cluster, however, was established as a smaller equivalent of
               MIT’s School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences (SHASS), perhaps because the
               latter already embodied a multidisciplinary ethos. Unlike at MIT, all students must
               take core courses in the humanities and social sciences in their first year as part
               of a common curriculum before subsequently choosing one compulsory HASS elective each
               term. MIT also established multidisciplinary teaching weeks where all subjects,
               including HASS, tackle a common problem from different perspectives. Since the
               completion of the MIT collaboration in 2017, there has been a further effort to
               integrate HASS more directly with the pillar subjects in a shift towards a more
               radically interdisciplinary educational ideal. 
            Key to this shift are HASS’s new minor programs: a Design, Technology, and Society
               (DTS) minor and the DH minor. Students minoring in DTS learn to analyze the social
               dimensions of design and technology using humanistic and social scientific methods,
               mainly within disciplines such as anthropology, history, psychology, and sociology.
                  https://hass.sutd.edu.sg/education/minors/design-technology-society-minor/
               The DH minor has two main goals. The first goal is to teach students how to utilize
               the tools and techniques of computation to help them analyze and interpret culture.
               The second goal is to have students think more critically about computation and about
               digital culture through the lens of the humanities.
                  https://hass.sutd.edu.sg/education/minors/digital-humanities-minor/
               Students can sign up for the DH minor at the end of their first year after they have
               taken the compulsory Global Humanities core course that
               is run on a Great Books model. The students minoring in DH tend to come mainly from
               those majoring in two computationally focused degrees, Computer Science and Design
               (offered by the ISTD pillar) and Engineering Systems and Design (offered by its
               eponymous pillar, ESD). Apart from the humanities core course, they have almost no
               prior experience in studying the humanities. 
            All students enrolled in the DH minor begin the program by taking a compulsory
               introductory DH course. This course focuses mainly on teaching how computational
               skills can be used to better understand objects of human culture. After this core DH
               course, the students take four humanities electives in subsequent terms. These
               electives are of two main types based on the different goals of the DH minor. Some
               electives focus on the digital world and teach students how to think humanistically
               about digital methods and culture via such fields as digital and environmental
               studies. The majority focus on traditional subjects such as history, literature, and
               philosophy and require students to conduct digital research projects where they use
               computational methods to investigate an aspect of human culture relevant to the
               elective.
         

            2. Introducing Digital and Humanities Methods in the Classroom
            DH has developed as a field primarily as a result of its common computational methods
               and approaches. Inevitably, the debates and practices of the discipline have largely
               focused on exploring the possibilities of these new methods as well as on thinking
               critically about their applicability in humanities teaching and research. These two
               sides of the conversation concerning DH have sometimes run into conflict. In the
               early 2010s, debates emerged about how far the field should be concerned with the
               humanistic critique of computation in addition to the more practical matter of
               applying computational methods. Scholar-bloggers sometimes framed this debate on DH
               approaches as one between hack (practice) and yack (theory). While the
               opposition was never as fundamental as this dichotomy suggests, the distinction
               between these two sides of DH nevertheless resonated with many digital humanists.
               (See  for a brief history of the debate).
            Related issues have also tended to structure and define conversations about DH
               teaching. Introductory courses and workshops in DH, in particular, can often struggle
               to find a balance between the immediate need to introduce humanities students to
               computational tools and techniques and that of having them think more critically and
               abstractly about the ideas that underpin these methods. John Russell and Merinda
               Hensley have criticized the tendency in DH teaching for buttonology, that is, the focus on showing how to
                  use software rather than critically engaging with digital methodologies
                  . (See also ;
                  ). At the same time, there has been a recent push
               toward placing more emphasis on critical digital pedagogy and digital literacy , though many introductory courses in DH remain
               structured around the use of particular software packages . 
            Recent debates about the balance of theory and practice have focused almost entirely
               on the digital side of DH, and there has been relatively little discussion about its
               relation to the humanities in general or, for that matter, about what humanities
               methods actually are, not to speak of how such methods can combine pedagogically with
               computational methods. There is an assumption in many DH courses and workshops that
               students will intuitively know how to put the computational tools and techniques that
               are taught to productive use in their research or coursework. Similarly, courses
               might engage in the critique of digital culture but rarely teach how exactly
               humanities methods inform this critique. We can contrast the relative lack of
                  discussion about humanities methods in DH with computational sociology, where
                  there is richer literature exploring the continuities and divergences between
                  traditional and digital approaches (see, for instance, ; ). See also  on
                  the need for greater methodological awareness in DH. The lack of attention to
                  humanities methods in DH may simply be symptomatic of a more general disregard for
                  methods in the humanities as a whole. In this regard, see .  This is not to say that DH researchers have
               not thought about these issues. John Unsworth, for instance, famously argued that
               computational work in the humanities should support the basic functions of humanities
               research, which he called scholarly primitives
               . Unsworth pointed to the need for more epistemological
               reflection on the processes of humanities research so that computational methods
               could be better integrated with them. Despite the longstanding influence of
               Unsworth’s article on the field’s self-definition, it is rare to find a systematic
               discussion of humanities epistemology in DH textbooks and other introductory
               literature, presumably because it is assumed that their readers would be students in
               the humanities who are already familiar with it.
            This issue became problematic for us when introducing DH to non-humanities students
               on our foundation course. While all introductory works provide definitions of DH,
               most speak only in general terms about humanities research and methods, if at all.
               The exact meaning of terms, such as close reading, is largely left open to
               interpretation, perhaps because, as Martin Paul Eve notes, to
                  many in the field of literary studies this question of what we mean by close
                     reading might seem so obvious as to need no answer
               . This willingness to leave the methods of one half
               of DH so loosely defined may go unnoticed in the humanities classroom, but it was an
               obstacle for some of our students. Variations of the same question kept coming up in
               our class discussions: What exactly is meant by humanities
                  research? It seems obvious to us now, but we had not foreseen how vital
               this question would be. The students’ primary concern was understanding what
               humanities knowledge is and how the epistemological framework of the humanities and
               that of computation could be integrated to produce new humanities knowledge. While
               thinking about how to address this concern and guide our students, we came to
               understand that this outsider perspective on humanities epistemology, namely
               that of STEM students trying to apply DH, also provided an opportunity to demystify
               humanities epistemology and make it legible to non-humanists.
            With this in mind, we have begun to revise our DH core course and some of our
               electives to better address students’ needs. Rather than focusing on either
                  hack or yack, that is, computational methods or the humanistic
               critique of them, we are instead structuring our DH core syllabus around our own
               groups of humanistic scholarly primitives that can productively interface with
               computer science approaches. We base our selection of these scholarly primitives on
               the principle that humanities research creates new knowledge about objects of human
               culture by discovering meaningful patterns both within them and between
               them. Here, we have been inspired both by Rens Bod’s A New
                  History of the Humanities  as well as the work of
               other DH scholars who have similarly thought about this process as a form of modeling
               . We have also benefited from the work of the
                  DM2E (Digitised Manuscripts to Europeana) project, which published a
               report introducing a revised set of scholarly primitives, the activities based on the
               primitives, and the specific operations involved in those activities .
            We have started to structure the DH core course around three modules. The first
               module, analyzing and discovering, focuses on how we can
               interpret cultural objects by identifying their formal aspects and the meaningful
               patterns they make. We focus on both textual objects as well as visual objects and,
               using works of literature and art, first have the students think about how the
               interplay of particular words, colors, or shapes of these objects influence how they
               interpret them. We thus introduce the students to a loose idea of formalism and its
               epistemological role in the humanities before turning to how these methods can mesh
               with computational approaches. We then have the students engage each week in simple
               computational tasks — counting words and pixels at different scales, for instance —
               to get them to think about the epistemological overlap between intuiting forms versus
               inferring digital features. In these, we have drawn on inspiration from studies that
               have highlighted the continuities between French and Russian formalism, in
               particular, and DH methods (for instance, ; ; ) as well as made use of
               the more explicit operationalization of the continuity between topic modeling and the
               precursors of Russian formalism that Matthew Jockers points out in his book Macroanalysis
               , parts of which we use as a text for a section of our
               course. 
            The second module, conceptualizing and comparing,
               explores how humanities scholars derive new concepts from connections between
               cultural objects. Researchers in the humanities use the structures that underpin the
               concepts they employ to help compare different cultural objects. For instance,
               historians may create and debate the idea of a particular historical period;
               literature scholars may investigate issues of genre, authorship, and theme; and
               philosophers may create new forms of metalanguage to represent the different ideas
               and elements of their reasoning. We have the students try to come up with automated,
               machine-learning-based computational approaches that complement these humanistic
               connections. For example, topic modeling can allow students to ascertain how the
                  discovery of topics shared between texts by means of quantitative analysis
               matches up with the intuitive, thematic connections they make between those texts.
               Standard techniques in textual DH such as stylometry and vector models of the
               semantics of words and concepts lend themselves particularly well to this kind of
               pedagogy. The key point here is that, for these STEM students, quantitative analysis
               is often more easily graspable and can be built on to help them see the importance of
               humanistic methods of inquiry — especially when quantitative methods fall short, and
               their limits are exposed.
            
            The final module of the course departs somewhat from previous studies on scholarly
               primitives and focuses on creating and generating as
               research activities. Here we explore the role of the creative arts, in particular,
               the literary and visual arts, as a form of action research, that is, as a
               practical and creative means of better understanding the forms and processes of
               cultural objects . As part of this module, students
               particularly experiment with artificial intelligence and generative art and build on
               their previous work on the interface between humanities conceptualizing and machine
               learning of classification. They learn about the capacity of algorithms to create new
               artistic objects and think critically about how this creative process reflects the
               cultural archives and datasets on which an algorithm is trained. In some cases, this
               also enables students to see not only the limitations of computational approaches but
               also the distortive effects that could ensue if any and all residue that cannot be
               quantified and computed is automatically devalued (and, conversely, if anything that
               can be quantified and computed is allowed to lead to what Sareen et al. describe as performative
                  legitimation
               ). 
            In subsequent electives, we build on our work in the DH core course by continuing the
               conversation about epistemological connections between the humanities and computer
               science. For instance, one of us (S.B.) teaches an elective, Form and Content in Arts, Science and Society, that exposes students to
               concepts from structuralist semiotics by tracing, first, the analogy between the
               relationality of Saussurean semiotics and the computer scientific notion of semantic
               fields in the vector-space approach to semantics in text analysis. The course also
               provides our students with a gentle introduction to post-structuralism by way of
               Derrida’s Structure, Sign and Play
               , based on the foundation of that earlier analogy. The
               operationalization of complex and abstract notions like sign and signification in
               structuralist semiotics, as well as the foregrounding of the limits to such an
               operationalization when we get to more complex notions such as post-structuralism and
               deconstruction, provides a route for our undergraduate students from STEM disciplines
               into advanced topics in humanities theory that they normally would not have had the
               means to engage with (and which are challenging even to humanities undergraduates).
            
         

            3. Research Project Centered Pedagogy 
            Teaching DH to students who otherwise have little background in the humanities
               requires much more attention to research practices than digital tools. Alison
               Langmead, who has taught DH courses to both humanists and information scientists, has
               noted that humanists tend to have an easier time forming a
                  research question, while the information scientists tend to have an easier time
                  becoming familiar with the tools
               . Based on this insight, she and
               David J. Birnbaum have suggested beginning with research questions when teaching
               humanists and tool application when teaching information scientists. However, in our
               experience, computer science students can be skeptical about working with digital
               methods without a clear purpose. We have found that it is important to introduce them
               first to practical examples of DH research that tackle real questions. Even then,
               some of the students have echoed Nan Z. Da’s recent criticisms of DH research that
                  what is robust is obvious (in the empirical sense) and what
                  is not obvious is not robust
               . When assigning DH research articles to students,
               one major challenge then has been to find work that does not simply computationally
               confirm what is already known (the obvious) and that
               also can stand up to scientific scrutiny (the robust,
               whether in method, statistical analyses, etc.). We are now building an archive
                  of articles that we feel make a significant contribution to their humanities
                  field. These are not always published in DH journals. A good example is , published in the Journal of
                     Asian Studies, which uses topic modeling to offer new and concrete
                  insights on the topical relationship between the Analects, Mencius, and Xunzi.
            
            We have found that introducing students early on to impactful DH research papers is
               an efficient means of inculcating in them an appreciation of how digital methods
               support humanistic inquiry. From the start of our introductory DH course, we
               encourage students to put these theoretical perspectives into practice, and in our
               weekly seminars, we have them work on focused research problems. In the mid-term and
               final assignments too, the students design, implement and report on their own
               research projects. As the course progresses, the scaffolding we give them diminishes
               until, in the final project, they are encouraged to take the lead as the principal
               researchers. The confidence and independence the students gain from this allow us to
               embed DH more firmly within the general humanities curriculum at SUTD. The faculty
               who run most of the humanities electives that students take subsequently as part of
               the DH minor are not DH practitioners by training. The DH component of these
               humanities courses comprises projects that students undertake with little technical
               supervision. So, it is important that the students develop, early on, the skills to
               carry out such research projects independently. 
            Early exposure to the difficulties of devising and executing research projects also
               helps us dispel a fairly common presumption our STEM-minded students have that DH
               will be easy for them. We have found that some of the introductory DH literature can
               reinforce this student bias by overly focusing on the role of play, tinkering, and
               screwing around . This is not to say that this kind of
               approach is not valuable. On the contrary, all humanities scholars can vouch for the
               importance of casual browsing and serendipitous discoveries. It is simply that, as a
               form of pedagogy, an emphasis on screwing around is probably more effective in
               a classroom of humanists who may be intimidated by computational methods. As far as
               possible, we have our students think more carefully about what Andrew Goldstone  criticizes as rationalizations of inconclusive arguments as exploration, play, or productive
                  failure. As such, we try to have our students focus their research
               projects on clear objectives relevant and of interest to scholars in humanities
               disciplines. Rather than downplaying the importance of concrete disciplinary
               arguments in their projects, we allow our students to learn from and appreciate the
                  ugly feelings
                that arise in attempting to reach this goal. 
            The reason why this goal is difficult is that, as Helen Small has recently pointed
               out, drawing upon the work of Gayatri Spivak , the
               qualities by which the humanities claim distinctive
               purpose often tend to be sharply different from the epistemology that practitioners
               of science and technology are used to. Small points out that the humanities value
                  qualitative above quantitative reasoning, interpretative above positivistic thinking, and historical analysis as much as synchronic structural analysis.
               The humanities, she says, distrust proceduralism and lay
               special emphasis on the role of the perceiver in ascertaining
                  even the most philosophically secure of knowledge claims.
                As a corollary, it is an individualized response to
               cultural objects that the humanities value, rather than the lowest common
               denominator, or statistically averaged, responses .
            Centering the DH minor program on research projects is not without challenges. Our
               students take elective courses mainly (though not exclusively) with non-DH
               specialists and often tend to have better computational skills than their
               instructors. This is overall a good thing since students can organically bring into
               the classroom what they have learned from their degree programs. This leads to a more
               equitable exchange of ideas between students and instructors in devising projects. As
               such, the results are often more ambitious and innovative than if the students were
               to carry out a project determined by their instructor. There is a danger, however,
               that this teacher-student collaboration can unintentionally turn into a form of
               compartmentalization , in which the student
               simply acts as a programmer and the teacher formulates the humanities side of the
               project. Instructors must remain vigilant that the students give as much time and
               attention to the humanities question they are investigating as they do to the
               computational methods they are using. There also can be an additional problem in that
               the instructors do not always feel comfortable grading a project that employs methods
               they do not fully understand. As far as possible, we try to mitigate this by having
               DH specialist faculty available to mentor students and instructors in all phases of
               their projects.
            In carrying out research projects in their elective courses, students also face
               difficulties designing a feasible project in the month or so they have to complete
               them. Sometimes students have unrealistic expectations of what they can accomplish
               and are unable to finish their work. For instance, they often have to spend a lot of
               time at the beginning of their projects engaging in corpus-building due to the lack
               of readily available corpora in their areas of interest, which are very diverse —
               having ranged in recent terms from Southeast Asian science fiction to the philosophy
               of Heidegger. Sometimes we can mitigate these challenges with better guidance from
               their instructor and DH specialist mentor. In other cases, we encourage students to
               design prototypes instead or create proofs of concept. In addition, we are currently
               experimenting with offering students the opportunity to continue and build upon the
               projects that their peers started in previous iterations of the elective courses.
               However, we have found that many students are not as interested in doing this as they
               like to create something new and feel a sense of personal ownership over their
               work.
         

            4. Global and Local Digital Humanities
            The lack of datasets and specialized DH tools for many of our Asia-focused humanities
               electives is part of the more general challenge we face in designing a DH curriculum
               for a Singaporean and Asian regional context. Our thoughts about this challenge
                  were initially inspired by Gimena del Rio Riande’s writings on local and global
                  DH, particularly . And yet we also
               consider this to be one of the most meaningful opportunities in building our DH
               program. DH as a field is fairly new to Singaporean academia  — our minor is currently the only one on the island —
               and our program is still finding an accent that recognizes both local specificity and global coherence in DH
               . This SUTD-specific DH approach will ideally come to
               reflect our culturally diverse and multilingual student body. A typical classroom at
               SUTD will consist of around 75% Singaporean students who speak English and Chinese,
               Malay, Tamil, or other languages as their mother tongue, and around 25% international
               students, mainly from China, India, Korea, and Southeast Asia. In making our DH
               curriculum more locally specific, however, we must also work with English as the
               mandatory medium of instruction in Singaporean universities. 
            Finding relevant English-language material can be particularly difficult as many
               English-language DH textbooks and tutorials reflect the Eurocentric research
               interests of their authors and intended audiences. As such, it can be hard to
               convince our students that DH’s potential is much broader than the American and
               British literary canon. This is another reason why we rely much less on
                  standard DH textbooks and increasingly have our students read research
               articles that align more with their cultural interests and those of our general
               humanities curriculum. This can often mean assigning our students regional readings
               that do not specifically identify as DH research but may be in fields such as data
               science. Students thus learn to recognize and appreciate regional DH work beyond the
               purview of U.S. and European academia. For example, in a course taught by one of us
               (A.G.) on classical South and Southeast Asian literature and art, DH students were
               introduced to Osaka University’s BUDA.ART project, a collaboration between data
               scientists and art historians analyzing archives of Buddha statue images . This work does not identify as DH, but it serves as a
               starting point for DH students on the course to create and analyze their own 3D
               models of museum artifacts.
            While our common class readings must be in English, it is sometimes possible to
               provide non-English course material along with an English translation, particularly
               in the elective courses. We are also developing our own datasets of Singaporean
               cultural material, such as political speeches, that we can use for class tutorials
               instead of American and European datasets. This will be a long-term task since most
               material in Singapore’s national archives and libraries is not digitized in an easily
               usable form. In their assignments and class projects, we encourage our students to
               explore the vast amount of non-English DH scholarship in Asia, particularly in
               Chinese (see ), and devise projects that focus on
               topics that reflect their own interests. However, students frequently encounter
               difficulties finding machine-readable data in their research area. They also soon
               realize that many tools do not support the languages they want to analyze.
               Furthermore, when dealing with Singaporean English (Singlish), our students often
               confront the epistemic normativity  of tools
               trained only on American or British English. Faced with these obstacles, we challenge
               our students to build upon the available tools so that they can deal with the local
               specificity of their projects. Previously, for instance, we have had students use
               spaCy to train a sentiment classifier on Singlish to analyze tweets and online
               reviews. However, this kind of building can be difficult in a small classroom project
               as it tends to be very time-consuming, and the results are not always readily
               presentable.
            We face a pedagogical challenge, then, that is deeper than simply increasing the
               diversity of representation in our class materials. It is not enough for us to
               correct the perceived exclusions of DH by adapting current DH practices so
               that they can encompass local cultures. There is a danger that we will simply
               reproduce U.S. and European DH in a Singaporean context and therefore perpetuate a
               Eurocentric orientation that has excluded many of the world’s cultures from the field
               in the first place . This is particularly
               problematic for our research project-based curriculum, where students have sometimes
               uncritically modeled their Singapore and Asia-focused projects on the topics of
               American and European DH work on the assumption that these projects represent a
               universal ideal. In this regard, our students would benefit from greater exposure to
               critical and postcolonial theory, though we need to be mindful that we do not simply
               reorientate ourselves towards the theoretical preoccupations of the Global North. In
               addition, further deepening our engagement with the computational cultural work going
               on in the region would help expose our students to a productively different set of
               preoccupations and interests. 
            Finding our scholarly accent as a Singaporean DH program will involve balancing
               between connecting with global DH currents and engaging with more local and regional
               DH work (that may or may not fall within the big tent of globally defined DH).
               An important step will be broadening the scope of global DH by allowing for greater
               diversity in how our students engage with the field. A critical task will be for
               students and faculty to collaborate to create new datasets and build and modify tools
               to accommodate the wide variety of cultural interests in the department and student
               body. At the same time, our program needs to be more actively engaged in shaping a
               truly de-centered, global DH. There are several steps we plan to immediately take to
               do this. First, we can reach out to other universities in Southeast Asia and beyond
               to foster regional teaching and research collaborations. Second, we can establish
               translation groups among faculty and students to translate DH research in regional
               languages for use in our courses. Third, we can compile annotated bibliographies of
               regional DH work and write English-language tutorials and reviews for regional tools
               and projects that can serve as a resource for ideas in our elective courses and for
               the global DH community. 
         

            5. Conclusion
            SUTD’s DH program represents a new, experimental chapter in DH pedagogy. From the
               perspective of American and European DH, the challenges we face in establishing an
               independent DH curriculum outside of a traditional humanities program and within a
               STEM-focused Asian university are certainly unusual. But as DH becomes more global,
               the various types of institutional and cultural settings for DH as a field will
               continue to diversify. We have argued here that this diversity will and must raise
               important questions for DH as a local and global field. This will involve the
               challenge and opportunity to rethink both what DH is and how we do it independent of
               its classroom origins as a parergon to traditional humanities disciplines. Our
               approach at SUTD is only one of many possibilities, and we hope that this article is
               a starting point for further discussions about how we can make DH pedagogy more
               inclusive, particularly within Asian regional and STEM-orientated contexts.
         

            Acknowledgements
            We thank Lim Sun Sun (SUTD) for helpful feedback on an early draft of this
               article.
         
