Title:  Our Time Is Now (It’s Always Been Our Time)
Volume:  016
Issue:  3
Date:  22 July 2022
Abstract:  
            In this reflection, I discuss my path into digital humanities scholarship through
               Black studies. I share how I became involved in digital humanities in the 2000s as a
               graduate student who found that it offered answers to methodological problems I was
               encountering in my research. Then, I examine how early career colleagues and I banded
               together to create a space for Black studies and other ethnic studies fields within
               digital humanities in the early 2010s. Finally, I propose that addressing race — and
               its relationship to gender, sexuality, nation, disability, and colonialism, among
               others — is a matter of scholarly integrity that must be put at the center of digital
               humanities inquiry today.
         
Full Body Text: 

            
            I came to digital humanities through Black Studies, looking for answers to a question
               — and found more questions. But the answer was always clear: we are the ones we’ve
               been waiting for to create the space for digital humanities to more fully realize the
               promise of the democratization of knowledge and to improve representation of
               minoritized communities in the digital cultural record. 
            In the late 2000s, beginning my dissertation on what W.E.B. Du Bois called the global color line, I struggled with the limits of written
               text as I tried to articulate flows of knowledge between social movements influenced
               by Black radicalism. Paper seemed ill-equipped to contain what was coming to life as
               a vibrant, multidirectional exchange around the world. Every attempt to pin it down
               seemed a pale (pun intended) representation of beautiful complexity that lived in
               institutional and community archives. 
            One day, everything changed. Doing research in the Huey Newton Papers at Stanford
               University, I came across subscriber rolls of The Black
                  Panther newspaper, a globally circulated periodical from the Black Panther
               Party. While many countries represented on the rolls were unremarkable given the
               history of Black internationalism (Cuba, the USSR, Algeria), others were surprising
               (Norway, Denmark, Poland). Perhaps, if I could put this data on a map, I’d have a
               heuristic to think through ideas I struggled to commit to paper. A digital humanist
               was born. 
            I didn’t know this was called digital humanities, and I’m not sure many who
               were working in the burgeoning field knew that either. I am still not sure
                  whether digital humanities is a field, sub-field, or
                     methodological toolkit. Given the significant amount of ink spent on
                  this debate, I’m not sure anyone else is either. Today, digital cultural mapping
                  is such an accepted digital humanities practice, that it may seem odd that its
                  status was ever in question. While digital humanities has well-documented,
               if contested, roots in areas like humanities computing and computer and writing, I
               found digital humanities — and digital humanities found me — in its early years, not
               long after the term digital humanities had been introduced through publication
               of The Blackwell Companion to Digital Humanities in
                  2004. In What Is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in English
                  Departments? ,
                  Matthew Kirschenbaum recounts the emergence of the term digital humanities,
                  linking it to conversations between volume editors and the marketing department at
                  Blackwell.
            
            Becoming part of a conversation in its nascent moments, where the terms of the engagement
               were being hashed out in the early 2010s — and, unusually for academic discourse,
               hashed out through Twitter hashtags — was empowering and discouraging in equal
               measure, particularly when one comes to it as I did: as an answer to methodological
               problems I encountered in Black Studies. I had not come to digital humanities through
               the same routes of other digital humanists of my generation, many of whom were
               graduate students at universities with senior digital humanities scholars, but by
                  accident. In retrospect, my graduate fellowship at the Center for New Design
                  in Learning and Technology (CNDLS) at Georgetown University in the mid-2000s was
                  focused on digital humanities pedagogy, but we didn’t call it that. I would later
                  argue in New Digital Worlds: Postcolonial Digital Humanities
                     in Theory, Praxis, and Pedagogy (Northwestern UP: 2018) that the work
                  of my dissertation advisor Deepika Bahri at Emory University on Postcolonial
                  Studies @ Emory in the 1990s was one of the first postcolonial digital humanities
                  projects, though she didn’t call it that either.  Not having a pedigree
               linking me to the emerging community of digital humanists was simultaneously
               liberating and precarious. I was conscious — and anxious — that I didn’t have anyone
               in the senior ranks to vouch for me, I would be remiss to not note that the
                  person who did vouch for me was one of my peers: Alex
                  Gil, who was well known to this world and willing to put his burgeoning reputation
                  on the line to raise up my voice. In doing so, he provided my first introduction
                  to the ways we can build lateral relationships that challenge established
                  hierarchies of power in the academy, which is now central to my work.  but
               I also had the freedom to raise concerns, at times pugnaciously, about where
               discussions of race fit into digital humanities. During those early conversations on
               Twitter in the early 2010s, which accelerated the formation of digital humanities, I
               quickly realized that while two senior scholars — Amy Earhart and Tara
                  McPherson At the time, in new media studies and related fields, there were
                  many other brilliant voices, particularly women of color like Radhika Gajjala,
                  Lisa Nakamura, and Anna Everett, whose work gave us foundations to build on for
                  digital humanities.  — were asking trenchant questions about race, it really wasn’t a topic that many white digital humanists wanted to touch. And, to be
               blunt, entering that conversation — particularly as a woman of color — was
               terrifying.
            Mercifully, I was not alone. While Twitter was a point of entry into the fray of
               digital humanities, it was also where I began to find my people — other graduate
               students of color, as well as senior allies and those in adjacent fields like new
               media studies, who’d found their way to digital humanities and shared my concerns
               about the ways that digital humanities elided questions of race and
                  colonialism. The lengthy acknowledgments in New Digital
                     Worlds speak to the rich community of people who were part of this work
                  in the late 2000s and the 2010s and are available at https://muse.jhu.edu/chapter/2230419.  We set about finding new
               friends and building new worlds within digital humanities, hoping that the next
               generation of graduate students working in Black Studies and other ethnic studies
               fields could find a place without having to fight to make a place. Starting in the
               early 2010s, though this work remains ongoing, we created projects, organizations,
               journals, and scholarship to clear space for digital humanities in many areas of
               study — Black Studies, Caribbean studies, Latinx studies, Native and Indigenous
               studies, postcolonial studies. Imagine a world before we had the AADHum
                  (African American History, Culture and Digital Humanities Initiative at the
                  University of Maryland – College Park), the Black Press Research Collective,
                     archipelagos, The Caribbean Digital, the Center for Black Digital
                  Research at Penn State, Reviews in Digital
                  Humanities, Global Outlook::Digital Humanities, Digital Native American
                  and Indigenous Studies, USLDH, the Digital Ethnic Futures Consortium, DISCO, and
                  the many other projects and initiatives we have built. We lived it. 
            
            But there were battles every step of the way. There are stories. Just don’t ask
                  about what happened in Poland. While it’s no longer controversial to
               address race in digital humanities in the early 2020s, these were tough conversations
               in the late 2000s and early 2010s. As was explained to me in my early days in digital
               humanities, the most visible, senior scholars in digital humanities had been toiling
               in obscurity, their voices unheard, their scholarship misunderstood for so long. And
               their work was finally being recognized — digital humanities had stepped onto the red
               carpet in our professional organizations, and it was their time. It was
               not our time. 
            I have never been swayed by arguments about whose time it is because power — in
               this case, the power of academic discourse — operates precisely by dividing and
               conquering competing claims. It forces a fictive sense of prioritization, the sense
               that only one pressing need or concern can be at the forefront of conversation.
               Instead, the question we should be examining is how addressing the operations of race
               — and its relationship to gender, sexuality, nation, disability, and colonialism,
               among others — is nothing less than a matter of scholarly integrity and must be put
               at the center of digital humanities inquiry. 
            We aren’t there yet — but could be. And now is the time. It’s always
               been our time. 
         
