Title:  Varieties of Digital
               Literary Studies: Micro, Macro, Meso
Volume:  016
Issue:  2
Date:  02 May 2022
Abstract:  
            
            Digital literary studies constitutes a broad church.  However, the field tends to
               divide into, at one pole, quantitative, macro-level studies of historical literary
               texts and, at the other pole, close-readings of individual born-digital literary
               works, typically hyper-avant-garde in conception.  There is, in practice, little
               interplay between the two groupings.  This article sketches a proposed meso space
               in between the two extant levels.  Drawing on methods from book history, literary
               sociology, cultural studies, and digital media theory, this mid-level approach examines digital technology’s role in recasting the institutions of contemporary mainstream literature:
               the impact of powerful new digital intermediaries; the blurring of
               author/reader/reviewer roles; and the continued existence of print artefacts within
               online environments.
         
Full Body Text: 

         

         
            
               If literary studies is to survive the twenty-first century, it
                  will need to reinvigorate its ambitions and methods by forging closer links to the
                  study of other media rather than clinging to ever more tenuous claims to
                  exceptional status.
               
            
         

         By the first decade of the new millennium, evidence was mounting that the ‘high theory’
            of ideology critique had played itself out as literary studies’ governing paradigm 
               
            . 
               Refer, it is possible that the very productive critical habits embodied in what Paul
               Ricoeur memorably called the ‘hermeneutics of suspicion’ — widespread critical
               habits indeed, perhaps by now nearly synonymous with criticism itself — may have had
               an unintentionally stultifying side effect: they may have made it less rather than
               more possible to unpack the local, contingent relations between any given piece of
               knowledge and its narrative/epistemological entailments for the seeker, knower, or
               teller . See also: There is a dawning sense among literary and
                  cultural critics that a shape of thought has grown old ; and There
               is a growing sense that our intellectual life is out of kilter, that scholars in the
               humanities are far more fluent in nay-saying than in yay-saying, and that eternal
               vigilance, unchecked by alternatives, can easily lapse into the complacent cadences
               of autopilot argument.…At a certain point, critique does not get us any further
               . The energy and sense of liberation that had propelled
            successive waves of structuralist, post-structuralist, Marxist, feminist, postcolonial,
            new-historicist, and queer theory in the academy seemed to have reached a point of
            diminishing returns. Once revolutionary modes of analysis had ossified into rote
            posturing, with talk of radical revisioning oddly transmuted into received wisdom. This
            sense of a discipline in stasis was not only intellectual but also institutional —
            existential even. Universities’ political paymasters and research-funding bodies have
            increasingly insisted that disciplines demonstrate their vocational utility and
            real-world ‘impact’. Undergraduates, voting with their feet, indirectly registered the
            same message via declining enrolments, while graduate students — surveying a parlous
            academic job market — opted for other, presumably safer, careers  . James F. English
               notes, in his statistically-ballasted study The Global Future of English Studies
               (2012), that the number of US undergraduate English majors was relatively stable
               during the first decade of the twenty-first century, but that English’s share of all
               bachelor’s degrees awarded fell in response to competition from, inter alia,
               communications and media studies courses . This already precarious
            disciplinary status quo was then massively destabilized by the COVID-19 pandemic’s shock
            to higher-education systems worldwide as revenue from international students collapsed
            in the face of travel bans and local lockdowns. In a discipline long prone to gloomy
            prognostications about its future, English scholars of even a more optimistic cast had
            to admit, by 2020, that the doomsayers really did have a point (Endgame, 2020).
         Against this post-millennial background, engagement with the digital world seemed a
            logical pivot for the humanities, given information and communication technologies’
            wholesale transformation of all aspects of contemporary western life since mainstreaming
            of the internet in the early 1990s. For literary studies in particular though, this turn
            to the digital came freighted with heavy baggage. Mid-1990s ‘death of the book’
            discourse had pitted an all-conquering ‘electronic literature’ (eLit) against an
            ostensibly obsolete print medium, and had left many literary humanists with an active
            distaste for digital triumphalism . Strategic
            errors made by digital boosters in positing the digital as implacable rival and
            inevitable successor to print had served to polarize debate and made it harder to adopt
            middle-ground positions. As it transpired, eBooks and the printed codex negotiated
            an uneasy marketplace modus vivendi, but traditional literary scholars and former eLit
            enthusiasts were slower to do likewise. The rise of Digital Humanities (DH) discourse
            from around 2005 threatened a repeat of 1990s hostilities, this time with adherents of
            quantitative ‘distant reading’ at loggerheads with advocates of traditional hermeneutic
            close reading, who accused their adversaries of not reading at all  .
         I have no intention here of buying into such stale, polarized, and unproductive debates.
            Indeed, superseding them is the starting point for the present discussion. In spite
            of the self-presentation of both eLit advocates and DH-ers as radical agents of change,
            their reconfigurations of the literary studies discipline have, if anything, not gone
            far enough. Both approaches remain essentially text-centric, differing principally on
            whether a niche group of very recent texts is painstakingly interpreted, or a large
            corpus of often obscure historical texts is digitally skimmed. Broader questions of how
            digital technologies might reconfigure academe’s now century-old literary studies
            project by looking beyond the text to an encompassing socio-economic reality remain
            largely unasked. 
            At the outset of the present discussion, some definitional clarification seems in order. In talking
            about ‘digital literary studies’ I denote principally literary works, deploying whatever
            medium, created since the late decades of the twentieth century. These have been
            produced, circulated, and consumed in the context of a digital literary sphere (however
            much the parameters of that sphere have expanded and its agents have multiplied over
            subsequent decades). But, by extension, much of the following argument about practising
            a ‘literary media studies’ is also relevant to analyzing literature produced in
            earlier, pre-digital eras, with due allowance being made for the varying medial
            environments and socio-economic contexts of specific periods and geographical locations.
            It is a broadly sociological, media-aware disposition I am advocating, not one with
            strict chronological cut-off points.
         Currently, our intellectual schemas for making sense of the digital paradigm’s epochal
            impact on literary culture remain inadequate. Digital literary studies continues to miss
            the larger significance of digital technologies for contemporary literary culture
            because it takes either too micro or too macro a perspective. On one hand,
            studies of eLit have existed since the late 1980s, and focus on close-reading individual
            born-digital texts, usually of an avant-garde nature with at best coterie audiences. On
            the other hand, the last decade and a half has seen the efflorescence of DH approaches
            which machine-read extensive historical literary corpora to gauge large-scale
            statistical trends in genre, authorship, and nationality. However much their
            chronological frame differs, the guiding methodology remains at some level hermeneutic.
            Thus, DH scholar Alan Liu may be correct in his claim that the contrast between the
            practices of close reading and the digital humanities is so stark that it is changing
            the very nature of the ground being fought over: the text . Yet, text-centrism of
            either stripe still mostly disregards the material world beyond the text itself: the
            agents of production, circulation, and consumption; the commercial context of the book
            trade; and the legal, political, and cultural policy frameworks that impinge upon or
            facilitate the flow of texts. There is some irony in Liu’s over-emphasis on DH’s
               challenge to traditional literary studies’ ideas of the text, as his chapter
               elsewhere urges DH to widen its critical aperture by engaging in specifically
               critical examination of power, finance, and other governance protocols of the world
               as practiced in new media studies and media archaeology . Compare Matthew
               Kirschenbaum and Sarah Werner’s appreciation that economic, political, and
               institutional issues necessitate broadening the scholarly gaze beyond the text
               itself: This, then, in broad strokes, is the media ecology in which contemporary
               authorship, book publishing, and reading now finds itself, a text-centric world that
               is categorized by new forms of short-form interaction, new economic models, new
               metrics of visibility and reputation, and new forms of viral dissemination, as well
               as a polyglot riot of devices, platforms, systems, and services, most of them held
               tenuously together in something known vaporously only as 'the cloud' . While often exemplary research about this intermediate space does exist
            (see below), it is currently scant and scattered, too often existing as a corrective to
            the main currents of eLit or DH research rather than, as should be the case,
            constituting the starting point for an overarching reorientation of the literature-media
            interface around sociological concerns. We are thus left, in an era of rapid book-world
            changes, with a troublingly partial understanding of how digital technologies are
            transforming the very institutionality of contemporary,
            mainstream literature. 
         To resolve this impasse, we urgently require what John Frow, discussing the future of
            literary sociology, terms a ‘mid-level concept’ (2013, [2010]) — namely, an analytical
            framework straddling, on one hand, innumerable individual literary texts and, on the
            other, the unwieldy abstraction that is ‘literature’ . Literary studies has
            attempted, over its roughly century-long institutional history, to fill this ‘mid-level’
            space with various organizing schema: periodization; genre categories; and diachronic
            accounts of national literatures . But these too remain
            near-exclusively text-centric. The why and how of literature’s arrival on the scholar’s desk for painstaking close-reading
            are factored out of analysis, and the text’s relationship to an abstractly configured
            form of identity politics has, in recent decades, dominated proceedings. The still
            too-often hazy technological and institutional apparatus that moves a given book into
            the scholarly ambit and makes it available for close-reading I here dub the ‘meso’
            space. 
         I borrow this terminology from the field of economics where scholars since the 1980s
            have also proposed a mid-level category to bridge that discipline’s traditional
            bifurcation into microeconomic and macroeconomic frames . The aim of such renegade economists is to capture those political-economic forces
            governing the space between individual economic actors and the broader structures within
            which they operate. Largely in parallel, a conceptually cognate ‘new institutionalism’
            has, since the early 1990s, also emerged within the discipline of sociology 
            . It has a similar interest in
            ‘mid-level’ or ‘meso’ intermediaries that shape cultural phenomenon (for example,
            commercial organizations, public-sector entities, regulatory frameworks, social
            networks) and which exhibit a strong degree of self-perpetuating autonomy. Such an
            institutional focus helps integrate the abstract totalities of ‘society’ or ‘the
            economy’ at one extreme and the empirical specificity of atomized individual choices at
            the other. The new institutionalism…comprises a rejection of rational-actor
               models, an interest in institutions as independent variables, a turn towards
               cognitive and cultural explanations, and an interest in properties of supraindividual
               units of analysis that cannot be reduced to aggregations or direct consequences of
               individuals' attributes or motives . Sociologists, they
               note, find institutions everywhere (9). The approach also evinces a
            refreshing self-consciousness that the level of reference chosen for analysis profoundly
            influences the research questions formulated, the types of evidence sought, and the
            resulting conclusions . 
         By analogy, in the literary studies context, the various institutions of authorship,
            publishing, retailing, reviewing, and readership provide compelling ‘mid-level’
            analytical frames for compiling thick descriptions of precisely how digital media are fundamentally reconceptualizing literary culture.
               Not coincidentally, the founder of new institutionalism, Walter W. Powell, was
               also co-author of the first sociological attempt to map contemporary US
               book publishing, Books: The Culture and Commerce of Publishing (1982). Patricia H.
               Thornton and William Ocasio have likewise undertaken research into the
               higher-education publishing industry (1995, 1999, 2001, 2004). The
            attractive relativism of the meso approach avoids, in this context, both the sweeping
            technological determinism of medium theory and the futile insularity of individual
            case-studies unmoored to larger theoretical schema. Vitally, the new institutionalism
            illuminates that literary entities are not mere externalities of an aesthetically
            autonomous literary culture; they are constitutive of it in that they profoundly
            influence what achieves recognition as ‘literature’. Literary
            studies’ long preoccupation with the linguistic minutiae of the textual artefact thus
            needs supplementing with sociological awareness of the material world beyond the text (in the word’s dual technological and economic senses), without pitting the two perspectives against each other or subordinating one to serve as mere illustration of the
            other’s explanatory paradigms. The way out of literary studies’ currently troubled,
            defensive pass as outlined at this article’s opening is thus multi-step: firstly, to
            reconceive the discipline in cultural-sociological terms. Secondly, to investigate how
            the current wave of accelerating digitization is changing that sociological context. And
            thirdly – as I sketch in this article’s final section – to use the opportunity provided
            by these contextual changes to rethink literary studies in far-reaching ways: its
            objects of study; institutional settings; analytic methods; potential publics; and
            pedagogical practices.

         Digital literary studies: The current state of play
         Before diving into such subtopics and appropriate methodologies for exploring the
            digital literary studies meso space, it is instructive first to provide a fuller picture
            of the current state of play regarding both eLit and DH. Specifically, it is
            enlightening to examine how these fields may be currently shifting or even, tentatively,
            converging. DH has emerged as a prime area of research renewal and public interest in
            the humanities in the wake of high theory  
                 . The field builds upon mid-twentieth-century work in
            stand-alone humanities computing, but reorients it for the networked and Web 2.0
            environments comprising the core of contemporary media and communications. It makes
            explicit the humanities’ continuing relevance for twenty-first-century culture and
            society, rejecting inherited notions of a qualitatively-oriented humanities as
            epistemologically opposed to quantitative computing technologies .
            Refreshingly, DH also moves humanistic methods away from critique as the end-point of
            analysis towards the building of research tools usable by others, including the general
            public  .
         Literary studies has long been at the forefront of DH initiatives, with digital literary
            studies representing one of its most fertile subfields  . Partly this is due to literary studies’ long history with computing
            technologies dating back to the 1960s mainframe era (bibliographic textual editing,
            concordances, stylometry, and author attribution). Partly also it is because literary
            studies is among the most textual and word-based of humanities disciplines and therefore
            a natural match for logocentric computing technologies  . While digital literary studies constitutes a broad church, the dominant strand
            involves data-mining and visualizing of vast corpora of digitized print works from,
            predominantly, the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, which are used to highlight
            trends by author, date, nationality, genre, or keyword    
              .
         Largely in parallel with these developments, since the late 1980s information and
            communication technologies have disturbed literary studies’ default assumptions by
            demonstrating that the printed codex is not literature’s sole and inevitable platform.
            Scholars of eLit have investigated how network structures such as hypertext facilitate
            multilinear narratives, reconfiguring relationships between author, text, and reader, as
            well as reconceptualizing texts as mutable and evolving — -‘processural’ in Astrid
            Ensslin’s phrasing   
               . Conversely, such research has rendered newly visible the linear
            logic and particular affordances of the print medium through a
            salutary process of defamiliarization   . 
         While both digital creative works and computer-powered research tools have made their
            presence felt in contemporary literary studies, the two fields have tended to operate in
            parallel. As Martin Paul Eve differentiates, to read digital or electronic literature closely…is not the same as close reading literature, digitally . Scholars of born-digital
            works largely congregate under the banner of the international Electronic Literature
            Organization (ELO) and produce belletristic, frequently fine arts-inflected,
            close-readings of experimental digital works, almost all of which have readerships
            largely confined to the community of their creation. Whereas scholars deploying digital
            tools to perform quantitative analyses of large historical corpora tend to congregate
            variously at Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations-sponsored meets or the
            US-dominated Modern Language Association’s Digital Humanities special interest group,
            and to publish in journals such as Cultural Analytics.
               https://culturalanalytics.org/
             Leading terrestrial sites of this second, principally quantitative arm of
            digital literary studies research — such as the Stanford Literary Lab (formerly led by
            Franco Moretti) and McGill University’s .txtLAB (directed by Andrew Piper) — are mostly
            North American-based and, for reasons of US copyright, confine their research to
            pre-twentieth-century literary history   . This leaves
            DH scholars with surprisingly little to say about the structures through which contemporary creative literary works circulate. While the ELO is
            more international in its membership, with significant nodes in Scandinavia as well as
            North America, it has the opposite problem: its preferred procedure of close-reading
            highly contemporary works is plagued by hardware and software obsolescence. This results
            in a discipline forever trying to shore up its scholarly memory . These twin challenges leave the impact of the digital realm on contemporary, mainstream literary cultures
            chronically under-examined. Making a similar point about the relative lack of
               intellectual exchange between book history and DH, Matthew Kirschenbaum writes in
                  2014, book history shades ineluctably into media history .
         
         While this sketch of the digital literary research landscape is accurate in its
            generalities, there are promising recent signs that both eLit and DH scholars are
            starting to acknowledge the missing ‘meso’ level. Richard Jean So’s Redlining Culture (2021) undertakes quantitatively-informed analysis of how
            ‘minority authors’ have been consistently marginalized in the historical workings of the
            ‘U.S. literary field’ . But he nevertheless introduces his book with an overview
            of accelerating conglomeration among US trade publishers over the second half of the
            twentieth century. It is a welcome DH avowal that the economics of American literature
               — production, reception, and recognition emphatically matter . By looking
            outside of the text and observing how digitization transformed the entire book 
            production and retailing industries via word-processing software and point-of-sale
            stock-monitoring technologies, So makes a vital connection between the material and
            institutional contexts in which literature was produced and the digital programs with
            which we might parse it. The digital ceases to be a neutral tool which we apply to texts ex post facto, but a cultural force with which book
            industry participants were wrestling and which authors were sometimes explicitly
            addressing in their work .
         A further green shoot appearing in the previously barren meso space is the recent
            explicit rebadging of eLit scholarship as a form of DH. There are precedents for
            such a maneuver, such as Scott Rettberg’s Electronic Literature as Digital Humanities
            chapter for Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens and John Unsworth’s discipline-defining
               anthology A New Companion to Digital Humanities (2016).
            Nevertheless, in practice, most ELO adherents have tended to hold themselves somewhat
            aloof from post-millennial DH developments, pointedly insisting that their own academic
            project dates from at least the 1980s. But digital literary studies modes of affiliation
            are perceptibly now in flux. Dene Grigar, former President of the ELO, co-edited the
            volume Electronic Literature as Digital Humanities: Contexts, Forms,
               and Practices (2021) which proclaims unambiguously that electronic literature
               is digital humanities . Her echo of the title of
            Rettberg’s article — one of the inspirations for this book — underlines eLit’s belated
            surrender to the rhetorical and institutional pull of the more modish label . Taken
            together, works by the likes of So, Rettberg, and Grigar suggest that previously
            operative binaries between eLit and DH (contemporary versus historical; qualitative
            versus quantitative; creative versus analytical) are losing their valency. Their
            synthesis prompts the enticing question of how much the contours of the digital literary
            landscape might shift further still.

         Conspicuous by their absence: Technological, institutional, economic, and social
            contexts
         The lingering lacuna in current conceptualizations of digital literary studies becomes
            especially apparent when we zoom out to consider the technological, institutional,
            economic, and social changes underway since the early 1990s adoption of the Internet
            across western societies. Indisputably, the landscape of contemporary mainstream
            literature has been transformed. The gatekeeping authority of trade publishers has been
            partially usurped by self-publishing and crowd-funded publishing initiatives via which
            anyone may anoint themselves an author. Circulation of literary works and venues for
            book discussion have been similarly transformed by the rise of born-digital periodicals,
            internet retailing, social-media book promotion, and online writers’ festivals. Thirdly,
            consumption of literary culture has been revolutionized by traditionally passive,
            silent, and anonymous readers using interactive technologies to network in online book
            clubs and to recast themselves as amateur literary critics via online book review and
            ratings platforms. Each wave of social-media has been co-opted in turn by a subsector of
            bookish users to facilitate digital book talk, whether via litblogs, bookTube,
            bookstagram or, most recently, bookTok. Reader becomes reviewer and, more
            problematically, de facto publicist and content producer. This last point underlines
            digital technology’s greatest disruption of codex-based literary culture: how the
            previously distinct roles of producer, disseminator, and consumer have become impossibly
            blurred. As various functions in book historian Robert Darnton’s famous ‘Communications
            Circuit’ are elided, single agents take on multiple, combined roles .
         These changes have not, of course, passed un-noticed by academe. Scholars drawn from
            book history and media archaeology (Matthew Kirschenbaum, Lisa Gitelman, Martin Paul
            Eve), communication and cultural studies (Ted Striphas) and cultural sociology (J. B.
            Thompson, Laura J. Miller) have analyzed the significance of the contemporary book
            world’s pervasive digitization for their respective disciplines. While several of these
            scholars have backgrounds in literary studies, they nevertheless keep in view the
            material specificity of the book object, so often rendered a transparent and passive
            substrate by traditional formalist close-reading approaches. Because of this
            extra-textual awareness, their works explore the effect of digitization on book culture
            without the ominous 1990s sense of the entire book format being under threat. For those
            scholars in the group trained in sociology or communication on the other hand, the
            pre-eminence of the book as a media format was never an article of faith. Thus, the rise
            of other media formats signals not ignominious demotion of the book but merely the
            reorganization of an always-evolving informational ecosystem. The book – let alone the
            text — is never considered self-sufficient; it is, rather, the locus at which multiple
            commercial, regulatory, social, and cultural forces converge. To understand the book in
            the current era is inevitably to be redirected outwards to these larger contexts. It is
            this invaluable sociological perspective that such scholars bring to contemporary
            understandings of the book.
         Work undertaken to date in this meso zone should be applauded for its willingness to
            examine digital technologies’ impact on the contemporary literary world. It also, at
            points, shades into the more DH arm of digital literary studies (for example in So’s
            recent book or the work of Martin Paul Eve). But here again the conception of the
            digital’s role appears to be primarily quantitative: harnessing the enumerative power
            and analytical scale of digital data to ask new ask questions about how Bourdieu’s
            literary field functions. Proponents of more textually-oriented, quantitative ‘cultural
            analytics’ approaches, such as Piper, are careful to pre-empt objections from those
            schooled in literary critique by stating that distant reading is not (pace Moretti) a substitute for close-reading, but rather a filtering tool and
            complement for detailed textual analysis . In the view of such self-styled
            academic bridge-builders, the two methods represent ‘commensurable’ approaches  . Yet such work has been less ready to ask qualitative questions of the digital paradigm itself,
            specifically, how the rise of digitization affects the inter-relationship of traditional
            agents in the literary field. As a result, the digital tends to feature as
            transcendent — a neutral, external tool invoked to aid analysis but not itself
            complicit in the economic or sociological framing of the object of study. Where the
            textual corpus chosen is largely historical, this factoring out of the digital’s agentic
            role may be defensible, though it occurs also in contemporary-focused work. For example,
            Laura B. McGrath, in a study of the late twentieth- and twenty-first-century book world,
            has illuminatingly deployed quantitative DH methods to reveal how US publishers
            overwhelmingly use ‘comparable title’ data from white authors when estimating likely
            sales for manuscripts under consideration, to the detriment of writers of color .
            Yet, her analysis is more an ex-post-facto study of the top 500 titles used for
            ‘comping’ by the current book industry than of the impact of rapid and ongoing
            datafication on the industry itself. The problem, she implies, lies more with the
            composition of the specific corpus of comp titles chosen than
            with the act of ‘data-driven acquisitions’ per se . Accordingly, the digital still
            functions primarily as a neutral aid for scholarly examination, rather than featuring as
            itself the object of critical study.
         Despite much evidence of vibrancy in the digital literary studies space, mainstream
            literary studies has been predominantly silent about the impact of the digital within
            the contemporary book world. James F. English has been a rare voice advocating for
               building bridges between literary studies and cultural sociology, if not cultural
               studies per se in its English and Australian formulations (2010): We have succeeded
               all too well in containing the threat posed by cultural studies, missing many
               opportunities to widen the [literary studies] discipline’s aperture to new literary
               objects, new pedagogical strategies, and new, less tried-and-true forms of
               interdisciplinarity — in particular, those that would open conversations with the
               dreaded quantitative social sciences and encourage our use of empirical methods
               . His book elsewhere distinguishes between US-style cultural studies,
               which is more akin to identity politics mixed with area studies, as contrasted with
               the transmedial forms of cultural critique associated with British cultural studies
               pioneers such as Richard Hoggart and Raymond Williams (184, n.59). US scholar
            Jim Collins (a Notre Dame professor with, significantly, joint appointments in Film and
            Television as well as English) memorably pinpoints this omission. In a 2013 interview,
            Collins spoke of his frustration at not being about to pose the kinds of production- and
            consumption-oriented questions in his English classes that he habitually would in his
            media studies courses: 
         …you should look beyond the classroom if you are talking about contemporary
            fiction. The last couple of times I did the postmodern fiction class…I realized that
            Amazon and adaptations and Oprah Winfrey – they were like the pink elephant in the room,
            that everybody knew was there, but nobody really knew how to talk about, and so we just stayed with the text and talked about literary style and
            individual genius and postmodern historiography and things like that. So it was that
            sense of dissatisfaction. What are we missing by not talking how literary fiction
            circulated, how it could become part of day-to-day life, for everyone, not just for the
            literary critics and my students? It seemed to me that if we wanted to really understand
            contemporary reading cultures, we had to do that as well. 
         
         To remedy this anomalous situation, Collins proposed what he dubs literary cultural
            studies . This, like cultural studies, would take issues of technological,
            institutional, economic, and social context seriously. Text and context would be held in
            dynamic relationship, posited as mutually constitutive, without superimposing the
            epistemological claims of one discipline on the other . It can
            thereby avoid the sociological absolutism that has bedeviled many previous parleys
            between the literary studies and sociology disciplines, in which literature is allotted
            the thankless task of ‘proving’ sociological precepts  . Discernible behind Collins’s remarks is du Gay et al.’s famous
            ‘Circuit of Culture’ model from their 1997 book about the Sony Walkman. In this
            widely-influential cultural studies diagram, the textual representation of the object
            remains important for elucidating meaning, but it is contextualized against a much
            broader background incorporating producer motives, audience behaviors, modes of
            social-identity facilitation, and forms of regulation. The effect is a 360-degree
            perspective on the life of a cultural object. 
         The phrase ‘literary cultural studies’ may appear, at first glance, an oxymoron.
            Cultural studies, in its British and Australian strains, grew of course out of a revolt
               against the exclusive study of a highly limited historical
            canon of English literature. To the extent that cultural studies has ever been interested in analyzing books, it is usually only those works so
            debased and disparaged in traditional literary studies as to have been rendered
            symbolically ‘unclean’: pulps; romances; horror; westerns; comics etc. What is radical
            and refreshing about Collins’s brand of ‘literary cultural studies’ is that it brings
            the sociological gaze of cultural studies to analyze afresh literary studies’ original
            object of study: literature. More than this, Collins and his ilk eschew the knee-jerk
            relativism of cultural studies orthodoxy to parse the concept of ‘literariness’ itself.
            Here considerations of aesthetic value are not ruled out of bounds at the outset but are
            instead reconfigured as sociologically brokered: by analyzing, say, the disputes of
            amateur lit-bloggers, paid book reviewers, and literary academics around a single work
            we are watching aesthetic evaluation being hammered out in real time by agents wielding
            differing degrees of economic, institutional, and social capital. 
         The direct upshot of Collins’s frustration with the prevailing bifurcation of literary
            and media studies paradigms was his path-breaking monograph Bring on
               the Books for Everybody: How Literary Culture Became Popular Culture (2010). But
            the broader project of building a ‘literary cultural studies’ or — in my preferred formulation — ‘literary media studies’ for the digital
            remains unrealized. This is the ‘meso’ level of digital literary studies alluded to in
            my title. A meso-level digital literary studies must borrow from cultural sociology’s
            new institutionalist mindset to account for the influence of contemporary technological,
            institutional, economic, legal, and social factors which intervene between individual
            texts and the totalizing abstraction of ‘Literature’. It should take the coexistence and
            interpenetration of print and digital domains as its intellectual ground and closely
            analyze the complex flows of content between them. Doing so gives us tools to
            understand why the ‘literary’ not only continues to exist in a digitally-dominated
            mediascape (contrary to 1990s predictions), but how users deploy digital media to
            cultivate specifically literary modes of self-presentation: the
            virtual Goodreads ‘bookshelf’; the artfully curated bookstagram feed; the
            dark-academia-inflected BookTok persona.

         Domains of Disciplinarity: Constructing ‘Eng. Lit.’
         How did we arrive at the point that sociological understandings lie outside mainstream
            literary studies’ order of business? The various institutional, epistemological,
            methodological, and pedagogical choices made from the late decades of the nineteenth
            century into the early decades of the twentieth century in establishing English
            literature as an academic specialism have cast long shadows. More particularly, for
            present purposes, they have inhibited the current discipline’s conceptual repertoire
            when attempting to analyze contemporary literary works. Before proposing, in this
            article’s final section, how literary studies might productively open itself up to
            contemporary digital developments, it is first necessary to trace here key contours of
            the original ‘Eng. Lit.’ project. My purpose in doing so is to examine both the legacy
            of those choices and to discern alternative paths not (yet) taken. Decisions made while
            inventing the new discipline were phenomenally successful in ensuring literary studies’
            dominance within humanities divisions during the mid to late twentieth century   
            . But, by the twenty-first century, many
            of these in-built assumptions have grown more hobbling than enabling, and demand
            re-examining to assess their continued utility.
        
            Object of study
         
         Literary studies’ first hurdle was that analyzing English literature appeared too
            irreducibly subjective a practice to qualify as a legitimate academic subject. Not even
            requiring mastery of a foreign (or, even better, dead) language, the would-be discipline
            lacked both intellectual rigor and an established canon, threatening to evaporate into
            dilettantish impressionism and a disturbingly feminine enthusing over poetry   
              . One
            strategic counter to these perceived weaknesses was to compile a catalogue of ‘great
            works’, thereby importing into the fledgling discipline theological traditions of
            scriptural collation, evaluative winnowing, and hermeneutic scrutiny.
            Early-twentieth-century formalist celebration of internal complexity and interpretive
            paradox by critics such as T.S. Eliot led to a preference for condensed literary forms,
            an intellectual debt repaid by the New Criticism’s championing of Modernist poetry
             . Literary works were routinely disassociated from
            their debasingly ‘Philistine’ material production context in the mass market so as to
            strengthen claims to high art . ‘Close reading’ protocols thus
            produced a stripped-down textual artefact of the words on the page, variously expressed
            by proponents as the concrete experiences which are poems or, still more tersely, the
               text itself  . New Criticism thus
            dismissed at a sweep authorial biography, institutional carriage, and socio-cultural
            reception as so much superfluous encrustation . Similarly, a text’s
            historical origins were systematically devalued to bolster claims to such works’
            timeless relevance  . Literary professors unremittingly
            discouraged students’ own creative efforts (at least until the burgeoning of creative
            writing programs in certain, previously marginal, institutions from the mid twentieth
            century); it was deemed presumptuous for students even to aspire to the hallowed
            category of Author. Thus the complex processes by which literary works come to be were
            effectively obscured and mystified. Longstanding critical silence about the formative
            role played by Modernist literary institutions in the invention of ‘Eng. Lit.’,
            reinforced by an overwhelming preoccupation with the literary past, served to quarantine
            the new academic construct from the very sociological forces that brought it into
            being.
            
         Institutional setting
               Where a discipline sits within universities has deep significance for the ontologies and
            epistemologies it internalizes. The structure of the late-nineteenth-century university
            in which Eng. Lit. was established had its roots in medieval curricula dominated by
            Classics, philosophy, and history. This disciplinary triumvirate had only belatedly and
            grudgingly expanded to incorporate contemporary foreign languages   . Early literary studies’ mode of isolating valued texts from their
            historical context seems borrowed from Classics and was a conscious attempt to free
            literature from its subordinate status as an offshoot of history and linguistics in the
            earlier academic formulation of philology    .
            Significantly, literary studies never put down institutional
            roots in the social sciences – coalescing during this same period – and hence missed
            those disciplines’ characteristic view of cultural phenomena as sociologically produced
            . This predisposed Eng. Lit. towards a form of Romanticist
            creator-worship — disavowed in New Critical theory but avidly reinforced in practice.
            Individual genius was responsible for bringing great works into being, with the enabling
            contributions of literary intermediaries (publishers, editors, reviewers, booksellers
            etc.) reduced to, at best, attendant midwives or, at worst, agents of textual
            ‘corruption’. The upshot was a radically dematerialized and decontextualized
            understanding of literary works that was only partially corrected by the waves of
            ideology critique that transformed literary studies from the 1960s onwards. While such
            revisionist approaches reconfigured literature as a locus of social power struggles,
            they overwhelmingly understood cultural politics as conducted at the level of textual
            representation and interpretation, rarely via material processes of production,
            circulation, or consumption.
            
        Analytic mode
         One especially deleterious legacy of English literature’s institutionalization has been
            its inability to account for readerly affect. This analytic blind-spot puts it at a
            grave disadvantage in attempting to explain a digital literary sphere everywhere powered
            by readers’ emotional investment in books. Academic literary studies’ prime goal of
            reducing (or appearing to reduce) subjectivism in interpreting literary works was
            designed to create the appearance of reproducibly ‘scientific’ knowledge. Hence the
            preference for literary techniques (poetic forms, figures of speech, narrative point of
            view etc.) that could be taught as transferrable between individual works. The first
            causality of such a drive for systematism and scientific replicability was readerly
            subjectivism (the affective fallacy), in that an idealized Reader who served to model
            preferred interpretations was substituted for actual, individual readers. The second
            casualty was authorial subjectivism (the intentional fallacy), as examining a literary
            creator’s motivation was likewise declared intellectually out of bounds . This strategy could largely hold sway in an era where authors had limited
            technological ability to publicly disseminate their artistic intentions or readers their
            profusely varied interpretations of texts (cf. ). But it is near
            impossible to maintain when authors commonly use social media channels to commune
            directly with their readerships and highly affective readerly responses permeate the
            internet  . In fact, the scale and intensity of readers’
            emotional responses to books constitute the very currency of online book culture. 
            
            
         Literary studies’ publics
               
         In the domains of object of study, institutional setting, and analytic mode, literary
            studies was attempting to invent a discipline in something of a vacuum. Yet when it came
            to the issue of potential audiences for the new discipline, Eng. Lit’s proponents faced
            the opposite problem: vernacular literary works already had too
               much of a public, namely, the general readership for books and periodicals.
            Popular readerships tended to view with suspicion these newly self-appointed academic
            ‘experts’. Worse, vernacular print cultures had long incubated their own arbiters of
            value in the form of literary reviewers, acquisition editors, and publishers’ readers —
            all of whom were equally chary of the arriviste so-called
            ‘Vigilant School’  . As a defense, literary studies designed
            itself as a consciously antiquarian project — unwilling to award contemporary works
            the laurels of greatness until they had been confirmed by time . The discipline’s immediate publics, as a direct consequence, became
            claustrophobically insular: fellow academic literary critics; their graduate students;
            and the school students their undergraduates progressed to teach in their subsequent
            careers   . An assiduously maintained
            town-and-gown distinction arose between literary academe and the contemporary book
            world, at least in so far as its intellectual engine-room was concerned. Credentialed
            graduates might disseminate New Critical principles and methods among secondary and
            continuing-education students, or even via textbook publishing, but the line of
            influence ran only one way. 
         This situation was, perhaps surprisingly, compounded by the linguistic turn in literary
            criticism from the 1960s onwards. While proponents of ideology critique championed
            intellectual movements such as Marxism, feminism, post-colonialism, and queer theory as
            injecting a necessary socio-political relevance into the study of literature, the
            abstruse vocabulary in which their ideas were couched was rarely accessible to readers
            beyond the institution’s walls. So long as literary studies remained relatively
            confident of its academic position, buoyed by high enrolments against a background of
            limited alternative humanities offerings, such disengagement from wider literary publics
            could be perpetuated. But with government funding and rhetorical support for the
            humanities now under threat across the western world, such habitual insularity appears
            suicidally short-sighted   . A literary studies
            that cannot demonstrate its relevance to contemporary publics grown accustomed to the
            rapid interactivity of digital environments and chary of being told what to think by
            self-appointed critics cannot expect to continue for long.
            
            
         Professing the discipline of literature
        
         Any discipline is as much a formative process as it is a given entity; it reveals itself
            through the habits it inculcates in students, thus naturalizing the choices of an
            earlier generation as simply 'the way things are done'. As Elaine Showalter neatly sums
            up this process of academic reproduction: we typically do[] unto others as was done
               unto us . In its earliest decades, literary studies pedagogy was dominated by
            ‘practical criticism’: close-reading seminar exercises; the essay (often read aloud to a
            tutor); and summative exams . Given the belles-lettres origins of the discipline, this choice of the essay as the
            characteristic assessment form makes some sense, obliging students to hone their writing
            skills by using the best that has been thought and known in the world as rhetorical
            models . At that time, technological platforms and academic
            enthusiasm for iterative or collaborative forms of assessment were scant, hence the
            student remained locked into a too-often airless dyad with their lecturer or tutor:
            drafting and submitting work largely in ignorance of what fellow students were writing
            or thinking, an isolation exacerbated in Britain by the Oxbridge tradition of one-on-one
            tutorials . Such one-shot, essay-based, summative forms of assessment
            have continued as literary studies’ pedagogical norm. Yet now that highly collaborative
            virtual learning platforms have become undergraduates’ habitual learning environment
            (and never more so than in the shift to online teaching accelerated by the COVID-19
            pandemic) maintaining the model of literary education as a process of imitative
            apprenticeship to the lecturer’s hermeneutic sensibility is manifestly out of date.
         In sum, print culture has long constituted literary studies’ unacknowledged condition
            precedent — the ground for its existence and its presupposed medial norm. Raman
            Selden’s stunningly offhand comment, in the first edition of his bestselling 1980s
            literary theory primer, reveals how baked-in this assumption is: we may omit the
            contact [i.e. medium] for the purpose of discussing literature; it is not of special
            interest to literary theorists, since contact is usually through the printed word
            . Deeply embedded assumptions about print’s immutability and transparency
            explain many of literary studies’ long-evident oversights: its unease with anonymous
            oral traditions; its tin-ear for drama as performance; and its protracted hostility to
            subsequently invented filmic and broadcast media. Faced with the rise of digital media
            from the late 1980s, and especially during the increasingly internet-dominated 1990s,
            literary studies’ response was, in the main, to double-down on its valorization of print
            culture. Perceiving digital media as an existential threat, literary studies chose in
            the main to ignore it, or defanged the new rival by adopting it as helpmeet for
            print-centric forms of research. For their part, digital advocates hardly helped matters
            with their ‘death of the book’ zealotry and zero-sum predictions of the medial future
            . But by the third decade of the twenty-first century, with print and
            digital media manifestly continuing to coexist, the explanatory inadequacy of such
            winner-takes-all conceptions is clear. Analysts of the contemporary literary sphere need
            not nail their colors to either mast, but are instead optimally placed to describe the
            increased interpenetration and interdependence of digital and literary culture. Doing so
            promises to open new horizons for the study of literature, potentially securing a future
            for a discipline sorely in need of good-news stories. 
            
         Dimensions of literary studies reconfigured by the digital literary sphere
         I have mentioned various scholars drawn from media archaeology / book history,
            communication / cultural studies, and cultural sociology who work in the
            new-institutionalist ‘meso’ space, investigating the interrelationship of print and
            digital formats, the digitization of contemporary academic and trade publishing, and the
            dominance of online book retailer Amazon, among other topics. But to read their
            admirable work, located as it is outside the Eng. Lit. mainstream, is to become
            uncomfortably aware of how little such meso-level digital analyses have percolated
            through the discipline of literary studies itself. It is too tempting for scholars,
            whether a dwindling old guard of literary humanists, the now-dominant proponents of
            post-1968 ideology critique, or even those most recent Young Turks — DHers themselves —
            to disregard the piquant implications of such research by filing it under other,
            sociological disciplinary headings. They thereby miss the crucial significance of the
            meso space for the future of literary studies itself. A mid-level framework prompts ‘big
            picture’ questions about how our discipline was originally institutionalized, its
            current contours and, most importantly, how we might best harness digital technologies
            to secure its future. Specifically, meso-scale digital literary studies productively
            throws into question the five key aspects of literary studies’ traditional
            self-conception outlined above, posing fundamental questions about disciplinary
            identity.
            
            
               
            What counts as ‘literature’?
            Not only ‘born-digital’ experimental literary works long championed by the ELO but
            also new digital paratexts such as audiobooks, book trailers, videos of writers’ talks
            posted online, amateur readers’ reviews, and book-centric social-media posts expand the
            definition of ‘literature’, presenting new objects for literary analysis. As texts which
            both embody literary expression and mediate literature’s role with wider communities
            (retailers, critics, readers) they pose new questions about the porousness of the
            literary text and its encompassing social domain. They also foreground the relationship
            between literary value and economic capital in ways that demand detailed description of
            the commercial dimension of books rather than the New Critical tactic of simply
            bracketing it off.
         
         The shift in such texts’ material substrate from print to digital necessitates that
            literary scholars enact far-reaching changes in theory and method. To comprehend
            fully the production history, institutional circulation, and consumptive patterns of a
            given literary work, researchers will have to cast their nets far wider than the codex
            itself, delving into the less familiar terrain of internet archiving, social-media
            scraping, and analogue downloads of questionable legality . This is assuming that relevant research material lies in the public domain
            which, given the fiercely data-hungry and proprietorial Amazon’s stranglehold over the
            contemporary book industry, can never be assumed . Thus, a meso-framed,
            sociological perspective on twenty-first-century literary objects requires fundamental
            rethinking of literary studies’ default sources of evidence and its habitual
            close-reading method. Familiarizing ourselves with research techniques drawn from the
            rapidly converging media and cultural studies field – interviews and surveys, internet
            ethnography, algorithmic criticism — is essential given the contemporary book’s place
            within a converged media landscape. When the industry producing the objects we study
            changes, so must we. 
            
            
            Where is literary studies situated?
           Literary studies, as a traditionally textually-oriented humanities discipline, in
            past decades engaged in often fractious relations with newer humanities subjects which
            had a primarily sociological self-conception, notably cultural and media studies.
            Maintaining such hostilities seems self-defeating when the humanities and social
            sciences alike face crises of legitimacy, funding, and enrolments, albeit to varying
            degrees. Rethinking literature sociologically permits us to move past these academic
            turf-wars to explore what kind of epistemological and institutional configurations best
            combine strands of humanities and social science expertise, drawing in undergraduate and
            graduate students from diverse catchments and helping to revitalize the discipline.
            To date, such a synthesis has been impeded by too often quarantining sociological
            understandings of the literary industry and readerly behaviors from mainstream literary
            studies under the banner of ‘book history’ or ‘publishing studies’ .
            Incorporating print-originated and born-digital texts into
            literary studies syllabi, and contextualizing these with studies of the ‘literary
            system’ would demonstrate how all interpretations of a text are
            influenced by medium and context. Literary works require, in N. Katherine Hayles’s
            phrasing, media-specific analysis (2004). We cannot hope to understand the ‘digital’
            in digital literary culture without borrowing from the conceptual toolbox of media and
            cultural studies. Work underway and plentifully cited within its own disciplinary
            settings about media platforms and affordances, interactivity, algorithmic culture,
            user-generated content, social-media performativity, digital-native research methods,
            and public humanities outreach complements and illuminates more traditional book
            historical procedures. The traffic is far from one way either. We can bring to media
            studies scholars a keener awareness of prior phases of media transition, the long
            overlaps between media formats, and the resilience, democratisation, and transmedial
            fluidity of twenty-first-century literary studies — a discipline that cultural studies
            too readily likes to straw-man as stodgy and elitist. 
            
            
        
            How do we talk about literature?
            Demotic forms of literary criticism such as cultural journalism, book reviewing,
            and reading-group discussions have long and rich histories. However, these
            extra-academic or paraliterary forms of book discussion have too often been belittled
            or ignored by a literary academy jealously guarding its expertise and needing a ground
            against which to define itself . This has had the unfortunate effect of long
            bifurcating professional and amateur readers, alienating broader constituencies with
            which literary academe might have made common cause. The recent academic rediscovery of
            affect promises belatedly to legitimize lay readers’ emotional responses to texts within
            literary studies . This, of course represents a direct
            challenge to one of the precepts undergirding literary studies’ institutionalization
            over a century ago: the expunging of subjectivism in interpreting texts. Contemporary
            academics must engage in the delicate balancing act of recognizing that
            emotionally-invested modes of reading among book enthusiasts never went away, while
            simultaneously preserving their own status as professional interpreters of the literary
            scene. Readerly affect can, as Rita Felski has demonstrated in a trilogy of recent
            books, itself be the subject of academic analysis for what it reveals about dispositions
            towards literature (2008, 2015, 2020). Yet Felski barely mentions the massive archive of
               online readerly evidence (blogs, bookTube reviews, bookstagram
            posts, and viral TikTok videos) to test whether her inferences about highly-educated
            academic readers are more broadly verifiable. In engaging with such readerly data, it is
            equally important not to idealize readerly affect as necessarily resistant, but instead
            to acknowledge how emotionally authentic reader responses to books are avidly data-mined
            by media platforms in the interests of fine-tuning their algorithms and driving
            advertising revenue.
         
         
            Who are literary studies’ contemporary publics?
            Related to the above, literary discussion by this point in the twenty-first
            century must move beyond a narrowing coterie of professional critics to engage
            meaningfully with broader publics demonstrating interest in literary matters: e.g.,
            books and arts programming in mainstream media; writers’ festival audiences;
            face-to-face book clubs; book-focused social-cataloguing platforms such as Goodreads;
            and social-media ‘book talk’ communities. We need to build better bridges, in Felski’s
            phrase , with these lay readers, long alienated by the abstruse vocabulary and
            paranoid reading strategies of ideology critique, to cultivate a public humanities mode
            of literary scholarship. In doing so, we need to guard against any suggestion that we in
            academe are bringing ‘enlightenment’ to the benighted masses. Such academic rank-pulling
            seriously misunderstands the flattened hierarchies and interactive norms of online
            literary culture. Rather, academics need to educate themselves about the protocols
            governing online literary discussions, attend in good faith to debates already ongoing
            in digital fora, and grapple with thorny ethical issues of how to research online
            readerly communities in ways that share research outcomes with the communities studied.
            Conversely, and more confronting for the academic ego, what might literary studies
               learn from the affective investments and dialogic practices of
            non-professional readers, now so abundantly discoverable online? As Carolyn Dinshaw
            astutely observes, amateur literary activities can expose and critique professional
               literary activities . Non-credentialed literary commentators have eagerly
            embraced the internet’s characteristic distributed architecture and the democratic
            access it permits. But at the same time, they demonstrate resilient interest in
            mechanisms for cultural evaluation and discrimination (e.g. cumulative book review
            ratings, community-endorsed litbloggers, ‘top’ bookTubers etc.). There is no necessary
            contradiction here: such readerly communities seek a voice in the weighing of literary
            worth and are restive with literary evaluation taking place behind closed doors and then
            being handed down, from on high, by an academic clerisy. Rather, they want broadening of
            the parties to literary discussion and for critics to publicly state their evaluative
            criteria, with all verdicts being open to debate. Academic expertise still holds value
            for this group, if academics can trade the familiar role of incontrovertible authority
            for one of dialogic participant, and can make their arguments in language intelligible
            to an interested layperson. The success and growth of literary-centric,
            publicly-oriented websites such as Literary Hub is heartening in this regard.
               https://lithub.com/. See also, in this
               public-humanities vein, The Conversation international network of websites (with its
               tagline ‘Academic rigor, journalistic flair’) and the Ivy League-associated Public
               Books (with its imperative Think in public).  A niche-targeted content
            aggregator, it showcases content drawn from academic presses, cultural journalism
            (print-based and online), and blogsites. Its curatorial tone is well worth emulating:
            discerning but not exclusionary, smart but fun. Literary Hub’s default inclusion of a
            comments function beneath each article offers a model for how this new style of literary
            academe might talk to – and, importantly, with — bookish publics.
         
            How best to teach literature?
            Digital literary environments’ characteristic textual instability, collaborative
            authorship, and commercial-creative blurring prompt reappraisal of literary studies’
            inherited pedagogical modes. Since the discipline’s institutionalization in the early
            twentieth century, our pedagogical practices have remained remarkably static:
            lecture/seminar/tutorial teaching modes; close-reading analytic method; and
            predominantly one-shot, essay-based assessment . By contrast, digital
            technologies enable students to work collectively, for staff to engage students in
            ongoing scholarly projects, and for established researchers to mentor students’
            interventions into popular literary discussion through public-facing assessment outcomes
               . The dominant pedagogical practice within literary studies
            can shift from an expert scholar attempting to cultivate like-minded acolytes through a
            system of apprenticeship, to a facilitator model in which academics provide theoretical
            and contextual tools for students to reconsider their existing involvement in print and
            online modes of literary discussion. The aim is to make students conscious of their
            position within book culture, denaturalizing it as a neutral window onto self-evidently
            great writing. What if, for example, the end-of-term research essay morphs into a
            critical examination of Amazon’s terms of service, a series of BookTube videos about the
            current Booker Prize shortlist, or credited contributions to an evolving DH database?
            Such alternative modes of assessment need not amount to abrogation of critical rigor for
            the fashionably flaky, nor exploitation of undergraduate labor for academics’ own career
            advancement. They simply involve applying literary studies’ critical mindset to a
            broader array of technological, institutional, economic, social, and cultural mediators
            than the discipline is accustomed to acknowledge.
         
         The meso-level digital literary studies advocated here is thus not merely a
            supplementary project of adding digital texts to the standard
            literary studies curriculum: innovation as minimal-effort quick fix. Instead, the
            digital era necessitates root-and-branch rethinking of the literary studies discipline
            across multiple domains: object of study; institutional siting (with its implications
            for theory and method); epistemological aims; envisaged audiences; and pedagogical
            practice. Thus, for all the claims over the last decade and a half that DH represents a
            radical attack on traditional literary studies (whether emanating from proponents or
            opponents), viewed in this light DH hasn’t gone nearly far enough. The same can be said
            for eLit, to the extent that it still considers itself a separate academic project from
            DH. Digital technology is not simply a tool for expanding our textual corpora or
            devising new modes for reading those texts, but an opportunity to recast the whole
            nature of literary study.

         Conclusion
         As we enter a third decade of ‘postcritique’ literary studies, it is clear that waiting
            the digital out is not an option. Conceptions of a print culture posited in steadfast
            opposition to the digital have been disproven by the consumer trends of the last 25
            years and were, in any case, always ontologically suspect. Media historians have long
            disputed neatly successionist views of a newer communication technology wholesale
            replacing an earlier medium. The intellectual challenge — and payoff – instead lies in
            observing different mediums’ patterns of complex interdependence, mutual
            cannibalization, and unexpected revivification. Literary studies’ post-millennial pivot
            towards the digital has been welcome in providing our discipline with justification for
            its continued twenty-first-century relevance. However, the ways
            in which digital literary studies is currently configured have exposed a hollow middle
            between, at one extreme, micro-scale studies of contemporary born-digital works that are
            often closer to fine arts practice, are accessed by miniscule publics, and are likely to
            become technologically obsolete within a decade and, at the other, macro-oriented
            studies of pre-1923 literary history (now almost a century in the past). Neither of
            these domains provides a viable roadmap for a literary studies discipline seeking to
            engage meaningfully with the mainstream of contemporary culture. It is not so much that
            embrace of the digital has been a mistake for literary studies but that the embrace has
            been awkwardly set up. Digital technologies not only provide new platforms for existing
            texts, they normalize new modes for producing texts, radically expand networks for
            circulating them, and greatly empower readers who seize the opportunity to become
            textual producers in turn. Digital sociology offers the necessary tools to broaden our
            analytic gaze to capture this sense of a digital literary sphere in dynamic flux.
         To return in closing to the Jim Collins interview mentioned earlier, he speaks of the
            urgency of the literary academy looking up from its texts and its now-familiar
            ideological constructions of race, class, gender, and sexuality to engage fully with the
               materiality of contemporary literary culture: for me to teach
            contemporary fiction I should now talk to my students about how they come to it, how it
            circulates, what’s going on outside as well as inside the
                  classroom . Such an expansive mindset allows literary academe to converse with
            communities of paraliterary enthusiasts with whom we have so far had little traffic: the
            burgeoning and vociferous audiences for writers’ festivals; book clubs; online
            reviewing; and digitally-hosted book talk in general. Many of these groups have for some
            decades turned away from academic literary critics as taste arbiters, alienated by the
            arcane terminology and suspicious reading protocols they encountered in undergraduate
            curricula or endured in diluted versions as high-schoolers. We cannot afford to pass up
            this opportunity to make common cause with a sizable body of literary enthusiasts among
            the broader public, not with literary studies buffeted by falling enrolments,
            governments’ vocational agenda, and insecure patterns of academic employment. Demotic
            brands of literary criticism never went away; we just lacked the theoretical,
            methodological, and pedagogical tools (and yes, perhaps, the willingness) to engage with
            them. With the advent of the digital literary sphere, these extra-academic literary
            discussions are better archived, more discoverable, and more socially porous than ever
            before. We are thus faced with the choice Rita Felski identifies in the epigraph to this
            article: to retreat in the face of digital culture and to define literariness in
            ever-more circumscribed and aesthetically exclusive ways. Or, to embrace what the
            digital literary sphere has to offer our discipline: new things to study; new ways to
            talk about them; and – crucially – new audiences who may well want to hear what we have
            to say about how contemporary literary culture actually functions.
