Title:  Humanities Computing as Digital Humanities
Volume:  003
Issue:  3
Date:  29 September 2009
Abstract:  
            This article presents an examination of how digital humanities is currently conceived
               and described, and examines the discursive shift from humanities computing to digital
               humanities. It is argued that this renaming of humanities computing as digital
               humanities carries with it a set of epistemic commitments that are not necessarily
               compatible with a broad and inclusive notion of the digital humanities. In
               particular, the author suggests that tensions arise from the instrumental, textual
               and methodological focus of humanities computing as well as its relative lack of
               engagement with the digital as a study object. This article is the first in a
               series of four articles attempting to describe and analyze the field of digital
               humanities and digital humanities as a transformative practice.
         
Full Body Text: 
Humanities Computing as Digital Humanities

            Introduction
            The humanities are undergoing a set of changes which relate to research practices,
               funding structures, the role of creative expression, infrastructural basis, reward
               systems, interdisciplinary sentiment and the emergence of a deeply networked
               humanities both in relation to knowledge production processes and products. An
               important aspect of this ongoing transformation of the humanities is humanities
               scholars’ increasing use and exploration of information technology as both a
               scholastic tool and a cultural object in need of analysis. Currently, there is a
               cumulative set of experiences, practices and models flourishing in what may be called
               digital humanities. The research presented here explores the scope and direction of
               this emerging field as well as the role of humanities computing in this
               enterprise.
            In this article, the first in a four-part series, I explore the discursive shift from
               humanities computing to what is now being termed the digital humanities, examining
               how this naming is related to shifts in institutional, disciplinary, and social
               organization. Materials such as the Humanist email list, journals, conference
               materials, principal texts, professional blogs and institutional websites provide an
               important empirical basis for the analysis. Academic fields are partly produced,
               represented, reinforced, changed and negotiated through these modes of discourse. As
               will be evident from the analysis, the renaming of humanities computing to digital
               humanities brings with it a set of epistemic commitments that are not necessarily
               congruent with a broad and inclusive notion of the digital humanities. I suggest that
               interesting tensions arise from the instrumental, textual and methodological focus of
               humanities computing as well as its relative lack of engagement with the
                  digital as a study object.
            In the second article, I explore the broader landscape of the digital humanities
               through a discussion of digital humanities and digital humanists, associated
               traditions, personal encounters and importantly, through a suggested set of
               paradigmatic modes of engagement between the humanities and information technology:
               information technology as a tool, an object of study, an exploratory laboratory, an
               expressive medium and an activist venue.
            The third article discusses cyberinfrastructure for the humanities more broadly — and
               for the digital humanities in particular — in relation to the current discourse of
               cyberinfrastructure, models of implementation and possible directions. The article
               also presents a fairly extensive case study of HUMlab — a digital humanities center
               at Umeå University. Finally, tentative advice as to implementing and strategizing
               humanities cyberinfrastructure is offered.
            In the fourth article, I explore the multiple ways in which the digital humanities
               have been envisioned and how the digital humanities can often become a laboratory and
               vehicle for thinking about the state and future of the humanities at large. Some
               foundational issues, including the role of the humanities and changing knowledge
               production systems, are discussed and related to the development of the digital
               humanities. Furthermore, a tentative vision of the digital humanities is presented.
               This vision is grounded in the article series as a whole as well as in the important
               collaborative possibilities and challenges that lie ahead of us. 
            Together these four articles constitute an attempt to outline and critically discuss
               how the humanities interrelates with information technology in multiple ways, to
               understand the historical, conceptual, and disciplinary aspects of this
               interrelation, and to present an expansive model for the digital humanities.
         

            Background
            One of things that has fascinated me for a long time is the range of origins,
               approaches and traditions associated with different varieties of digital humanities,
               ranging from textual analysis of medieval texts and establishment of metadata schemes
               to the production of alternative computer games and artistic readings of
               nanotechnology. An important rationale for this article series is to facilitate a
               discussion across various initiatives and disciplines and to make connections. There
               are many humanities scholars involved in what may be called digital humanities who
               have no or little knowledge of humanities computing, and vice versa, many humanities
               computing representatives who do not engage much with current new media
               studies of matters such as platform studies, transmedia perspectives or database
               aesthetics. Few people will engage in activities across the board, of course, but it
               is important to have a sense of the growing disciplinary landscape, associated
               methodological and theoretical positions, and emerging collaborative possibilities.
               To me, this is an integral part of digital humanities as a project.
            There are several good reasons for giving humanities computing the particular
               attention it receives in this article: its rich heritage, historical and current
               accomplishments, the sheer number of people involved, and the apparent discursive
               transition to digital humanities. Furthermore, any attempt at mapping an
               emerging field presupposes a discussion of disciplinary territory and ambitions, and
               humanities computing provides a particularly good starting point as it is relatively
               established and well-defined. And as we will see, many of the issues, considerations
               and parameters relevant to humanities computing are also relevant to digital
               humanities more generally.
            In the following, we will start out from a particular example of humanities computing
               as digital humanities and associated epistemic commitments. Some of these commitments
               are traced in the subsequent historical, institutional and contextual description of
               humanities computing. We will then move on to look at the renaming of humanities
               computing to digital humanities, which in turn will lead to a critical discussion of
               humanities computing with a particular focus on some points of tension between
               traditional humanities computing and an expansive notion of digital humanities. In
               conclusion, humanities computing will be briefly juxtaposed with a very different
               kind of digital humanities tradition.
         

            Setting the Stage
            The Call for Proposals for Digital Humanities 2009, the principal humanities
               computing conference, provides an illustrative example of how the disciplinary
               territory of digital humanities is being defined in relation to the tradition of
               humanities computing and how epistemic commitments can be manifested
               discursively.
            Epistemic cultures, as defined by , are those amalgams of arrangements and mechanisms
                  – bonded through affinity, necessity, and historical coincidence – which, in a
                  given field, make up how we know what we know
                (original emphasis). We are thus concerned with ways in which knowledge is
               created, represented and defended. Epistemic cultures are constructed and maintained
               through, among other things, the epistemic commitments of participating scientists as
               part of the means by which alignments are made between academic disciplines, the
               fields of enquiry that they represent, and shared notions about what constitutes
               valid research . In the following, the epistemic
               commitments of humanities computing and digital humanities are mainly traced through
               looking at different modes of discourse. While these modes may have different
               functions and intended audiences, they collectively add to the analysis.
            The Digital Humanities 2009
                  Call is divided into three parts. The first part provides a broad and
               relatively open definition of the digital humanities. 
                  The international Programme Committee invites submissions of abstracts of
                     between 750 and 1500 words on any aspect of digital humanities, broadly defined
                     to encompass the common ground between information technology and problems in
                     humanities research and teaching.
                  As always, we welcome submissions in any area of the humanities, particularly
                     interdisciplinary work. We especially encourage submissions on the current
                     state of the art in digital humanities, and on recent new developments and
                     expected future developments in the field.
               
            
            The invitation relates to any aspect of digital
                  humanities which is loosely defined as the common ground between
               information technology and problems in humanities research and teaching.
               Interdisciplinary contributions are particularly encouraged. As expected, the second
               part provides a higher level of specificity. 
                  Suitable subjects for proposals include, for example, 
                        text analysis, corpora, corpus linguistics, language processing,
                           language learning
                        libraries, archives and the creation, delivery, management and
                           preservation of humanities digital resources
                        computer-based research and computing applications in all areas of
                           literary, linguistic, cultural, and historical studies, including
                           electronic literature and interdisciplinary aspects of modern
                           scholarship
                        use of computation in such areas as the arts, architecture, music,
                           film, theatre, new media, and other areas reflecting our cultural
                           heritage
                        research issues such as: information design and modelling; the
                           cultural impact of the new media; software studies; Human-Computer
                           interaction
                        the role of digital humanities in academic curricula
                        digital humanities and diversity
                     
                  
               
            
            Here we are presented with a narrowing down of what was described in the first part.
               This is common in conference calls as a way of indicating the particular focus of the
               conference, of course, although it is difficult to discern any clear thematic
               delimitation in this particular case. We are thus concerned with a fairly broad range
               of possible topics. However, the ordering and phrasing of these topics suggest a
               specific tradition or framework, and an associated set of epistemic commitments. For
               instance, it is not by accident that text analysis comes first and that phrases such
               as computer-based research and use of computation are used. Even so it
               could be argued that much of what be included in a broad notion of digital humanities
               could be subsumed under these topics, and that particularly the sixth topic –
               research issues – opens up the scope to areas such as new media studies. But the
               placement, exact wording (e.g. the cultural impact of new media) and the
               broader context may not make these potential conference participants feel targeted
               unless they already have a relation to the community and humanities computing.
            In the third part of the call for proposals follows a much more precise definition of
               digital humanities and associated topics: The range
                  of topics covered by digital humanities can also be consulted in the journal of
                  the associations: Literary and Linguistic Computing (LLC), Oxford University
                  Press. The journal Literary and Linguistic
                  Computing has been a key publication for humanities computing for a long
               time. However, defining digital humanities through the topics presented in LLC
               clearly excludes many other initiatives and developments in the intersection of the
               humanities and information technology and suggests a very particular tradition,
               institutional grounding and epistemic culture.For instance, the privileged role
                  of text can be indicated through looking at four recent issues of the journal:
                      (special theme: Computing the edition),  (largely statistical text analysis), 
                  (largely text analysis apart from one article on scholarly visualization) and  (largely text analysis, annotation and authorship
                  attribution). See also expanded discussion later in this article. Moreover,
               this level of narrowing down is clearly not congruent with the description of digital
               humanities given in the first part of the call, which may be said to be less
               obviously situated in the tradition of humanities computing and associated epistemic
               commitments.
         

            History and Paradigm
            The partial institutionalization of humanities computing has resulted in academic
               departments or units, annual conferences, journals, educational programs and a rather
               strong sense of communal identity. These are all qualities that are typically
               associated with the establishment of a new discipline (cf. ). The following excerpt from a description of a 1999 panel organized by
               the Association for Computing the Humanities seems to confirm this analysis: Empirically, humanities computing is easily recognized as a particular academic
                  domain and community. We have our professional organizations, regular conferences,
                  journals, and a number of centers, departments, and other organizational units. A
                  sense for the substance of the field is also fairly easy to come by: one can
                  examine the proceedings of ACH/ALLC conferences, issues of CHum and JALLC, the
                  discussions on HUMANIST, the contents of many books and anthologies which
                  represent themselves as presenting work in humanities computing, and the academic
                  curricula and research programs at humanities computing centers and departments.
                  From such an exercise one easily gets a rough and ready sense of what we are
                  about, and considerable reassurance, if any is needed, that indeed, there is
                  something which we are about.
                     http://www.ach.org/abstracts/1999/renear-ach.html
                  
               
            
            Communal identity, of course, is built over time, and history and foundational
               narratives play an important role in this process. Father Roberto Busa is typically
               cited as the pioneer of the field of humanities computing, and his work dates back to
               the late 1940s: 
                  During the World War II, between 1941 and
                     1946, I began to look for machines for the automation of the linguistic
                     analysis of written texts. I found them, in 1949, at IBM in New York
                     City.
                  
               
            
            In this foundational story, two important epistemic commitments of humanities
               computing are established: information technology as a tool and written texts as a
               primary object of study (for linguistic analysis). Commitments such computer as
                  instrumental tool and text as object end up helping decide what are
               legitimate types of questions and study objects for the field, and how work and
               relevant institutions are organized.
            The journal Computers and the Humanities was started as
               early as in 1966 and, interestingly, it seems as if early issues were not as
               textually oriented as one might have assumed. Early articles include PL/I: A programming language for humanities research,
               Art, art history, and the computer and Musicology and the computer in New Orleans (all from
               1966-1967). Thirty years later we find articles such as The
                  design of the TEI encoding scheme,
               Current uses of hypertext in teaching literature,
               Neural network applications in stylometry and Word frequency distributions and lexical semantics (all from
               1995-1996). In 2005, this journal was renamed Language Resources
                  and Evaluation, and had by this time lost its status as one of the
                  official journals for humanities computing. In one of the obituaries,
               Willard McCarty applauds the first 25 years of the journal and comments on the
               editors’ final statement (which points the difficulty of maintaining the broad scope
               of the journal): 
                  CHum's astonishing denial of a future
                     for humanities computing comes in the same year as the Blackwell's Companion to
                     Digital Humanities. […] If anything, the development of CHum since then
                     suggests rather the opposite — a narrowing down from the breadth of humanistic
                     interests, across the full range of disciplines, to a sharp focus on material
                     often closer to computational linguistics than anything else — and often too
                     technical for all but the specialist to read. This narrowing does not reflect
                     the field.
                  
               
            
            In other words, Computers and the Humanities was seen as
               having taken a direction not fully compatible with the epistemic tradition of
               humanities computing. Indicatively, in a Call for Papers from 1998,
                  http://cfp.english.upenn.edu/archive/Collections/0047.html
                there is a special invitation for state-of-the-art surveys, and the only
               example given is Current Approaches to Punctuation in
                  Computational Linguistics. Also, this happened at about the same time as
               the Alliance of Digital Humanities Associations (ADHO) was formed, and another
               important reason for the demise of Computers and the
                  Humanities was that it was strategically, financially and institutionally
               advantageous to make Literary and Linguistic Computing
               and not Computers and the Humanities the principal
               humanities computing journal.See e.g. http://www.ach.org/documents/minutes2003.html
                Indeed, these reasons were probably more important than the perceived
               incompatibility between humanities computing at large and Computers and the Humanities. Nevertheless, the result was that for a few
               years, humanities computing only had one principal journal.
            The journal Literary and Linguistic Computing has from
               its inception focused on textual and text-based literary analysis – as you would
               expect from its title. It was established in 1986 by the Association for Literary and
               Linguistic Computing (itself established in 1973). This journal has clearly played an
               important role in establishing the field of humanities computing – not only in
               offering a publication venue, institutional structure and academic exchange but also
               in publishing self-reflective articles on the role, organization and future of
               humanities computing. As we saw earlier, the journal has even been used to define the
               digital humanities – thus in a sense transferring the epistemic culture of the
               journal and associated field to the new field.
            As important as these printed journals have been for establishing humanities
               computing as a field, humanities computing representatives were also early adopters
               of communication technologies such as email lists. The first message on the Humanist List was sent on May 13, 1987 by founding editor
               Willard McCarty, making it one of the first academic email lists to be established.
               Currently about 1600 people subscribe to the Humanist list
                  . In December 2004, there were about 1500
                  subscribers personal communication with Willard McCarty.
                  The readership thus seems relatively stable. which is an email list with
               consistently high quality, carefully organized threads and an often lively
                  discussion.There is an archive of the Humanist list which makes for
                  interesting reading and historical contextualization. http://www.princeton.edu/~mccarty/humanist/
                Although the range of topics is very broad it is fair to say that there is
               persistent and fundamental interest in textual analysis and related matters. As
               McCarty himself points out, Humanist facilitates an
               ongoing, low-key and important discussion: 
                  We're always worrying ourselves about
                     whether humanities computing has made its mark in the world and on the world.
                     It seems to me, however, that quiet change, though harder to detect, is
                     sometimes much better and more powerful in its effects than the noisy,
                     obviously mark-making, position-taking kind. If during these 17 years Humanist
                     has contributed to the world, it has done so very quietly by nature, like
                     conversation, leaving hardly a trace.
                  
               
            
            Here it is also rather obvious that humanities computing serves as an
               identifying label and collaborative sentiment for the Humanist community. We will
               soon return to this label (and an ongoing relabeling process) as well as the worry or
               concern that McCarty mentions but first a brief look at another major institution in
               this field.
            One of the most important venues for humanities computing have been the annual
               conferences jointly organized by the Association for Literary and Linguistic
               Computing (ALLC) and the Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH).
               Originally these organizations ran their own conference series, but from 1996 they
               started a joint conference series. From 2008, the Society for Digital
                  Humanities/Société pour l'étude des médias
                  interactifs (SDH/SEMI) became a third organizing association. These
               three associations are all members of the Alliance of Digital Humanities
               Associations. It is quite clear that these conferences predominantly address textual
               analysis, markup, retrieval systems and related areas. A simple frequency analysis
               based on titles of papers and sessions from 1996 to 2004 shows us that frequent
               non-functional words include text (56), electronic (53),
                  language (30), markup (28), encoding (27),
                  TEI (23), corpus (22), authorship (18),
                  XML (18), database (13) and multimedia
               (11). In comparison there is one instance of game and two instances of
               the plural form games. This is a rather crude measurement, of course,
               but it does give us a sense of the overall orientation. A more careful look at the
               2005 conference (at University of Victoria, BC) does not seem to contradict this
               sketch. For instance, the themed sessions that extended more than one program slot
               were Authorship Attribution,
               Libraries, Archives & Metadata,
               Computational Linguistics and Natural Language
                  Processing,
               Encoding & Multiculturalism,
               Scholarly Projects and Visualisation & Modeling. One-slot themed sessions included Automation,
               Text & Technology,
               Textual Editing & Analysis,
               Interface Design and Hypertext.Interestingly,  employs a
                  somewhat similar material in her analysis. As far as I know these are independent
                  analyses. My own material was first presented publicly in 2004. Yet another
               example is the 2008 Digital Humanities Summer Institute . Here the focus is on text encoding, transcription, and corpus text analysis in
               five out of the eight offerings in the curriculum. The other three sessions take up
               digitization fundamentals, multimedia and large project planning.
            While, journals, conferences and academic associations play an important role in
               creating and maintaining an academic field and community, another important factor is
               the ways in which a field has been institutionalized. In the case of humanities
               computing, this has been a long and partly uncertain process, which has clearly
               shaped the field.
         

            Institutional Models
            In organizational terms, humanities computing enterprises have been institutionalized
               in many different ways. And, of course, institutions develop over time. A useful
               resource is Willard McCarty’s and Matthew Kirschenbaum’s Institutional models for humanities computing
               . Here a number of questions or criteria are used to list
               and categorize humanities computing institutions. The first category incorporates
               academic units that do research, teaching and collegial service. Also [s]ome members of these units hold academic
                  appointments either in or primarily associated with humanities computing.
               Examples include the Center for Computing in the Humanities, King’s College London,
               and the Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities. Even though it is said
               in the document that [n]o judgement is
                  expressed or implied as to the worth of the centres under consideration,
               it could probably be argued that this first category serves as a role model (based on
               the way criteria are created and presented, the ordering of the categories and a
               broader humanities computing context).
            Historically, and to some extent contemporarily, it would seem that a prototypical
               organizational form is a humanities computing unit or center affiliated with a school
               of liberal arts or humanities. Often such units provide service to the rest of the
               school and this rather instrumental function has typically been primary. Of course,
               there might have been development in many other directions over time, but this basic
               function cannot easily be dismissed. A prominent example would be the Humanities
               Computing Unit at Oxford University whose roots go back to the 1960s and which was
               closed (or transformed) in 2002.  describes the final
               stages of this development: At the start
                  of the new millenium, the HCU employed over 20 people, half of them on external
                  grants and contracts valued at over 350,000 annually. With the advent of
                  divisionalization, however, it faced a new challenge and a new environment, in
                  which OUCS, as a centrally-funded service, must take particular care to meet the
                  needs of the whole University, in a way which complements the support activities
                  funded by individual divisions, rather than competing with or supplanting them.
                  Our strategy has been to focus on areas where the HCU's long experience in
                  promoting better usage of IT within one discipline can be generalized. In 2001, we
                  set up a new Learning Technologies Group, to act as a cross-disciplinary advocacy
                  and development focus for the integration of IT into traditional teaching and
                  learning. This new LTG is now one of four key divisions within the new OUCS,
                  additionally responsible for the full range of OUCS training activities.
            
            The status of such academic units, of course, is not normally on the same level as
               (traditional) departments which tend to be the privileged academic organizational
               unit. In many cases humanities computing units have been seen as service units with a
               rather instrumental role and representatives find themselves having to present their
               field in such a way as to maintain financial support as well as their share of
               integrity and independence. Frequently, like in the case above, academic units which
               are seen as having a technological service function are susceptible to different
               kinds of organizational changes and budget cuts. For instance, the central university
               administration might question whether the most efficient organizational structure is
               to have departments and faculties run their own computer support functions or whether
               it is more efficient to adopt a more centralized model. Also humanities computing
               units that have several functions might have to cut back on the more
               research-oriented activities because, after all, technical support is more
               instrumental (and sellable/buyable) and there might not be enough explicit interest
               from humanities departments to motivate a more research and methodology focused
               function. There are many examples of changes like these (see  for some other examples and a further discussion).
               Several prominent service-based units, including the Humanities Computing Unit at
               Oxford University and Centre for Computing in the Humanities at University of
               Toronto, have been closed down (or radically reformed) over time and this vulnerable
               position is part of the shaping of humanities computing.
            While it is fair to say that the present institutional landscape is rather diverse
               and expansive, it is also important to acknowledge that the ratio of thriving
               humanities computing environments and initiatives at universities in Europe and the
               United States is still very low in relation to the whole of the Humanities; something
               that may or may not be seen as a problem. Taking Sweden as an example, there seems to
               be only one traditional humanities computing unit in the country (at Gothenburg
               University) at present. Most of the growth seems to happen in places where there is
               no or little humanities computing legacy (Blekinge Institute of Technology and
               Södertörn University College). My own environment, HUMlab at Umeå University, does
               relate to humanities computing, but also to many other influences, and most of the
               Ph.D. students, for instance, would probably not see themselves as primarily involved
               in humanities computing. Most of them do subscribe to the Humanist, however.
         

            The Question of Autonomy
            A related and much-discussed issue – highly relevant to digital humanities generally
               and to humanities computing as digital humanities – concerns whether humanities
               computing should be independent and possibly an academic discipline in its own right
               or whether it should primarily interrelate with existing humanities departments. This
               discussion has partly been fueled by the need for academic status to create academic
               positions and a sense of not wanting or needing to be reliant on traditional and
               slow-moving departments and disciplines.In particular English departments are
                  likely to be targeted. They are part of the heritage and identity of humanities
                  computing as well as the foundational narratives mentioned earlier. Geoffrey
                  Rockwell writes, 
                     A discipline maintains common
                        stories of its founding and a history complete with heroes (Father Busa),
                        monsters (English Departments) and timely achievements (the publication of
                        the TEI P4).
                     
                  
                In fact, these disciplines may not even be considered suitable for dealing
               with relevant study objects and research issues, or appropriate methodologies: 
                  To study the effects and consequences of
                     digital technology on our culture, and how we are shaping these technologies
                     according to our cultural needs, we can now begin to see the contours of a
                     separate, autonomous field, where the historical, aesthetic, cultural and
                     discursive aspects of the digitalisation of our society may be examined. That
                     way, the field of Humanistic Informatics may contribute to the goal of the
                     Humanities, which is the advancement of the understanding of human patterns of
                     expression. We cannot leave this new development to existing fields, because
                     they will always privilege their traditional methods, which are based on their
                     own empirical objects.It is representative of Aarseth’s position and
                        refreshingly provocative style that his ALLC/ACH 2005 keynote was entitled
                           Old, new, borrowed, blue? Can the Humanities
                           Contribute to Game Research?
                     
                  
                  
               
            
            Another argument for not involving all of the Humanities may be that it is not seen
               as an efficient model.  tells us about strategies
               adopted when the Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities (IATH) at
               University of Virginia was started. Alan Batson, Department of Computer Science at
               UVA, argued that trying to involve everyone (distribute resources evenly) would be to
               replicate 30 years of failure; providing IT resources to people who are not
               interested in them or do not want to explore them does not work. 
                  IATH was founded as a resource for people
                     who had already made a commitment to humanities computing, a commitment defined
                     practically by an actual project with demonstrable scholarly
                     importance.
                  
               
            
            The tension between trying to involve as many as possible and making a difference
               through engaging people who have already shown an interest is basic and recurrent.
               Naturally, any enterprise of this kind is dependent on the local environment. There
               is obviously a significant difference between being an autonomous academic unit and a
               service-based or organization. In practice most humanities computing units are
               probably somewhere in between. Also, the service function can, of course, be
               very complex and should not be trivialized. McCarty talks about practice and
                  practitioners, and such terminology might be more suitable for many of the
               service-like functions more directly related to the humanities computing enterprise.
               He stresses the importance of methodological knowledge and says that 
                  [t]he practitioner learns a specific
                     but generalizable method for tackling problems of a certain kind
                  
               . This focus on methodology and associated tools is common in humanities
               computing, and arguably part of the epistemic commitments of the field that
               fundamentally shape the way humanities computing relate to the rest of the humanities
               and to other work in the humanities and information technology.
         

            Approaching the Digital Humanities
            As we noted earlier humanities computing has been a strong common denotation
               for much of the work and community described above. In his Humanities Computing, Willard McCarty describes the development from
                  computers and the humanities via computing in the humanities to
                  humanities computing. He characterizes these three denotations as follows:
                  when the relationship was desired but
                  largely unrealized (computers and the humanities), once entry has been gained (computing in the
               humanities) and confident but
                  enigmatic (humanities computing) . I
               have argued elsewhere  that juxtaposition (as in the
               first stage) does not necessarily have to indicate separated entities and that
                  humanities computing has an instrumental ring to it. Also, humanities
                  computing does not necessarily seem to include many of the approaches and
               materials that interest many humanities scholars interested in information technology
               (and computing). Of course, these arguments are related to the ambitions and scope of
               the field you are trying to denote.
            From this point of view, it is interesting to note that humanities computing
               representatives currently seem to be appropriating the term digital
                  humanities. Prominent examples of use of the new identifier include the
               relabeled ALLC/ACH conference (from 2006 onwards entitled Digital Humanities), a new book series called Topics
                  in Digital Humanities, a new comprehensive website http://www.digitalhumanities.org
               sponsored by the major humanities computing associations, the peer-reviewed journal
                  Digital Humanities Quarterly, the massive, edited
               volume A Companion to Digital Humanities
               , and the recent renaming of the Candian Consortium
               for Computers in the Humanities into The Society for Digital Humanities. The
               denotation has certainly been used before (at University of Virginia among other
               places), but it seems to be employed more broadly now and in a more official and
               premeditated fashion. An important indication of the spread of the term and
               institutionalization of the field can be seen in the establishment of the Office of
               Digital Humanities by the National Endowment for the Humanities (US) in 2008. A
               broader analysis of different varieties of digital humanities will be returned to in
               the second article in this series.
            Looking at issues 1-20 of the Humanist
               The text files were taken from the Humanist website apart from issues 2005-2006
                  and 2006-2007 which were created. and instances of humanities
                  computing versus digital humanities, the following figures
               emerge: 304/2 (1997-1998), 343/3 (2000-2001), 566/16 (2001-2002), 283/15 (2002-2003),
               280/19 (2003-2004), 363/45 (2004-2005), 130/44 (2005-2006) and 110/90 (2006-2007).
               The first instances of digital humanities in issues 11 and 14 (1997-1998
               and 2000-2001 respectively) refer to nominal constructions such as digital
                  humanities object and digital humanities environment. While we
               should be careful about how to interpret crude quantitative data like these, it is
               fairly clear that humanities computing for a long time was the
               predominant term and still is frequent, but that we are moving towards an increased
               use of digital humanities (relative to humanities
               computing). The retained and frequent use of the older term points to a
               discrepancy between the over-the-board institutional renaming of the field described
               above and the community’s use of the term as evidenced in the Humanist material.
            This discrepancy or co-existenceAn interesting example of co-existence can be
                  found in the introduction to the A Companion to Digital
                     Humanities: The digital humanities,
                     then, and their interdisciplinary core found in the field of humanities
                     computing, have a long and dynamic history best illustrated by examination of
                     the locations at which specific disciplinary practices intersect with
                     computation.
                is also evident if you look at the Blackwell's A
                  Companion to Digital Humanities from 2004. There are about twice as many
               instances of humanities computing as digital humanities
               (139/68). The internal distribution of the terms is more interesting and can easily
               be explored using the online version of the companion. For instance, humanities
                  computing is predominantly used in the section where the contributors are
               described, while digital humanities is much more common than
                  humanities computing in the introduction (called The Humanities Computing and the Digital Humanities: An Introduction).
               These two texts represent very different genres. The Notes on Contributors section is
               largely a venue for self representation and presentation. The introduction is where
               the (new) field of digital humanities is being described and advocated (by the
               editors of the volume). In the history section (12 chapters in total) it is clearly
               the history of humanities computing that is told (58 instances of humanities
                  computing versus 1 instance of digital humanities). The
               section on principles (7 chapters) is primarily humanities computing-focused (23/4)
               as the main topics are text analysis, encoding, classification and modelling. The
               final two sections – on applications and production, dissemination, archiving –
               contain fewer instances of either term. One possible reason may be because these
               sections are more grounded in actual practice. Also, it is clear that individual
               preference plays an important role. Again, we are concerned with simple, quantitative
               measurements, but there is definitely a picture emerging.
            A pertinent question is whether the discursive transition from humanities computing
               to digital humanities is mainly a matter of repackaging (humanities computing), or
               whether the new label also indicates an expanded scope, a new focus or a different
               relation to traditional humanities computing work. The editors of the book series
                  Topics in the Digital Humanities indicate an ongoing
               change: 
                  Humanities computing is undergoing a
                     redefinition of basic principles by a continuous influx of new, vibrant, and
                     diverse communities of practitioners within and well beyond the halls of
                     academe. These practitioners recognize the value computers add to their work,
                     that the computer itself remains an instrument subject to continual innovation,
                     and that competition within many disciplines requires scholars to become and
                     remain current with what computers can do.
                  
               
            
            The book series announcement as a whole, however, maintains a focus on the computer
               as a tool and humanities computing methodologies. The epistemic commitment to
               technology as tool is also clearly evident from [t]hese practioners recognize the value computers add to their work.
            
            Unsurprisingly, it is difficult, possibly irrelevant, to pinpoint the meaning of a
               term in change, but it is nevertheless relevant to look at how such terms are
               introduced and used by an academic community. It is obvious that the term
                  digital humanities, as used by the humanities computing community,
               often serves as an overarching denotation in book and journal titles, etc., while
                  humanities computing is often used in the actual narrative.
            The territory of the term is being defined and negotiated by institutional entities
               such as the journal Digital Humanities Quarterly. The
               following text, which also suggests ongoing change, comes from the very first
               editorial of DHQ in the inaugural issue: 
                  Digital humanities is by its nature a
                     hybrid domain, crossing disciplinary boundaries and also traditional barriers
                     between theory and practice, technological implementation and scholarly
                     reflection. But over time this field has developed its own orthodoxies, its
                     internal lines of affiliation and collaboration that have become intellectual
                     paths of least resistance. In a world — perhaps scarcely imagined two decades
                     ago — where digital issues and questions are connected with nearly every area
                     of endeavor, we cannot take for granted a position of centrality. On the
                     contrary, we have to work hard even to remain aware of, let alone to master,
                     the numerous relevant domains that might affect our work and ideas. And at the
                     same time, we need to work hard to explain our work and ideas and to make them
                     visible to those outside our community who may find them useful.
                  
               
            
            This is an inclusive and open definition which also suggests a particular community,
               associated history, changing boundaries and possibly some fence keeping (imposing a
               notion of centrality or non-centrality and through identifying we and
                  them). Although no direct reference is made in the text, it is rather clear
               that the tradition implicitly referred to is humanities computing. The interest in
               dialogue indicated in the editorial is clearly important to the development of the
               whole field. Importantly, for a broad notion of digital humanities and a consorted
               effort, this dialogue must not only incorporate humanities computing as digital
               humanities and other varieties of digital humanities, but must also take place across
               a disciplinary landscape that additionally includes quite a number of initiatives and
               people that might not primarily classify what they do as digital
                  humanities. Indeed, not even everyone associated with the enterprises being
               subsumed under the label digital humanities might be comfortable with that
               categorization.
            In any case, the new name definitely suggests a broader scope and it is also used in
               wider circles as a collective name for activities and structures in between the
               Humanities and information technology.In her short reference to terms for the
                  field,  seems to regard these and other related terms
                  as more or less equivalent. In this analysis the terms are not seen as synonymous.
                  Rather they have certain traditions and values associated with them. And as
               we have seen in this analysis, there are many examples of humanities computing as
               digital humanities claiming a larger territory.
         

            Humanities Computing as Digital Humanities
            If humanities computing is to be taken as a more general digital humanities project
               it seems relevant to carefully consider the scope, implementation and ambition of the
               paradigm. Also, regardless of this perspective, there are certain characteristics of
               the paradigm that deserve critical attention and discussion. The four issues
               presented below touch on some of the disciplinary boundaries and epistemic culture of
               humanities computing and may possibly challenge some established perceptions of
               humanities computing. In any case, what follows is not so much a criticism of a
               paradigm as an exploration of boundaries and possibilities. It should also be added
               that the points discussed here have a bearing on digital humanities more
               generally.
            First, humanities computing as a whole maintains a very instrumental approach to
               technology in the Humanities. In her introductory chapter in the volume Digital Humanities, Susan Hockey says that this is not the
               place to define humanities computing, and continues, 
                  [s]uffice it to say that we are
                     concerned with the applications of computing to research and
                     teaching within the subjects that are loosely defined as the humanities,
                     or in British English, the arts
                  
                  
                (italics added). Hockey’s description is indicative of a paradigm in which
               information technology is typically not seen as an object of study, an exploratory
               laboratory, an expressive medium or an activist venue. Rather, technology has this
               basic and epistemically grounded role as a tool and much of humanities computing is
               about using these tools, helping others to use them and, to some extent, developing
               new tools (and methodologies). Many of these tools, such as concordance programs,
               have a rather long and distinguished history, and there has not necessarily been a
               great deal of radical change over time (see ). It could
               be argued that the focus of traditional humanities computing is not innovating new
               tools, but rather using and developing existing ones. Also a fair proportion of the
               development seems to occur on a structural or meta-data level. Examples include text
               encoding and markup systems. Of course work on this level has fundamental
               implications for the development and use of tools.
            Text encoding is typically seen as a core element of humanities computing. Koenraad
               de Smedt says that 
                  Text encoding seems to create the
                     foundation for almost any use of computers in the humanities
                  
               .
                   provides a useful overview and history of text
                  encoding. Classifications such as the major Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)
               involve very basic theoretical and methodological challenges  and there have also been calls for the development of more
               innovative tools based on these and other schemas .
               Rockwell stresses the importance of moving beyond existing personal tools, making
               community and server based tools more available, allowing for playful exploration and
               encouraging critical discussion of tools. Clearly there is a need for such a
               development, and while there are some exemplary projects there is a need for further
               development, discussion of best practice and further critical analysis. For instance,
               it would be interesting to see more integration with web 2.0 thinking and
                  platforms.While web 2.0 is certainly a buzz word there is no doubt much
                  interesting development in web-based collaborative and social software, handling
                  of micro content, visualization and innovative interfaces. See  for a useful overview. work in interaction and
               participatory design as well as methodologies such as rapid prototyping. An
               interesting, current example of methodological innovation is Rockwell’s and
               Sinclair’s work on extreme text analysis.
                  http://tada.mcmaster.ca/Main/WhatIsExtremeTextAnalysis
               
            
            It might also be argued that traditional humanities computing has not primarily been
               concerned with interface and how things look and feel – the materiality of the tools.
               Kirschenbaum says that 
                  the digital humanities have also
                     not yet begun […] to initiate a serious conversation about its relationship to
                     visual design, aesthetics, and, yes, even beauty
                  
               . McGann asserts that 
                  [d]igital instruments are only as good
                     as the interfaces by which we think through them
                  
               . There have also been calls for tools with more far-reaching and radical scope
               than the ones that humanities computing typically provides. Drucker and Nowviskie
               point out that 
                  [w]e are not only able to use digital
                     instruments to extend humanities research, but to reflect on the methods and
                     premises that shape our approach to knowledge and our understanding of how
                     interpretation is framed
                  
               .
            Second, it has often been pointed out that what brings humanities computing together
               is largely a common interest in methods, methodology, tools and technology. This
               partly follows from an instrumental orientation, of course, and there is no reason to
               question the methodological commons as a valuable interdisciplinary focus and
               productive collaborative sentiment. However, this strong methodological focus
               fundamentally affects the way humanities computing operates and relates to other
               disciplines. The most serious implication is that a predominantly methodological link
               to other disciplines may not integrate many of the specific issues that are at the
               core of these disciplines. It could be argued that this makes it more difficult for
               humanities computing to reach out more broadly to traditional humanities departments
               and scholars. While there will always be interest in methods and technology, the
               actual target group – humanities scholars with an active interest in humanities
               computing tools and perspectives – must be said to be relatively
                  limited.Conversely, the target group may be too large or knowledgeable when
                  the methods or technologies are already in use. In an interesting and
               provocative paper,  argues that the emerging
               discipline of digital humanities has been emerging for decades and that there
               is a perceived neglect on the part of the broader humanities community. While he is
               appreciative of the work done in humanities computing, he also finds that For the past forty years, humanities computing
                  have more or less languished in the background of traditional scholarship.
                  Scholars lack incentive to participate (or even to learn about) the results of
                  humanities computing.
            
            Looking at text analysis, Rockwell points out that 
                  text-analysis tools and the practices
                     of literary computer analysis have not had the anticipated impact on the
                     research community
                  
               . Juola’s analysis shows that citation scores for humanities computing journals
               are very low and he also points out that the American Ivy League universities are
               sparsely represented in humanities computing publications and at humanities computing
               conferences. It could be argued, however, that the lack of citations is partly due to
               the fact that humanities scholars who use humanities computing tools might not be
               inclined to cite the creators of these tools. This is especially true if no written
               work on associated methodology (or theories) has been employed in the research.
            A relevant question, of course, is whether humanities computing wants and needs to
               reach out to the humanities disciplines.Commenting on Juola’s presentation at
                  DH 2006 in Pairs in an informal wiki entry, Geoffrey Rockwell writes, 
                     Why do we have
                        to get buy in from others? Do researchers in established fields feel they
                        need to convert everyone else in the humanities? Do we really need
                        legitimization from others?
                     http://tada.mcmaster.ca/view/Main/Dh2006?skin=plain
                  . This relates to the earlier discussion of autonomy and discipline
               or not. There seems, however, to be rather strong support for expanding the territory
               and for achieving a higher degree of penetration. Furthermore, if the methodology and
               tools are central to the enterprise it seems counter-intuitive to disassociate
               yourself from many of the potential users (and co-creators) of the tools. It is
               evident from his discussion of possible high-profile killer applications that
               Juola shares an interest in the development of a new or evolved kind of tools with
               Drucker and Nowviskie and others. It could be argued that it would be beneficial to
               have tools or applications that relate more directly to some of the central
               discipline-specific challenges of the various humanities disciplines. Such a
               development would probably lead to somewhat less focus on methodology, a tighter
               integration of humanities computing and humanities disciplinesTerras says that 
                     [t]he field may only flourish as an
                        academic subject if it becomes less insular and interacts both with Computer
                        Science and those Humanities scholars who are less willing to accept
                        computing as part of their research tools
                     
                  . and possibly more tools and applications with a rich, combined
               theoretical, experiential and empirical foundation.
            Third, humanities computing has a very strong textual focus. Given the history and
               primary concerns of the field as well as the textual orientation of much of the
               humanities this is not very surprising. Traditional text is clearly a privileged
               level of description and analysis. In her analysis of humanities computing, which is
               partly corpus-based, Terras writes that 
                  Humanities Computing research is
                     predominantly about text
                  
               . While this is true, there has certainly been an increased interest in
               multimedia and non-textual representation. This interest may, for instance, be
               manifested in the form of metadata schemes for visual material or, increasingly, the
               interest in using geographical information systems in humanities computing. Reference
               is sometimes made to different technologies and methods (3D-modeling, GIS, animation,
               virtual reality etc.) but these are not necessarily integrated in practice. For
               instance, Jessop says that 
                  the research potential of working with
                     digital tools for handling spatial data has been explored in only very limited
                     contexts
                  
               . There are many exceptions and prolific scholars with a strong commitment to
               these issues but this cannot be said to be true of most of humanities computing.
               There is also a risk that other media are handled much in the same way as text (e.g.
               another object type to encode) or merely subservient to text following a very strong
               epistemic commitment to text as object. Here follows a rather text-focused discussion
               of images in relation to the history (and future) of humanities computing: 
                  There are of course many advantages in
                     having access to images of source material over the Web, but humanities
                     computing practitioners, having grown used to the flexibility offered by
                     searchable text, again tended to regard imaging projects as not really their
                     thing, unless, like the Beowulf Project , the
                     images could be manipulated and enhanced in some way. Interesting research has
                     been carried out on linking images to text, down to the level of the word . When most of this can be done automatically we will
                     be in a position to reconceptualize some aspects of manuscript studies. The
                     potential of other forms of multimedia is now well recognized, but the use of
                     this is only really feasible with high-speed access and the future may well lie
                     in a gradual convergence with television.
                  
               
            
            There is nothing wrong with a textual focus, of course, but it does have effects on
               the scope and penetration of humanities computing. The so-called visual turn
               Or, for that matter, a post-visual turn represented by for instance  and . or research on
               multimodal representation does not seem to have had a large impact on humanities
               computing. One reason is probably because there is little interaction between these
               communities and because it is difficult to conceptualize and develop tools for these
               kinds of framework. More generally, there seems to be an increasing interest in
               non-textual and mixed media in the Humanities and elsewhere (see for instance
               research on remediation, trans- or crossmedia texts, digital art and the current
               interest in mashups). And, needless to say, most native digital media are not
               pure text while humanities computing through focusing on text in its digitalized and
               encoded form could be said to privilege a rather pure (if annotated and
               structured) form of text. It seems that there should be considerable opportunities in
               this area for humanities computing – both for innovative tools and thinking – but
               also in relation to making a strong case for the need for considerable
               cyberinfrastructure in the Humanities.While there seems to be interest in text
                  mining and grid computing for textual analysis in humanities computing it seems
                  more likely that a broader range of data, visualization and computing intensive
                  applications will develop in relation to non-textual material (or a combination of
                  textual and non-textual material). Furthermore, there is clearly a need for
               people with expert competence and interest in structuring, annotating and managing
               data. It is exciting to see that interest in non-textual representation and analysis
               seems to be growing in humanities computing. It seems worthwhile to support this
               development – at least if the vision is an expansive and inclusive humanities
               computing/digital humanities. Such a development would not have to preclude a
               retained textual focus, of course.
            My fourth and final point relates to data and material used in humanities computing –
               or, put another way, the objects of study of humanities computing and associated
               disciplines. McCarty distinguishes between four data types in his discussion of a
               methodological commons: text, image, number and sound . It is characteristic of the model that the source materials and
               approaches of the disciplines are reduced these four data types and a finite (but not fixed) set of tools for
                  manipulating them.McCarty also adds that these tools are derived
                  from and their application governed by formal methods. The formalistic
                  aspects of humanities computing will not be discussed in any great detail
                  here. This touches on a tendency to subscribe to formal and science-driven
               models of knowledge production in humanities computing (where text is the principal
               object of study): 
                  Applications involving textual sources
                     have taken center stage within the development of humanities computing as
                     defined by its major publications and thus it is inevitable that this essay
                     concentrates on this area. Nor is it the place here to attempt to define
                        interdisciplinarity, but by its very nature, humanities
                     computing has had to embrace the two cultures, to bring the rigor and
                     systematic unambiguous procedural methodologies characteristic of the sciences
                     to address problems within the humanities that had hitherto been most often
                     treated in a serendipitous fashion.
                  
               
            
            As we have already seen and as the above quote reinforces, text is a privileged data
               type in humanities computing. Furthermore it could be argued that humanities
               computing is mainly interested in digitalized texts (or in some cases, digitalized
               historical sites etc.) and not material that is natively digital. Born digital
               material would include computer games, blogs, virtual worlds, social spaces such as
               MySpace, email collections, websites, surveillance footage, machinima films and
               digital art. Most of these objects are studied and analysed within different
               kinds of new media settings and to me this is an interesting in-between zone. Would
               humanities computing be interested in engaging more with new media scholars? There is
               certainly a need for well-crafted tools for studying online life and culture. Why
               does there not seem to be any software for doing comparative analysis and
               interpretation of computer games, for instance?To the best of my
                  knowledge. How can machinima films be tagged and related to the cultural
               artefacts to which they reference? How do we systemize and contextualize email
                  archives?Rockwell and Lancashire do discuss preservation of electronic
                  texts: 
                     The
                        future understanding of our past and understanding of this age of
                        technological change will be incomplete if we do not take steps to preserve
                        one of the most widely used forms of electronic information — the electronic
                        text.
                     http://tapor.ualberta.ca/Resources/TAIntro/
                  . Can social software platforms be adapted to humanities computing
               needs? Can multimodal and multi-channel communication be tracked, tagged,
               interrelated and made searchable in any consistent way?
            I find the intersection between humanities computing and new media studies
               intriguing. There is some new media-like work going on in humanities computing but it
               is relatively marginal and there are few tools available. A more complete and
               multifaceted engagement might stimulate more theoretical work in humanities
               computing. Rockwell makes a case for the importance of such an engagement: 
                  Digital theory should not be left to
                     new media scholars, nor should we expect to get it right so that we can go back
                     to encoding or other humanities disciplines. Theorizing, not a theory, is
                     needed; we need to cultivate reflection, interruption, standing aside and
                     thinking about the digital. We don’t need to negotiate a canon or a grand
                     theory, instead I wish for thinking about and through the digital in
                     community.
                  
               
            
            Regardless of whether such an engagement involved theory or mainly methods and tools,
               it seems that there might be mutual gains. Not least would humanities computing be
               able to draw more on a growing interest in digital culture and the technological
                  texture that Don Ihde postulates. A further possible result would be a more
               robust link to humanities disciplines through also working in a field where there are
               many current and important research challenges in relation to the digital (e.g.
               participatory culture, surveillance societies, gender and technology, and emerging
               art and text forms).The need for a stronger link to the disciplines has been
                  articulated in several different contexts. In an interesting Humanist thread (, ) from 1992, Mark
                  Olsen says (rather provocatively) that Humanities computing is a hobby largely because there
                     has been a consistent failure among the practitioners of humanities computing
                     to rock the boat; to produce results of sufficient interest, rigor and appeal
                     to attract a following among scholars who *do not* make extensive use of
                     computers. While rocking the boat should not be a goal in itself
                  it is true that the kind of development indicated here would probably bring about
                  more discipline-specific and humanities-external interest.
            
            The epistemic commitments of humanities computing are not limited to points discussed
               above, however these are particularly relevant for the discussion of humanities
               computing as digital humanities[28]. A broadly conceived digital humanities would
               necessarily include the instrumental, methodological, textual and digitalized, but
               also new study objects, multiple modes of engagement, theoretical issues from the
               humanities disciplines, the non-textual and the born digital.
         

            Multiple Identities and Risk Taking
            Let us briefly contrast humanities computing with a rather different kind of
               institutional setting and epistemic tradition. Anne Balsamo writes about the Georgia
               Institute of Technology in the article Engineering Cultural
                  Studies: The postdisciplinary adventures of mindplayers, fools, and
                  others. More specifically she relates the story, tensions and context of
               the program in science, technology, and culture offered in the School of Literature,
               Communication and Culture (LCC) at Georgia Tech. Partly this is done through the work
               of cyberpunk science fiction writer Pat Cadigan.
            LCC used to be an English Department and was transformed in 1990. Balsamo discusses
               the different identities that faculty wear and the complex interrelations associated
               with being a humanities representative at a predominantly technical school. For
               instance, the institutional position requires LCC faculty to be committed to
               traditional humanities values, in order not to give engineering schools arguments for
               reducing or doing away with the humanities requirement. The lack of a stable identity
               is the result of different roles and an interdisciplinary setting, and it resonates
               with the lack of stable identity that seems to be such an integral part of humanities
               computing. The interdisciplinary meetings and setting are important to both
               enterprises, but they are not without risk: 
                  Forging these new alliances – with
                     technologists, scientists, and medical educators – offers the possibility of
                     staking a claim on a territory that has been previously off-limits to the
                     nonscientist cultural theorists. As with other political struggles, the project
                     of alliance building is not without its risks and dangers.
                  
               
            
            Another similarity is instrumentalistic expectations from the outside. In the
               case of an institution such as LCC there are expectations of delivering high
                  culture and presumably, useful knowledge, to engineering students. At the same
               time there are basic values and critical perspectives that need to be expressed: 
                  As a feminist scholar, I certainly don’t
                     want to abandon the epistemological critique of the construction of scientific
                     knowledge as patriarchal knowledge. Nor do I want to give up on the pursuit of
                     social justice through scientific and technological means. This becomes another
                     occasion for the practice of identity-switching – this time not simply between
                     the humanist and the critic, but between the teacher and the advocate. Whereas
                     the teacher demands the students engage the philosophical critique of an
                     epistemological worldview and construct their own assessment of the value-laden
                     nature of a particular scientific worldview, the advocate continues to guide
                     them towards careers in science and technology and encourage them to find a way
                     to make a difference.
                  
               
            
            Both Balsamo’s engaging narrative and the narratives of humanities computing speak
               about being in between, having multiple identities, lacking a stable identity, and
               engaging richly but not unproblematically with other disciplines within and without
               the local setting. There is energy, risk-taking and wanting to make a difference in
               such narratives.
            Georgia Tech and traditional humanities computing clearly represent very different
               approaches to digital humanities. For example, while Balsamo sees information
               technology as a cultural object in need of exploration and epistemological critique,
               traditional humanities computing treats technology in a more formal and instrumental
               way. In the next article in this series, an attempt to lay out a more detailed and
               comprehensive map of the digital humanities will be made. A number of diverse
               initiatives and approaches are used as examples, and different modes of engagement
               with the digital are discussed at more length. The story of the digital
               humanities continues to be complex in terms of the theoretical, practice-based,
               historical, technical and disciplinary foundations and a fast-changing landscape. It
               is exactly these qualities that make digital humanities an exciting field to study,
               and a place full of energy and multiple identities.
         

            Acknowledgements
            I draw on interaction with a great many helpful and inspiring scholars, managers,
               artists, developers and others. I would like to thank Matthew Ratto for his careful
               reading of drafts and his suggestions and Stephanie Hendrick for her comments and
               language suggestions. In addition, I have greatly benefited from discussions with
               Geoffrey Rockwell, Willard McCarty, David Theo Goldberg, Lisa Parks, Katherine
               Hayles, Christopher Witmore, Erica Robles, Michael Shanks, Jeffrey Schnapp, Anne
               Balsamo, Tara McPherson and many others.
         
