Title:  Velvet Evolution: A Review of Lev Manovich's
                        
Volume:  013
Issue:  1
Date:  26 April 2019
Abstract:  
                
                Lev Manovich presents a theory of software as simulation. To form the user
                    interface for modern media software, older media are metaphorized, and then new
                    features are added to the media by virtue of their being simulations, and
                    finally the original media are combined to create new forms of cultural
                    expression. Movies that seamlessly combine lens photography and 3D computer
                    graphics are the best example of new cultural forms created by software.
            
Full Body Text: 
When I started writing this review, a story had just gone viral in social media and
                then moved to traditional media: a teacher in Kenya had to prepare his students to
                take a standard exam that included using computers, but had no computers in his
                classroom, so he drew the user-interface of Microsoft Word on the blackboard, in
                exquisite detail . This story caught attention
                because it pointed out the digital divide of course, but we were also fascinated by
                the detail - striking, how we are all able to check the accuracy of his drawing from
                memory. It suggests a central claim of Lev Manovich's Software
                    Takes Command: we now live in 
                    a software society and our culture can be justifiably
                        called a software culture — because today software plays a central role in
                        shaping both the material elements and many of the immaterial structures
                        that together make up culture
                    
                . To argue for this claim and follow through on its implications, his work
                spans categories such as visual arts, media studies, and software studies.
Manovich combines three rhetorical threads in this book. First is an encomium to
                software as something close to a force in human evolution: at the end of the
                twentieth century humans have added a fundamentally new dimension to everything that
                counts as 
                    culture
                    
                . Second, within the historical trajectory leading from Xerox PARC to the
                Macintosh to iPads, Manovich studies the writings of some of the better-known
                computer scientists involved to discover ideas of remediation that are central to
                his analysis. Third, he produces close reading of two pieces of software that are
                products of that school of thought: 
                    desktop applications for media authoring most widely used
                        today,
                    
                 namely Adobe Photoshop and After Effects.
We think it is entirely fitting that a text like Frankenstein, so germinal in our culture that we see signs of it
                everywhere, should be the subject of so much scholarly attention, read by multiple
                schools of criticism. A text like Microsoft Word is no less central to our lived
                experience and ephemeral and lasting culture, and deserves scholarly attention as
                well. Manovich coined the term 
                    software studies,
                    
                 in his earlier important work, Language of New
                    Media, and he fully explores it here.
A budding academic field has branched off to do software studies, which we
                might generalize as centering on the study of code as writing. Manovich follows his
                own path here: software as a force in culture. He makes the case strenuously that we
                cannot consider any aspect of contemporary culture — from art to entertainment to
                work and the economy, to the production, distribution, and use of knowledge — without
                considering software, because software as a movement has brought with it an
                aesthetic and epistemology. And Manovich is interested in software, not code: 
                    I am interested in how software appears to users — i.e. what
                        functions it offers . . . the interfaces used to present these functions,
                        and assumptions and models about a user, her/his needs, and society encoded
                        in these functions and their interface design
                    
                .
To cite an example he keeps returning to: many examples of software include the
                functions of select, copy, cut, and paste. Manovich has the technical sophistication
                to know that the algorithms behind these functions can have nothing to do with each
                other. In fact, when I use them in a program like Adobe Illustrator, I might be
                invoking entirely different modules of code if I select and copy a block of text or
                the outline of a building or a bit-map image. Manovich would have us dispense with
                these distinctions. What is important for his argument is that they create the same
                experience for the user, the same way of dealing with information and with the
                world; and the conventions that unify the movement of software in expressly the same
                way as a particular linear perspective can unify a school of visual art. He is most
                comfortable dealing with the visual user interface as a seamless surface and he
                provides virtuoso close readings reminiscent of New Critics like Cleanth Brooks or
                I. A. Richards.
Manovich's survey of the history of ideas centers on the computer as simulation.
                Computers are remediation machines, borrowing the term remediation from Jay
                Bolter and Richard Grusin: 
                    the representation of one medium in another
                    
                . Older media are metaphorized in the visual interface of software. Files are
                viewed inside images of manila folders that we can drag them into and out of, and we
                add color to a shape with an image of a paint bucket. This is the central aesthetic
                and the germinal idea animating all the software Manovich focuses on. Software has
                made computers into a metamedium, a wide range of already-existing and
                    not-yet-invented media.
Most important to Manovich's narrative, the innovators at Xerox PARC and then Apple
                Computer developed applications for media manipulation and creation that
                incorporated representations of older media (e.g, scissors, paint brushes,
                envelopes) into their graphic user interfaces. He moves from one well-known
                historical episode to another — Douglas Engelbart's mother of all demos, Alan
                Kay and others at Xerox PARC (the direct ancestor of the Macintosh's interface) — and
                suggests a genealogy that leads us to the present of Photoshop and After Effects and
                Terminator II. Although these writers’ texts are readily available and Engelbart's
                demo is on YouTube, any serious attention paid to them is worth praise. Manovich
                points out the continuity of ideas and argues that they culminate in the software
                that media professionals use in the present.
Diving into the recent history of software is still rare enough to always be worth
                reading, and I hope Command inspires more and deeper
                work. What alternative ideas of computing died on the vine? Is it significant that
                all the figures Manovich touches on are white men with similar educational
                backgrounds and institutional positioning? How did economic and institutional
                pressures affect the ideas these figures chose to pursue? Did anything connect these
                figures aside from ideas? Other than theories of modern art, were there any ideas
                circulating in the 1960s and 1970s that may have found their way into their
                thinking? The writers he surveys were interested in hardware as well as software
                (and not just because software was not unbundled in the way that it is now;
                Engelbart spends a good deal of time on office furniture); can we really speak of
                one without the other? He asks why these writers did not find more interest in the
                academy and why capital is more interested in these media technologies — an excellent
                question! — but quickly hedges: 
                    The systematic answer to this question will require its own
                        investigation
                    
                ; that question would indeed make for an interesting study.

                The Potential of Softwarization
                It is through close readings of cultural software that Manovich fleshes
                    out his ideas of software as re-mediation. When a medium undergoes the process
                    of softwarization, it is first metaphorized from the physical. E.g., reading a
                    book on an iPad, we can flip pages and leave a bookmark much as we can with a
                    physical codex. Then by virtue of the software simulating the bound paper book,
                    new features are added. We can zoom in on details of a page and copy and paste
                    text directly rather than having to do it manually, and the creators can add
                    features like hyperlinks. Thus the simulation both reproduces and augments the
                    older forms. It is a process he demonstrates in his close reading of the
                    interface of Photoshop. A paintbrush is simulated, but the simulation software
                    gives greater control than any artist ever had.
                Manovich effectively refutes the facile premise most of us, myself included — have
                    probably voiced, that capabilities are added to media — greater ease of creation,
                    manipulation, duplication, distribution and so on — by virtue of their being
                    digital. Rather, our new capabilities with new media arise from the software we
                    use. It is not by virtue of being digital that I can string-search a
                    digital copy of Frankenstein or copy it without
                    effort or loss in quality. Rather, I can search the text and copy it because
                    software allows me to.
                But wait, there's more. The next stage in the process of softwarization is when
                    chunks of code simulating different tools and different media communicate with
                    each other behind the scenes and are presented to us in the same interface, so
                    that media combine seamlessly. In his reading of the After Effects interface to
                    serve as illustration, Manovich argues that now since one can author in multiple
                    media at the same time, combining video, 3D animation, textual effects and so
                    on, the end result is not simply multi-media. Rather, 
                        the new media of 3D computer animation has eaten
                                up the dominant media of the industrial age  —  lens-based photo,
                            film and video recording
                        
                    , and a new medium is created where live-action video is not separable
                    from animation: 
                        the most fundamental assumptions of different media
                            forms and traditions, are brought together resulting in new media
                            gestalts. That is, they merge together to offer a coherent new
                            experience different from experiencing all the elements
                            separately
                        
                    . This process of softwarization is described in the terms of biological
                    evolution: 
                        The already simulated mediums started exchanging
                            properties and techniques. As a result, the computer metamedium came to
                            contain endless new species
                        
                    .
                To name the process of simulation and softwarization and remediation he adopts
                    the term Velvet Revolution, from Czechoslovakia's nonviolent political
                    change, to refer to the revolution of software, and although he never follows
                    through, he asserts, 
                        Although it may seem presumptuous to compare political
                            and aesthetics transformations . . . it is possible to show that the two
                            revolutions are actually related
                        
                    . This is the point in the book I most needed Manovich to flesh out. He
                    goes on to rely on the term, but never returns to define what the political
                    implications are. It's hard to guess at what the parallels are. Of course, we
                    should note that Manovich grew up and received his first training in art in the
                    Soviet Union, where in recent history aesthetics had very clear political causes
                    and effects. But if he sees political effects of this movement in software, he
                    does not explicitly explore it. What are the political implications of this
                    Velvet Revolution?
                Manovich views films like Terminator 2, The Matrix, 300, and
                    television commercials as the apotheosis of Velvet Revolution: the 
                        logic is also the same as that which we observe in the
                            creation of new hybrids in biology. That is, the result of the
                            hybridization process is not simply a mechanical sum of the previously
                            existing parts but a new species — a new kind of visual aesthetics
                            that did not exist previously
                        
                    .
                Software has enabled filmmakers to combine 3D graphics with live photography so
                    that they are indistinguishable, and characters played by actors interact
                    seamlessly with computer-generated characters, looking just as realistic so that
                    we can forget about the difference between them. We can extend the argument into
                    the present with films like Guardians of the Galaxy
                    and Rogue One: A Star Wars Story. The 2016 film
                        Rogue One created some controversy  for blurring the line until it is meaningless,
                    imposing the faces of a young Carrie Fisher and Peter Cushing on other actors.
                    Thus Carrie Fisher could have a simulated cameo as a younger version of herself
                    and Cushing, the deceased legend of stage and screen who died in 1994, could
                    play a crucial supporting role in this film, in 2016.
            

                Software and Human Progress
                Manovich's greatest contribution is an ode to software: 
                        our contemporary society can be characterized as a
                            software society and our culture can be justifiably called a software
                            culture — because today software plays a central role in shaping both the
                            material elements and many of the immaterial structures that together
                            make up culture
                        
                     [Manovich 2013, 33].
                His voice is as strong as it was in The Language of New
                        Media. Manovich's work is indispensable for the language he
                    provides, an optimistic — ecstatic even-view of the progress already achieved
                    and the further promise of digital technologies, unmoderated by critical
                    perspectives but also unsullied by the tendency of voices centered in Silicon
                    Valley to view the potential for profit as grounds for praise.
                Software is a force in human evolution: 
                        In my view, this ability to combine previously separate
                            media techniques represents a fundamentally new stage in the history of
                            human media, human semiosis, and human communication, enabled by its
                                softwarization
                        
                    . Additionally, software follows its own teleology, best described as a
                    virus released in the wild: 
                        The makers of software used in media production usually
                            do not set out to create a revolution. On the contrary, software is
                            created to fit into already existing production procedures, job roles,
                            and familiar tasks. But software applications are like species within
                            the common ecology — in this case, a shared environment of a digital
                            computer. Once released, they start interacting, mutating, and
                            making hybrids
                    	
                    . Human agency, collective or individual, is not important to this
                    narrative.
                Speaking broadly, we can view those who, analyze technology in the world as
                    divided between those whose first impulse is to celebrate every innovation of
                    technology as historic progress, and those whose first impulse is to be
                    critical, skeptical, suspicious. Many of those in the former group, if they are
                    not directly associated with venture capitalists, often tend to see the
                    economics of technology as itself justifying it. Try to imagine praise for
                    Facebook that makes no reference to market success. This is not true of
                    Manovich. He is ecstatic about progress demonstrated and the further potential
                    of new information technologies, without relying on facile economic
                    justifications. His work needs to be read, as it serves as a corrective to
                    critical approaches to our digital environment. He writes like a visionary and a
                    user of computers, not like a venture capitalist.
                He gives us the language to discuss the promise of software, but no help
                    criticizing it. To return to Manovich's central point about software and the
                    aesthetic of The Matrix, we might reflect on recent
                    history and the importance of recordings made public. During the last
                    presidential campaign (2016), a recording (whose veracity was confirmed)
                    surfaced of the future President confessing to sexual assault. There is talk of
                    him possibly being blackmailed with a tape involving prostitutes in a foreign
                    country. In the campaign for Governor in my home state of Illinois, a recording
                    (also confirmed) was leaked of a Democratic candidate having a conversation with
                    a past corrupt governor. A video claiming to show the Democratic nominee for
                    President is circulating now on the internet in conservative circles. That one
                    is obviously fake, but the examples cited above show that a fake video can
                    look very real. Rogue One is entertaining fiction but it is not hard to imagine
                    dangerous fictions flowing from the Velvet Revolution. How do we cope with the
                    same techniques used to bring Peter Cushing back from the dead being used to
                    show Barack Obama or Robert Mueller committing a crime? Manovich's work
                    celebrates the software that makes possible such a dangerous falsehood, but
                    leaves it to us to decide how to deal with the consequences.
                Manovich's comfort with software as a sealed commodity, as shown in the example
                    of copy and paste as a topos rather than code, would seem at odds with the
                    approaches of many in the audience of this journal. There is a very different
                    ethos valued by many digital humanists that stresses the transparency and
                    comprehensibility of the software tools we use, e.g., their ideal is to publish
                    not just the visualized product, but also the raw dataset and the code that
                    produced it and the version of R it ran on, in case a bug is discovered by the R
                    community in the future. Commitment to the work of understanding the software
                    tools used is not fun, but is generally considered empowering and honest.
                    Manovich is clear that he is interested in the experience of most users, and we
                    know that most users are happy to use seamless black boxes. This leads to an
                    honest question: is it a problem if most users don't have an empowered attitude
                    toward the software they rely on?
            
