Title:  DHQ Test Article: Beastiary
Volume:  000
Issue:  0
Date: N/A
Abstract:  
                
                
            
Full Body Text: 


                    Paragraphs: A simple series of paragraphs.
                        The language under discussion here is called Comic Book Markup
                            Language in part to highlight the book-ness and bookishness of these documents, their
                            material properties and bibliographic characteristics. Graphic narratives typically
                            manifest as books, stapled or otherwise bound leaves, perhaps
                            thirty-six pages, with an interesting and complex structure, incorporating the
                            graphic narrative — the sequential art and text or comics
                            content — alongside a rich assortment of paratexts: advertisements, fan mail, and so
                            on. The emphasis on both comics and books
                            in the title of the language signals an awareness of the full range of content in the
                            material artifact and the integration of comics content with related paratextual
                            content. The material properties of the book — the codex form, the leaves and pages,
                            the physical properties of the paper — are inseparable from the structure, pacing,
                            and design of the narrative. Certainly less page-bound organizational and
                            compositional frameworks are possible, such as the newspaper strips with long-running
                            narrative arcs, in which the daily strip of three or four panels
                            is the basic structural unit.
                         The traditional grouping of panels into deliberately composed groups (often
                            corresponding to the physical page or the strip of a newspaper
                            daily) is being challenged by changing publishing and reading technologies. iPhones
                            and other smartphones have become popular devices for reading newly published comics
                            as well as reprints of older comics. However, a full-page grid
                            of panels is not easily readable on the smaller screen of the typical smartphone, so
                            the software interfaces on such devices focus on a single panel at a time. The
                            deliberate juxtaposition of graphic and textual elements in the original composition
                            is shattered by the interface requirements and limitations of the reading device. As
                            new comics work is increasingly targeted at such digital platforms, the traditional
                            grouping of panels into compositional units resembling pages may be abandoned for new
                            compositional strategies. Larger format devices like the iPad and other tablets are
                            better able to represent full-page compositions of panels while also allowing zooming
                            in to focus on individual panels. The isolation of a panel from its surrounding
                            context is not easily achieved in print media. While the reader's eyes and attention
                            may focus on a single panel at a time, other panels on the page remain in the
                            reader's field of vision. The migration of comics content to digital reading devices,
                            and the structural and aesthetic implications of that migration, call attention to
                            the impact of the material characteristics of the comic book document.
                        Comic books are often very formally self-conscious documents and express a
                            fascination with their own bibliographic identities — creators (comic book writers
                            and artists) become characters in the narrative, editorial notes refer to episodes
                            from prior issues, comic books and paratextual elements, such as advertisements, are
                            parodied within the comic book narrative, publication milestones (such as the first,
                            fiftieth, or one hundredth issue are highlighted and celebrated. These literary,
                            rhetorical, and commercial moves point to a self-awareness of the comic book as
                            document and bibliographic object.
                        CBML is intended primarily for representing, modeling, and analyzing twentieth- and
                            twenty-first-century comic books, daily comic strips, longer narratives or
                            graphic novels, and Web comics and other comics content
                            published on digital platforms, such as smartphones and tablets. CBML may also serve
                            as a possible solution for encoding certain documents we might not normally
                            characterize as comics or comic books, but which share many formal characteristics
                            with comics. In his influential Understanding Comics, Scott McCloud's
                            definition of comics encompasses Hogarth's narrative picture series, the Bayeux Tapestry, and
                            pre-Columbian picture writing as found in the Codex Zouche-Nuttall
                            . 
                   

                 Block quotes
                     This study provides an introduction and rationale for the development of Comic Book
                         Markup Language, or CBML, an XMLXML, or eXtensible Markup Language, is a
                             widely-adopted metalanguage that specifies a set of rules for encoding documents
                             and data and for creating application- and domain-specific markup languages for
                             encoding documents and data. XML is a recommendation of the World Wide Web
                             Consortium. See . vocabulary for encoding
                         multiform documents that are variously called comics, comic books, and
                         graphic novels
                         I share with many comics creators and scholars a dissatisfaction with the term
                             graphic novel, finding it unnecessary, misleading and
                             perpetuating of a false distinction. Wikipedia's article on Graphic novel includes a useful summary of many of the criticisms of the
                             term. as well as other documents that integrate comics contentAn
                                 example is Peter David's Mascot to the Rescue!
                                 , a superhero-themed children’s novel that integrates
                                 comics content with more traditional narrative prose. Brian Selznick’s The
                                     Invention of Hugo Cabret
                                  is an illustrated novel, with many of the
                                 illustrations subdivided into juxtaposed images reminiscent of comics
                                 panels. or that share formal features with comics content. A markup
                         language is a set of machine-readable textual codes, or tags,
                         that are used to identify structure, semantics, and other features of documents and
                         data.Readers from the scholarly markup and digital humanities communities
                             will be familiar with many of the general issues about text encoding discussed
                             here. I am also hopeful that this essay will attract readers from the comics
                             scholarship community who may not be as familiar with text encoding, and so I go
                             into more detail about general issues of text encoding than I might
                             otherwise. The application of these codes to a document is typically a
                         necessary stage, often the most crucial and informative stage, of editing, analyzing,
                         indexing publishing, visualizing, and otherwise studying or manipulating texts in
                         digital environments. The act of encoding a document is a form of discovery, or
                         prospecting, in which the encoder maps a document's structure, identifies semantic
                         elements of interest, and documents relationships internal and external to the
                         document. Scholarly encoding is a form of both reading and writing. The reading,
                         shaped by the constraints of a markup language, is inscribed upon and embedded within
                         the digital text. As literary scholar and digital humanist Jerome McGann has noted, 
                             When you mark up a text you are ipso
                                 facto reading and interpreting it. A … text marked up in TEI [a scholarly
                                 encoding language] has been subjected to a certain kind of
                                 interpretation
                             
                         . Sperberg-McQueen, Huitfeldt, and Renear assert that markup is constitutive of
                         meaning, markup is interpretive, markup is performative, markup acknowledges or
                         licenses inferences about the text: 
                             
                                 Markup is inserted into textual material not at random, but to convey some
                                     meaning.
                                  An author may supply markup as part of the act of composing a text; in this
                                     case the markup expresses the author’s intentions, e.g. as to the structure
                                     or appearance of the text. The author creates a section heading, for
                                     example, by creating an appropriate element in the document; the content of
                                     that element is a section heading because the author says so, and the markup
                                     is simply the method by which the author says so. The markup, that is, has
                                     performative significance. 
                                  In other cases, markup is supplied as part of the transcription in
                                     electronic form of pre-existing material. In such cases, markup reflects the
                                     understanding of the text held by the transcriber; we say that the markup
                                     expresses a claim about the text. The transcriber
                                     identifies a section heading in the pre-existing text by transcribing it and
                                     tagging it as a section heading; the content of that element is a section
                                     heading if the transcriber’s interpretation is correct, but other
                                     interpreters might disagree; it is plausible to imagine discussions over
                                     whether a given way of marking up a text is correct or incorrect.The
                                         reader wishing to test whether or not it is indeed plausible to
                                             imagine discussions over whether a given way of marking up a text is
                                             correct or incorrect is invited to browse the TEI
                                                 Mailing List (TEI-L) Archive, where she will find many lively
                                         and energetic debates on markup practices.
                                 
                                  In the one case, markup is constitutive of the meaning; in the other, it is
                                     interpretive. In each case, the reader may legitimately use the markup to
                                     make inferences about the structure and properties of the text. For this
                                     reason, we say that markup licenses certain
                                         inferences about the text. 
                             
                             
                         
                     
                     Julia Flanders' discussion of scholarly text encoding privileges the role of the
                         researcher/encoder and likens the encoded text to the scholarly article: 
                             
                                 Perhaps we need to look to the pleasure of mutability. To recuperate XML,
                                     politically and aesthetically, we should be looking not to the paradigms of
                                     XML usage that arise from librarianship and from industry-level ideas of the
                                     separability of form and content, but rather to paradigms of performance of
                                     a different kind. By shifting our view we can understand XML as a way of
                                     expressing perspectival understandings of the text: not as a way of
                                     capturing what is timeless and essential, but as a way of inscribing our own
                                     changeable will on the text — in other words, as a form of reading. Seen
                                     this way, XML's presentational flexibility derives not from a separation of
                                     presentation and content, but rather from the shifting vantage points from
                                     which the text appears to us, the shifting relationships that constrain our
                                     understanding of it, the adaptability and strategic positioning of our own
                                     readerly motivations.
                                  Ironically, this is a view which emerges most clearly at the margins of
                                     current digital text practice. It is not visible in the large digital
                                     library projects, whose workflow has come to resemble an industrial
                                     operation complete with offshore outsourcing, detailed division of labor,
                                     reliance on automation and robotics, and an emphasis, in the output, on
                                     uniformity and quantity (thankfully planned obsolescence has not yet become
                                     part of the strategy). But we can find it in the small projects designed by
                                     individual faculty, typically in conjunction with their teaching, to create
                                     digital versions of individual texts which serve as readings: often
                                     idiosyncratic, unscalable, representing private insight. They function more
                                     like an article than an archive, as a local, contingent expression of
                                     insight.
                             
                             
                         
                     
                      The development of a markup language that can support such scholarly reading and
                         interpretation necessitates a careful study and analysis of the content, structure,
                         and semantics of the class or classes of documents for which the language is designed
                         — in this case, the comic book.
                     CBML is based on the 
                         Text Encoding
                             Initiative P5: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange
                     . The TEI Guidelines are a mature conceptual model for digital
                         representation of multitudinous and disparate document types: inscriptions and
                         papyri; illuminated manuscripts; authorial holograph manuscripts; correspondence;
                         printed books of prose, verse, and drama; critical and scholarly editions;
                         born-digital documents; and more. The TEI Guidelines
                         
                             make recommendations about suitable ways of
                                 representing those features of textual resources which need to be identified
                                 explicitly in order to facilitate processing by computer programs. In
                                 particular, they specify a set of markers (or tags) which may be inserted in
                                 the electronic representation of the text, in order to mark the text structure
                                 and other features of interest.
                             
                          The TEI Guidelines are widely used in the digital humanities
                         and academic library communities and are maintained by the TEI Consortium, an international body
                         modules, including modules for general categories of documents, such as prose, drama,
                         verse, and dictionaries.Hundreds of scholarly projects are based upon
                             underlying TEI-encoded texts and data. Examples includes my own projects: 
                                 The Algernon Charles Swinburne
                                     Project
                              and 
                                 Chymistry of Isaac Newton
                              , a collaboration with William R. Newman, Professor of History of Science
                             at Indiana University. While not an exhaustive list, many other TEI-based projects
                             may be found at http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/Projects/. The
                         Guidelines also provide additional modules that address more
                         specific textual features and metadata requirements, such as names and dates,
                         manuscript description, linking, textual criticism, and so on. And in their most
                         recent incarnation, the Guidelines provide elements and attributes for
                         linking transcriptions to facsimile page images. This latter feature is especially
                         useful for encoding comics and other graphics-intensive works. From these many
                         available modules, one selects a subset that meets the needs of a particular
                         document, project, collection, or analytical approach. The TEI
                             Guidelines are extremely flexible, providing a vocabulary and mechanisms
                         for encoding and describing a rich diversity document types. However, recognizing
                         that not every document type and representational requirement may be anticipated, the
                         Guidelines provide a well-documented system for customizing and
                         extending the provided tag set with new and modified elements and
                         attributes.See chapter 23 Using the TEI of the
                             TEI Guidelines
                              and Roma, an online tool for generating validators for the TEI.
                          TEI, as delivered by the TEI Consortium, is remarkably well-suited to
                         encoding many aspects of comic books; nevertheless, conceptual clarity and practical
                         benefits may be gained from some modest modifications and additions to the stock
                         TEI Guidelines. Hence CBML, a TEI customization with elements and
                         attributes for encoding many of the structures and features found in comic book
                         documents.
                     
                 

                 Tables
                 
                 Tables with lists in cells:
                 
                     
                     
                         Ten page paper
                         
                             
                                 Clear thesis, correct citations, good use of primary
                                     and secondary sources and examples, good mechanics,
                                     well-organized.
                             
                         
                     
                     
                         Based on a travel narrative and course themes
                         
                             
                                 Extensive and creative engagement with a narrative. 
                                 Citation and discussion of assigned readings and
                                     course themes.
                             
                         
                     
                     
                         Focused on geography 
                         
                             
                                 A thesis and analysis that reflects the traveler’s
                                     movement through a particular human and physical terrain
                                     at a particular time.
                             
                         
                     
                 
                 
                 
                     Features appearing in the top 500 highest-weighted in both time range models 
                     
                         
                             153 persistent features in Male-authored documents: 
                             1, a, abord, action, affaire, ajouta, amie, article, au, aura, auteur, autour, autre, aux, avons, bas, bouche, bras, c, capitaine, cent, chacun, chair, champ, charles, chez, christ, ciel, cinq, comment, comtesse, contre, corps, coup, coups, crime, côté, d', des, deux, diable, dis, docteur, doigts, dont, doute, droite, du, entre, est, face, fait, façon, femme, feu, fin, fit, fois, foule, gens, gros, haut, histoire, homme, hé, hôtel, ils, in, jacques, jean, juge, jusqu', la, laquelle, le, les, leurs, ligne, long, lorsque, main, mains, maîtresse, messieurs, mis, mit, moins, monseigneur, monsieur, montre, mot, même, nez, nom, nombre, nos, oeil, oeuvres, ordre, oreille, ou, oui, où, par, passage, pied, pieds, présente, président, prêtre, quatre, quelqu', quelque, quelques, question, qui, quoi, reprit, reste, rue, récit, saint, saints, salut, sang, second, seconde, selon, ses, seulement, simple, sire, soit, sous, sur, table, tirer, tour, toute, trente, trois, un, v, ventre, vers, vieux, village, vin, vingt, voici, y, yeux, à
                         
                     
                     
                         
                             192 persistent features in Female-authored documents: 
                             192 persistent features in Female-authored documents: absence, admiration, afin, agréable, ai, aimable, aime, aimer, aller, amitié, amour, anglais, angleterre, auguste, auprès, aurais, avais, avait, avec, avez, avoir, beaucoup, belle, bien, bonheur, bonne, brillante, but, cacher, car, caractère, celle, chagrin, chercher, chère, coeur, comprendre, compte, comte, confiance, conserver, cour, crois, destinée, disant, donner, douceur, douleur, doux, elle, elles, empêcher, encore, enfance, enfant, enfants, entièrement, envie, esprit, espérance, estime, eût, faisait, fallait, faut, fièvre, fleurs, france, frère, fût, gloire, goût, grande, grandes, généreux, henri, hiver, ici, il, imagination, impossible, inquiétude, inspire, inspirer, instant, intérêt, jamais, jardin, jours, liberté, lui, lumières, m, ma, mais, malgré, manière, manières, me, moi, mon, montrer, mère, ne, ni, nécessaire, opinion, parce, parler, parlez, passion, pauvre, pays, personne, personnes, petite, peut, peuvent, plaire, plaisir, pleurs, plusieurs, possible, pourquoi, pourrais, pouvait, prince, princes, princesse, pu, puisque, puissance, père, quand, que, quitter, regarder, reine, repos, retrouver, revenir, roi, sais, sait, sans, savoir, secret, sentiment, sentir, seule, si, son, souffrir, souvenir, souvent, soyez, suis, supporter, surprise, tant, toi, toujours, tous, toutes, trop, trouva, trouver, très, tu, utile, veux, vie, vit, vivre, voir, vois, vos, votre, voulait, voulut, vous, voyage, voyant, véritable, âme, éducation, égard, égards, émotion, épouser, était, êtes
                         
                     
                 
                 
                 Within the male and female lists, it is possible to identify a number of interesting semantic groupings of words. Reassuringly, the female pronouns and negative polarity items and male quantifiers discussed earlier are still present. In addition, there are a number of other semantic categories of words that appear to cohere: 
                 
                     Subjective thematic groups among the persistent features
                     
                         Enduring Male Terms
                         Enduring Female Terms
                     
                     
                         
                             
                                 
                                     Quantifiers: 
                                     quelqu', quelque(s)
                                 
                                 
                                     Religiosity: 
                                     christ, ciel, corps, diable, saint(s), saints, sang(?)
                                 
                                  
                                      Numericality: 
                                     1, cinq, cent, deux, nombre, quatre, second(e), trois, trente, un, vingt
                                 
                                 
                                      Anatomy: 
                                     bouche, bras, chair, corps, doigts, face(?), main, nez, pied(s), oeil, oreille, sang, yeux, ventre
                                 
                                 
                                     Authority: 
                                     capitaine, docteur, juge, président, sire
                                 
                                 
                                     Other notables: 
                                     action, amie, femme, feu, histoire, homme, maîtresse, rue, salut, vieux, village, vin
                                 
                               
                         
                         
                             
                                 
                                     Pronouns: 
                                     me, moi, mon, vos, votre, vous   
                                 
                                 
                                     Spirituality: 
                                     âme, chercher, coeur, destinée, espérance, esprit, imagination, inspire, inspirer, passion
                                 
                                 
                                     Quantifiers: 
                                     tous, toutes, (toujours)
                                 
                                 
                                     Emotion: 
                                     agréable, aimable, aime, aimer, amitié, amour, bonheur, douceur, douleur, doux, émotion, envie, espérance, plaire, plaisir, pleurs, sentiment, sentir, seule
                                 
                                 
                                     Family: 
                                     enfant(s), épouser, frère, mère, père
                                 
                                 
                                     Nobility: 
                                     prince(s), princesse, reine, roi
                                 
                                 
                                     Negatives: 
                                     impossible, ne, ni, pas, personne, sans
                                 
                                 
                                     Other notables: 
                                     éducation, impossible, inquiétude, gloire, liberté, lumières, opinion, pauvre, possible, puissance, quitter, sais, sait, savoir, secret, seule, souffrir, souvenir, supporter, surprise, vivre, voyage, voyant, voulait, voulut  
                                 
                                
                         
                     
                 
                 
                 
                     Professional Metadata for Figure 9. [A simple table]
                     
                         Airships
                     
                     
                         Explosions
                     
                     
                         Aircraft Accidents
                     
                     
                         Hindenburg (Airship)
                     
                     
                         1934-1956 (approx.)
                     
                 
                 
                     Folksonomic Metadata and Scores from Voorbij and Kipp Scale for Figure
                         9.
                     
                         Folksonomic Metadata
                         Score (Voorbij and Kipp Scale)
                         Notes
                     
                     
                         Hindenburg (Airship)
                         1
                         exact match to Hindenburg (Airship)
                     
                     
                         Hindenburg
                         2
                         synonym for Hindenburg (Airship)
                     
                     
                         Accidents
                         3
                         broader term of Aircraft accidents
                     
                     
                         Zeppelin
                         4
                         narrower term of Airships
                     
                     
                         Flames
                         5
                         Present in photograph; related to Explosions
                     
                     
                         Painting
                         6
                         this is a photograph
                     
                     
                         omgreadlater
                         7
                         junk tag
                     
                 
             	

                     Folksonomic Metadata and Scores from Voorbij and Kipp Scale for Figure
                         9. [with control over column widths]
                     
                         Folksonomic Metadata
                         Score (Voorbij and Kipp Scale)
                         Notes
                     
                     
                         Hindenburg (Airship)
                         1
                         exact match to Hindenburg (Airship)
                     
                     
                         Hindenburg
                         2
                         synonym for Hindenburg (Airship)
                     
                     
                         Accidents
                         3
                         broader term of Aircraft accidents
                     
                     
                         Zeppelin
                         4
                         narrower term of Airships
                     
                     
                         Flames
                         5
                         Present in photograph; related to Explosions
                     
                     
                         Painting
                         6
                         this is a photograph
                     
                     
                         omgreadlater
                         7
                         junk tag
                     
                 
             	
                 
                 
                 This table illustrates column spanning:
                        
                            Comparing the size of distinct index structures for four input
                                texts.
                            
                                
                                Suffix Trie
                                Suffix Tree
                                DAWG
                                CDAWG
                                SCDAWG
                            

                            
                                abcbc\(abcab\): 12 Bytes; 12
                                    symbols
                            
                            
                                 Nodes 
                                 66 
                                 17 
                                 16 
                                 6 
                                 6 
                            
                            
                                 Edges 
                                 65 
                                 16 
                                 23 
                                 13 
                                 21 
                            
                            
                                OCR page: 7 KB; 6.945
                                    symbols
                            
                            
                                 Nodes 
                                 21.418.626 
                                 7.355 
                                 11.995 
                                 1.163 
                                 1.163 
                            
                            
                                 Edges 
                                 21.418.625 
                                 7.354 
                                 14.915 
                                 4.083 
                                 8.094 
                            
                            
                                Excerpt EU-Corpus: 106
                                    KB; ca. 106.000 symbols
                            
                            
                                 Nodes 
                                 - 
                                 161.001 
                                 165.962 
                                 25.273 
                                 25.273 
                            
                            
                                 Edges 
                                 - 
                                 161.000 
                                 227.515 
                                 86.826 
                                 170.358 
                            
                            
                                Small Corpus: 1.2 MB;
                                    ca. 1.250.000 symbols
                            
                            
                                 Nodes 
                                 - 
                                 1.921.704 
                                 1.922.811 
                                 366.070 
                                 366.070 
                            
                            
                                 Edges 
                                 - 
                                 1.921.703 
                                 2.730.597 
                                 1.173.856 
                                 2.355.669 
                            

                        


 This table illustrates row spanning and text alignment:
                        
                            Comparing the size of distinct index structures for four input
                                texts.
                            
                                
                                Suffix Trie
                                Suffix Tree
                                DAWG
                                CDAWG
                                SCDAWG
                            

                            
                                abcbc\(abcab\): 12 Bytes; 12
                                    symbols
                            
                            
                                 Right-aligned
                                 66 
                                 17 
                                 16 
                                 6 
                                 6 
                            
                            
                                
                                 65 
                                 16 
                                 23 
                                 13 
                                 21 
                            
                            
                                OCR page: 7 KB; 6.945
                                    symbols
                            
                            
                                 Left-aligned 
                                 21.418.626 
                                 7.355 
                                 11.995 
                                 1.163 
                                 1.163 
                            
                            
                               
                                 21.418.625 
                                 7.354 
                                 14.915 
                                 4.083 
                                 8.094 
                            
                            
                                Excerpt EU-Corpus: 106
                                    KB; ca. 106.000 symbols
                            
                            
                                 Center-aligned 
                                 - 
                                 161.001 
                                 165.962 
                                 25.273 
                                 25.273 
                            
                            
                                
                                 - 
                                 161.000 
                                 227.515 
                                 86.826 
                                 170.358 
                            
                            
                                Small Corpus: 1.2 MB;
                                    ca. 1.250.000 symbols
                            
                            
                                 Nodes (bottom) 
                                 - 
                                 1.921.704 
                                 1.922.811 
                                 366.070 
                                 366.070 
                            
                            
                               
                                 - 
                                 1.921.703 
                                 2.730.597 
                                 1.173.856 
                                 2.355.669 
                            

                        



             

                 Lists
                 
                     Unordered Lists
                     
                     1.4 Do you work in teams to undertake your research?
                     
                          Yes 
                         No
                     
                     1.5 How often do you work in teams to undertake your research?
                     
                         I usually research with a team
                         I sometimes research with a team
                         I occasionally research with a team
                         I rarely research with a team
                     
                     1.6 The teams that I research with consist of (Check all that apply)
                     
                         Designers
                         Colleagues in my discipline
                         Colleagues from other disciplines
                         Software developers
                         Content specialists
                         Librarians
                         Computer Scientists
                         Students
                         Other (please list)
                     
                 
                 
                     Ordered Lists
                     
                     
                         
                             Our first recommendation would be to secure all promised support in writing.
                             Even though a current administrator is well disposed toward your innovation and understands the
                             commitment it requires of all those involved, administrators change. A written commitment will
                             ensure that new incumbents in any office understand that a commitment was made, by their
                             office and not just by the previous occupant, to your ideas, your personnel, and
                             the results you seek to achieve.
                         
                             Develop and articulate terms of evaluation that will enable your administration to
                                 see and measure your success. This can result in positive impacts on individual
                             applications for renewal, tenure and promotion, as well as on the innovation itself. It will
                             also provide you with material to convince new students of the value of adding your classes to
                             their timetables.
                         
                             Make explicit your intention to let your innovation wither on the vine if your
                                 administration is not willing to commit, in writing, to its continuation beyond an initial
                                 trial period (probably that of an initial grant). This way, you do not fail to at least
                             try to innovate, but you also do not commit yourself or your institutional
                             home to support that neither you nor they can afford in the absence of
                             administrative responsibility. 
                         
                             Those who would get involved in innovation must know explicitly how their
                                 involvement will count toward renewal, tenure and promotion. A good model might be one
                             in which key innovators have a written statement from whoever has the authority to offer it
                             indicating that involvement in the innovation will count, for example, as the equivalent of a
                             peer reviewed publication.
                         We found in developing and implementing the multi-disciplinary course we placed at the
                             core of the HHC experience that through administrative and financial imagination it is
                                 possible to overcome seemingly insurmountable professional and financial problems. We
                             were able to implement our core course for less than the cost of a single replacement hire on a
                             contractually limited term basis, despite the fact that we had seven university employees from
                             six different campus units involved. 
                         
                             Technical support and information literacy are now integral parts of a meaningful
                                 humanities experience. By fully integrating technical support and information literacy
                             into our courses, we have been able to offer students marketable computer skills and to incur
                             in them a healthier and more informed attitude to new forms of media production and
                             consumption.
                         
                             Students should be able to see that real scholarship is available to them to
                                 produce, and they can become participants in a scholarly field through the production of
                                 well-composed and thoroughly researched work. AhHa!, our data management system, made
                             it easy for us to track students’ progress through the program, and to let
                             them see how they compared to their peers. The perennially asked but what do you
                                 want? questions evaporated when students could see how others had addressed themselves
                             to assignments, and in fact the quality of student work improved as subsequent classes could
                             see what had been done before. Students were no longer working in the artificial vacuum of
                             individualistic student-scholarship, where real scholarship is defined as that
                             produced by unknown names followed by the three mysterious letters, PhD. Instead, students were
                             able to see that real scholarship was available to them to produce as much as to read, and that
                             they could become participants in a scholarly field not through some unexplained and occult
                             rite that their professors had undergone at some specific place definable only as not
                                 here, but through the production of well-composed and thoroughly researched work such
                             as that of which they were demonstrably capable.
                     
                     
                     
                         We represent textual variation with the <app> tag and
                             indicate the sequence of the author’s corrections with the
                             varseq attribute;
                         We contain the textual variation within the element <seg type="l">, representing the reconstruction of the verse
                             unit;
                         We avoid the redundancy of empty elements by specifying which unit
                             undergoes textual variation.
                     
                     
                     
                         Who are your collaborators?
                             What community is your research accountable to beyond your academic
                                 community?
                             How will you demonstrate your desire to be accountable to them?
                             Are there people you can talk to about the impact of your research beyond
                                 the IRB?
                         
                         How does everyone benefit from the research?
                             What questions does the community want answered?
                             Can people be compensated in ways that honor their time and
                                 skills?
                         
                     
                     Create
                     
                         What tools and or methods encourage multidirectional collaboration?
                             What mechanism of accountability can you create?
                             Are there ways that collaborators can use the research process to their
                                 own ends?
                         
                         What kind of process can you create for your research?
                             Is there room for collaborators to give and rescind consent at different
                                 times during the research process?
                             Does the pace of the project meet your needs and your collaborators
                                 needs?
                         
                     
                     Transform
                     
                         How will you take care of yourself in the research process?
                             What do you and your collaborators need to stay sustained while
                                 conducting the research?
                             What happens after the research product is complete?
                         
                         How will you be transformed?
                             Will the research strengthen your connection to your
                                 collaborators?
                              Did you and your collaborators come to new understandings?
                         
                     
                 
                 
                     Gloss Lists
                     
                     
                         
                             Apocalyptic:
                             A term that is used almost as loosely within biblical scholarship as outside
                                 it; etymologically the word is derived from the Greek for revelation or
                                 unveiling and some scholars would wish to restrict its use to a type
                                 of literature in which heavenly secrets are revealed to the seer by a vision, a
                                 heavenly journey, or the words of an angel (or some combination of all three).
                                 All too often, however, the term is used as if it meant eschatological, and for
                                 want of a better term it is often used to describe a particular type of
                                 eschatology in which ordinary human history is expected to be interrupted by a
                                 catastrophic divine intervention in the near future (the reason being that such
                                 eschatology is frequently expressed through the medium of apocalyptic in the
                                 first sense).
                         
                         
                             Byte Code:
                              The name often given to the intermediate product of compilation; a byte code
                                 file can typically be run on an interpreter or virtual machine rather than
                                 directly by a computer’s operating system.
                         
                         
                             Code:
                              Without further qualification this normally refers to Source Code, the
                                 set of instructions the author/programmer writes in whichever programming
                                 language he or she is writing to tell his or her program (in this case, work of
                                 IF) how to behave.
                         
                         
                             Compiler:
                              A piece of software to translate human readable source code into machine
                                 readable form. Compilation may be to a native executable (a file that can be
                                 executed by a particular operating system without further ado) or, more usually
                                 with Interactive Fiction, to some intermediate (byte code) form that can be run
                                 by different interpreters on different operating systems.
                         
                         
                             Containment Hierarchy:
                              The system of containment that determines which objects are within which other
                                 objects. In this context within includes inside, on top of, underneath
                                 or behind. At the top of the containment hierarchy stand the rooms; rooms are
                                 regarded as not being contained by anything but as directly or indirectly
                                 containing everything else (except for objects temporarily out of play and so
                                 outside the map althogether).
                         
                         
                             Debugger:
                              A tool which helps a programmer (or in this case, game author) track down
                                 programming errors or bugs. For example TADS 3 Workbench for Windows
                                 incorporates a highly sophisticated debugger that allows the programmer to step
                                 through his code line by line to see what it is doing each step of the way (and
                                 so determine where something is going wrong if it is going wrong).
                         
                         
                             Domain-Specific Language:
                              A computer programming language (such as Inform or TADS) specifically tailored
                                 to a particular type of task (such as writing Interactive Fiction).
                         
                         
                             Eschatology:
                              Anything that deals with the last things, the end of the age or the
                                 consummation of history (from the Greek eschatos, meaning last). In
                                 Christian theology eschatology traditionally deals with matters such as Heaven,
                                 Hell, the Second Coming and the Last Judgement; in a first-century context it
                                 is better thought of in terms of the coming of the kingdom of God, the age to
                                 come in which the evils of the present age would be overcome.
                         
                         
                             IDE (Integrated Development Environment):
                              A single piece of software containing all (or at least) most of the tools a
                                 game author needs in order to write a game, including an editor, a compiler, a
                                 debugger and an interpreter on which the game may be tested.
                         
                         
                             Inform:
                              The most popular language/system for authoring Interactive Fiction, written
                                 and maintained by Graham Nelson. Two versions of Inform are currently in use.
                                 Inform 6 (the older version) resembles a conventional programming language.
                                 Inform 7 adopts a more natural language style of programming with the
                                 aim of making the process of writing Interactive Fiction more like writing
                                 prose and less like conventional programming.
                         
                         
                             Implicit Action:
                              An action automatically carried out by the parser in order to facilitate the
                                 command the player actually typed; for example if the player types GO THROUGH
                                 RED DOOR when the red door is locked but the player has the key, a well-behaved
                                 parser would carry out implicit UNLOCK RED DOOR and OPEN RED DOOR actions
                                 rather than forcing the player to type these commands explicitly.
                         
                         
                             Inventory:
                              The items currently carried by the Player Character.
                         
                         
                             Interpreter:
                              A piece of software that (typically) implements a Virtual Machine and so
                                 allows a game compiled to byte code to be run on the player’s computer; one
                                 generally needs an interpreter to run a work of Interactive Fiction in the same
                                 way that would need a copy of MS-Word to read a Word file, or a program such as
                                 Windows Media Player to watch a DVD on a computer. The advantage is that an
                                 interpreter needs to be written only once for each operating system (Windows,
                                 MAC-OS, Linux, etc.) and can then play all the games written for that
                                 interpreter.
                         
                         
                             Library:
                              A set of supporting routines supplied with an IF authoring system such as TADS
                                 or Inform that handles most of the tasks common to most works of Interactive
                                 Fiction; a library will typically implement a parser and at least a basic world
                                 model, and will generally be written in the same language as that supplied with
                                 the authoring system to allow ready customization by game authors. 
                         
                         
                             Map:
                              The totality of rooms within a particular work of Interactive Fiction,
                                 together with the interconnections between them.
                         
                         
                             Menu:
                              A set of options presented to a computer user from which he or she is meant to
                                 select one.
                         
                         
                             Non Player Character (or NPC):
                              Any animate character (human, animal, alien or robotic) that appears in a work
                                 of Interactive Fiction apart from the Player Character; characters whose
                                 actions are not controlled by the Player Character. Usually, the term is
                                 restricted to characters who are actually implemented and can be interacted
                                 with rather than characters who are only mentioned or who never remain on stage
                                 long enough for the Player Character to interact with.
                         
                         
                             Object:
                              Something physical that the Player Character can interact with (or at least
                                 examine) in the course of the game, such as a table, chair, pen, or book (or,
                                 indeed, another character). Some objects may be quasi-physical (such as smoke
                                 or sunlight). In many IF authoring systems based on OOP (object-oriented
                                 programming) design, object may also refer to a programming object; in
                                 such systems a game object (in the first sense) will usually be represented by
                                 a programming object (the second sense), but programming objects may also be
                                 used for other purposes (if you don’t know anything about OOP, this second
                                 sense of object is probably irrelevant to you).
                         
                         
                             Parser:
                              That part of the software in a work in the Interactive Fiction that interprets
                                 the player’s command and translates it into an action that the program can
                                 perform (or else complain if translation is impossible or ambiguous).
                         
                         
                             Player:
                              The flesh-and-blood human being typing the commands at a keyboard and reading
                                 the game’s responses on screen.
                         
                         
                             Player Character (or PC):
                              The protagonist of a work of Interactive Fiction, whose actions are controlled
                                 (or at least guided) by the player, and through whose eyes and ears the
                                 fictional world is described to the player.
                         
                         
                             Room:
                              A (normally discrete) unit of space within the game’s map. The usual
                                 convention is that the Player Character can interact with anything that is in
                                 the same room as himself or herself (unless it is deliberately concealed), and
                                 so a room is effectively that volume of space that is immediately present to
                                 the Player Character. A room may be a room in the ordinary sense of a room
                                 within a building, but it may also be a section of space outdoors, such as a
                                 meadow, the top of a hill, or a section of street. 
                         
                         
                             Scope:
                              Roughly speaking, the set of objects with which the Player Character can
                                 currently interact, given the nature of the action he or she is meant to be
                                 carrying out. Normally this will be restricted to the objects the PC can see or
                                 touch, but this is not always the case. If the action is conversational, e.g.
                                 ASK ACTOR ABOUT TOPIC, then any object (or topic) is potentially in scope. If
                                 the author has implemented a GO TO ROOM command to take the Player Character to
                                 anywhere on the map, then any (known) room will be in scope.
                         
                         
                             Spoiler:
                              A piece of information (typically in a review) which reveals too much to
                                 someone who has yet to play the game, and so spoils the experience of playing
                                 it for the first time.
                         
                         
                             TADS:
                              An acronym for Text Adventure Development System, one of the two major
                                 languages/systems in which amateur Interactive Fiction is currently written.
                                 TADS 2 is still in use, but the latest incarnation (in which All Hope Abandon was written) is TADS 3. TADS was
                                 written by and is maintained by Mike Roberts.
                         
                         
                             Virtual Machine (or VM):
                              technically, a computing device implemented in software rather than as a piece
                                 of hardware (hence virtual); a piece of software that can execute byte
                                 code written for it, usually implemented as an interpreter for Interactive
                                 Fiction.
                         
                         
                             World Model:
                              That part of a work of an IF that defines the behaviour of the story-world in
                                 which the action takes place (such as movement around the map, the containment
                                 hierarchy, and some basic physics); typically, much of a game’s world model is
                                 supplied by the library of the authoring system used.
                         
                         
                             Z-Machine:
                              The Virtual Machine for which the Infocom games were written, and to which
                                 games written in Inform compile.
                         
                     
                     
                     
                         
                             Hardware obsolescence: The original console or computing platform
                             used to run the game may cease to be supported or even available in the
                             aftermarket.
                         
                             Software obsolescence: The original software needed to run the game
                             — operating system, drivers, frameworks — may lose support, cease development, and
                             become incapable of running on future hardware/software configurations.
                         
                             Scarcity: Some video games are produced in limited quantities, and
                             are subject to the dangers of media decay.A quantitative study of the
                                 scarcity of videogames was conducted in the UK in 2008. The study took a sample
                                 of videogame consoles, as well as 50 video game cartridges for the Atari 2600,
                                 and examined their availability in archives, on internet sale sites, and as
                                 illegal ROMs for download and play on emulators. The study determined that
                                 pirated ROMs present the most available resource for games, and that all of the
                                 archives found to contain the selected games were located in the United States.
                                 The recent opening of the UK National Videogame Archive may change this
                                 dispersal problem, but the rarity of authentic, original game copies represents
                                 a challenge to those who seek to preserve them. Paul Gooding and Melissa
                                 Terras, Grand Theft Archive: A Quantitative Analysis of
                                     the State of Computer Game Preservation,
                                 International Journal of Digital Curation 3
                                 (2008): http://www.ijdc.net/index.php/ijdc/article/view/85.
                         
                         
                             3rd party software dependence: Once a game platform becomes
                             obsolete, emulation may be the best method of providing access. Currently,
                             however, most emulators are developed by the game community and are of
                             questionable legality. They are also typically created without the benefit of the
                             original specifications, and are themselves at risk of becoming obsolete.
                         
                             Complex, proprietary code and an associated lack of documentation:
                             Videogames are generally released as compiled binaries with no documentation of
                             the compiling process, or even the programming languages used. Not having access
                             to the source code or language specifications makes migrating or emulating
                             software far more difficult. It’s a magnification of the format identification
                             issue for stand-alone, static files.
                         
                             Authenticity: The elephant in the digital preservation room —
                             proving that a digital object is what it claims to be, free from tampering or
                             corruption. Video games enjoy many versions between the first prototype, the
                             official release (on multiple platforms), and cracked or otherwise altered
                             unauthorized editions. Especially for older games, the only extant copy may exist
                             in a fan-run web repository, making the authenticity impossible to
                             establish.In this paper we propose alternate conceptions of
                                 authenticity for video games that may align better with their complex
                                 version histories. See the Preservation Through
                                     Adaptation and Patterns of Interaction Across
                                         Communities sections, as well as Recommendations.
                             
                         
                         
                             Intellectual property rights: The game development industry is
                             highly creative and competitive, leading developers to be very jealous of their
                             intellectual property. Most have instituted extremely draconian shrink-wrap
                             licenses reflecting this. And yet, once a game is no longer actively marketable,
                             they are unlikely to respond to inquiries about licensing for it.For a
                                 discussion of intellectual property rights as they relate to the economic value
                                 chain of the video game industry, see James Conley, et al., Use of a Game Over: Emulation and the Video Game
                                     Industry,
                                 Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual
                                     Property 2 (2004): http://www.law.northwestern.edu/journals/njtip/v2/n2/3/. For an
                                 opposing viewpoint — that hacking and piracy benefit society — see Will Jordan,
                                 From Rule-Breaking to ROM-Hacking: Theorizing the
                                     Computer Game-as-Commodity,
                                 Situated Play: Proceedings of DiGRA 2007
                                 Conference (2007): 708–713. For a discussion of what archivists and librarians
                                 can learn from video game players about IP reform, see Kari Kraus, 
                                     A Counter-Friction to the Machine: What Game Scholars, Librarians,
                                     and Archivists Can Learn from Machinimists about User Activism.
                                 Journal of Visual Culture (special
                                 Machinima-themed issue guest-edited by the Stanford Humanities Lab) 10 (2011):
                                 100–112.
                         
                         
                             Significant properties: What are the significant properties of a
                             game that must be maintained with each transformation/preservation action? How
                             important are font size and color palette? What about the speed of text scrolling
                             or sprite movement? How faithful must we stay to the original code? Is it enough
                             to save a video of gameplay, or must we save the interactivity? Do we need BOTH?
                             These are essential to define, as they play a major role in determining
                             authenticity.For a detailed example of the essential characteristics of
                                 videogames, and a preservation model using PLANETS, see M. Guttenbrunner, C.
                                 Becker, and A. Rauber, Evaluating Strategies for the
                                     Preservation of Console Video Games,
                                 Proceedings of the Fifth international Conference on
                                     Preservation of Digital Objects (iPRES 2008), London, UK, September
                                 29–30, 2008 http://www.ifs.tuwien.ac.at/~guttenbr/pubs/guttenbrunner_ipres2008.pdf.
                                 The IMLS-funded project directed by Jerry McDonough, Preserving Virtual Worlds II: Methods for Evaluating and Preserving
                                     Significant Properties of Educational Games and Complex Interactive
                                     Environments, with which Kraus and Donahue are both involved, aims
                                 to address related issues.
                         
                         
                             Context: Although this isn’t an immediate threat to the
                             preservation of games, building contextuality is important to creating
                             understanding for future users. This is truer for video games than many other
                             record types because, as technology advances, game players who have only been
                             exposed to the latest and greatest may be apt to play an older game and say, so
                                 what? even though the game might have been revolutionary for its
                             time. As an example, Sierra’s Mystery House
                                 was not just a first for the company — it was the first text adventure to
                                 incorporate graphics. An amazing breakthrough at the time, it seems crude in
                                 comparison to today’s realistic 3D environments.
                         
                     
                 
                 
                     Figures
                     
                     
                         
                             The 10th Century Venetus A MS of Homer: U4 (Allen): Marcianus Graecus
                                 Z. 458 (= 841) - the back (verso) of folio 15 (available under a Creative
                                 Commons license from Harvard’s Center for Hellenic Studies: http://​chs.harvard.edu/​chs/​manuscript_images) The knowledge
                                 based OCR project recommended in this report would allow us to work with
                                 manuscripts as well as printed materials. 
                             
                             The 10th Century Venetus A MS of Homer
                         
                     
                     
                         
                             Detail of the Venetus A showing scholia and text
                             
                             Detail of the Venetus A showing scholia and text
                         
                     
                     
                     
                         Two pages from The Fantastic Four #51. This example
                             contains many of the familiar elements of comics: panels, pictures,
                             narrative captions, word balloons, sound effects, motion lines, etc. 
                         
                         
                     
                 
             

                 Code Examples
                 
                     eg
This first example of CBML uses eg with internal character-level escaping of angle brackets:                     
                 
                 <cbml:panel ana="#action-to-action" characters="#cap #anon_man" n="5" xml:id="eg_000"> 
    <cbml:caption>
        Cap acts quickly to tranquilize the gun-happy pedestrian... 
    </cbml:caption> 
    <cbml:balloon type="speech" who="#cap" xml:id="eg_007"> 
        A little <emph rendition="#b">sleep</emph> will do wonders for you!
    </cbml:balloon> 
    <sound> SPLAT! </sound> 
    <cbml:balloon type="speech" who="#anon_man"> Ugh! </cbml:balloon>
</cbml:panel> 
                     
This second example also uses character-level escaping:                     
                     Rule 7 introduces the lookup strategy, by which particular information 
                         is obtained by reference to a special-purpose node. It directs a query such 
                         as f a c to the AEE node to convert the a to ē, so the perfective stem of 
                         facere becomes fēc. Here is that lookup node:
                         
                         AEE: 
    1 <$letter#1 a $letter#2> == $letter#1 ē $letter#2      
                         
                         
                         This node depends on a definition (not shown) that defines what atoms 
                         are in the category letter. Rule 1 says that any query beginning with a 
                         letter, then the atom a, then any letter, should evaluate to the two letters 
                         surrounding ē instead. 
                     
                     
This example includes a CDATA marked section within egto escape an entire XML code sample:
<journal vol="15" issue="4">
      <!-- Preview date: November 11, 2021
           Published date: February 2, 2022
      -->
      <title>2021</title>
      <list id="articles">
         <item id="000574"/>
         <!-- Chastang; OJS 1056 -->
         <item id="000566"/>
         <!-- Weidman and Pastor; OJS 1018 -->
         <item id="000578"/>
         <!-- Lee; OJS 1120; -->
         <item id="000579"/>
         <!-- Ketzan; OJS 1065; -->
         <item id="000581"/>
         <!-- Grieco; OJS 1169; -->
         <item id="000582"/>
         <!-- Figueras; OJS 1218 -->
         <item id="000597"/>
         <!-- Bonn; OJS 975 -->
      </list>
      <list id="reviews">
         <item id="000575"/>
         <!-- Barnett; OJS 1282; -->
      </list>


</journal>    

This example uses eg to achieve formatting control, without a CDATA section but with hi for formatting details such as bold:

働	く	べ	き	に	働	か	う	と	す	る
hatara	ku	be	ki	ni	hatarah	ko	u	to	su	ru
    
candidate rule #1: かう → こう   
candidate rule #2: 働か → 働    
 
                     
"其	れ	で	寧	ろ	小	黨*	分	立	で	行	く	所	ま	で	行	く	が*	よ*	い*"
so	re	de	mushi	ro	shou	tou*	bun	ritsu	de	i	ku	tokoro	ma	de	i	ku	ga*	yo*	i*
                     
黨 →  党 (global rule), がよい →  が良い (hiragana + * rule)
{'黨': [(6, 6)], 'がよい': [(17, 19)]}
                     
其   れ   で   寧  ろ  小  党*  分  立  で  行  く  所  ま  で  行  く  が*  良*  い"*
so re de mushi ro shou  tou*   bun   ritsu de i  ku tokoro   ma de i  ku ga* yo* i*
                     
                     
                     
                     


    
    
    
                     
                     

                     This example uses eg to control the formatting of a code sample but without escaping any characters:                     
                     var svg = d3.select('#graph') .append('svg') .style('width', 2000)
                         .style('height',1000);
                     
                 
                     code
                     
                     
                         We represent textual variation with the <app> tag and
                             indicate the sequence of the author’s corrections with the
                             varseq attribute;
                         We contain the textual variation within the element <seg type="l">, representing the reconstruction of the verse
                             unit;
                         We avoid the redundancy of empty elements by specifying which unit
                             undergoes textual variation.
                     
                     
             
Audio-visual media
              [Audio files are currently provided using a simple link encoded as ref (which downloads an MP3 file).] Click for the accompanying audio
                        interview.
              [Our preferred future encoding uses the media element which would play the audio file from the browser, and also supports an alt text for accessibility.]
               Click for the accompanying interview: Audio file containing an oral history interview between Harold Short, Anne Welsh, and Julianne Nyhan
             
             [Video files are embedded using the media element.] 
                 Simon Buckingham Shum, Open University, and member of the Memetic VRE project,
               demonstrates Compendium as a dialogue mapping tool for use in the creative and
               performing arts. At the 14-minute mark, Ale Fernandez of Orchestra Cube speaks. He
               introduces Orchestra Cube and his conducting exercise, which uses a range of
               notational symbols streamed over the network. He discusses how dancer Kyra Norman,
               who is located in the second grid location (shown by videos with the 2cam suffix),
               may respond to both the streamed notation and the Orchestra's performance. Ale then
               introduces a series of exercises in which performers in each grid location
               participate. The documentation ends with all participants being thanked.
            
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (2cam1). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Physics INSORS grid node. The camera is placed at the centre of the
                     room space.
                  
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (2cam2). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Physics INSORS grid node. The camera is placed to the right of the
                     room space.
                  
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (2cam3). This camera points towards the
                     front of the Physics INSORS grid node. The camera is ceiling mounted at the
                     centre of the room. The projected windows of the 4 camera views and streamed
                     screen from the Graduate School of Education node are visible.
                  
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (2cam4). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Physics INSORS grid node. The camera is placed to the left of the
                     room space.
                  
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (cam3). This camera points towards the
                     front of the Graduate School of Education INSORS grid node. The camera is
                     ceiling mounted at the centre of the room.
                  
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (cam1). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Graduate School of Education INSORS grid node. It is the centrally
                     placed camera in the room.
                  
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (cam2). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Graduate School of Education INSORS grid node. The camera is placed
                     to the left of the room space.
                  
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (cam4). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Graduate School of Education INSORS grid node. The camera is placed
                     to the right of the room space.
                  
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science. The video is produced through the Screen
                     Streamer function within Memetic and shows Compendium being used.
                  
                  
               
            
             
Embedded "pass-through" code
             ["Pass-through" code is HTML or other code embedded in the TEI file that is passed through unchanged to the browser, for instance to allow for embedded visualizations or data portals.] 
                 [This example comes from John Bradley, A Prosopography as Linked Open Data: Some Implications from DPRR.] What is SPARQL? Wikipedia starts its article about SPARQL by saying SPARQL
                        allows users to write queries against [...] data that follow the RDF
                        specification of the W3C. It works by allowing the SPARQL query creator
                    to specify a pattern to look for in the RDF graph, and to display parts of the
                    selected bits that match the pattern as results. This certainly is not the place
                    to provide a tutorial on SPARQL, but here is an example of a query in it:

                
                    
                        
                            
                                
PREFIX vocab: <http://romanrepublic.ac.uk/rdf/ontology#>
select ?name ?officeName 
where { 
    ?person a vocab:Person;
        vocab:hasName ?name;
        vocab:isSex <http://romanrepublic.ac.uk/rdf/entity/Sex/Female>.
    ?assertion a vocab:PostAssertion;
        vocab:isAboutPerson ?person;
        vocab:hasOffice ?office.
    ?office vocab:hasName ?officeName
} 
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                            
                        
                        
                    
                
                (A screen shot of what a browser shows when this is submitted is shown in the appendix as Figure 10.)

                The query looks for graph patterns in the DPRR RDF data that show women who are also
                    recorded has holding offices, and displays the woman's name and the name of the
                    office. It is expressed in the SPARQL language, and the reader can doubtless see
                    that it is not a trivial matter to learn to create queries of this kind,
                    particularly for those without knowledge of related query languages such as
                    XQuery for XML , or SQL for relational databases .                     However, once it has been learned, it provides a
                    powerful way to explore a complex set of RDF data, such as that found in
                    DPRR.
                 
                 [The following example comes from Rockwell and Sinclair, Tremendous Mechanical Labor: Father Busa’s Algorithm.] It is also worth noting that Busa’s project was large and different enough that
                    they had their own non-standard cards, including some with bubbles for manual
                    pencil marks. Figure 2 shows an example card from the Busa Archive with the
                    areas and labels related to Philological Analysis.
                    These printed zones could have been used by scholars to manually add annotations
                    as needed for human sorting as part of hybrid machine/human processing. Or they
                    could have been used for easily reading the punched data. Either way, it was
                    common for punched cards in those days to have to be handled by both humans and
                    by machines . The Index
                        Thomisticus project was no different; there would have been a
                    tremendous amount of human labor associated with handling the stacks of cards.
                    The human labor would have gone into preparing cards, moving them, checking
                    them, annotating them and even hand sorting them. It would be interesting to try
                    to recreate the flow of Busa’s hybrid processes, but that is for another
                        project.
                
                    
                        Your browser does not support iframes. Embedded document may be found at https://rawgit.com/sgsinclair/epistemologica/master/punchcard.html
        
        
        

[The following example is a duplicate version of the Rockwell/Sinclair example above, but embedded in a dhq:example with an added heading to test how that behaves.]
 
     Example Punch-card Emulator
     
                    
                        Your browser does not support iframes. Embedded document may be found at https://rawgit.com/sgsinclair/epistemologica/master/punchcard.html
        
             
                         

       
Downloadable code and data
        DHQ allows authors to link to code and data files. The links should use ref. Here is a link to a Python notebook and a link to the accompanying data set. If we ever implement the ability to run code notebooks directly within DHQ, the data files are also included in the data directory for this article.
       
       
Mathematical Formulas with MathML, ASCIIMath, and TeX
            
            ASCIIMath (currently deprecated)  
Samples of ASCIIMath encoding. When `a != 0`, there are two solutions to `ax^2 + bx + c = 0` and
they are
  `x = (-b +- sqrt(b^2-4ac))/(2a) .`

        
             

        
            TeX
          Sample of TeX encoding: 
          When \(a \ne 0\), there are two solutions to \(ax^2 + bx + c = 0\), and they are $$x = {-b \pm \sqrt{b^2-4ac} \over 2a}.$$ Furthermore, Einstein proved decisively that the relationship between energy and mass involves the speed of light, following the formula
          \(E=mc^2\). I have no idea what these next examples prove, but I'm sure it's important:
          $$ {1 \over 10} + {1 \over 100} + {1 \over 1000} + {1 \over 10,\!000} + \dots $$ I also think we should not have periods following block-level formulae. This one seems especially interesting:
          $$\matrix{0 &amp; 1\cr&lt;0&amp;>1}$$
          
        
                        
         
            MathML
              MathML is not yet supported in the DHQ ODD, so the following examples are not valid. However, they should display correctly.
      
          Inline sample 1 of MathML encoding:
                 
          
             
   V
   =
   
    
     4
    
    
     3
    
   
   π
   
    
     r
    
    
     3
    
   
  
          
          
           Inline sample 2 of MathML encoding:
           
           
  E
  =
  m
  
   
    c
   
   
    2
   
  
    
           
           
         Another inline sample. When

  a≠0
,
there are two solutions to

  ax2
  + bx
  + c = 0

and they are

  x =
  
    
      
        −
        b
        ±
        
          b2
          −
          4ac
        
      
       2a 
    
  
  .

         
             Excerpts from Wevers et al. (000445), Tracking the Consumption Junction: Temporal Dependencies between Articles and Advertisements in Dutch Newspapers
             For our study, we used the Granger causality test as follows. To identify a
                            shaping relation, we test if variation in a
                        specific word frequency for newspaper discourse (Y) at
                        time t is
                        predicted by variation in the frequency for the same word in advertisement
                        discourse (X) at
                        earlier time steps t-1…t-k. We
                        test for X Granger cause Y, by
                        comparing the performance of the ‘newspaper discourse only’ model:
                    yt=β0+β1yt-1+…+βkyt-k+ϵ
                    with the full newspaper and advertisement discourses
                        model:
                    yt=β0+β1yt-1+…+βkyt-k+α1xt-1+…+αmxt-m+ϵ
                    to identify which one does the better job at explaining word frequency
                            (yt)
                        based on the residuals. The zero-model for the hypothesis is H0:αi=0 for
                        each i of the
                        element [1,m] with
                        the alternative hypothesis being H1:αi≠0 for at
                        least one i of the
                        element [1,m]. We
                        applied the test bi-directionally such that a shaping relation finds support
                        if we can confirm that 
                        ‘X Granger cause Y’, and
                        in the case of a reflecting relationship we can reject ‘Y Granger cause X’.
                        Finally, if both ‘X Granger cause Y’ and
                            ‘Y Granger cause X’ find
                        support, we viewed this as indicative of a more complex relationship between
                        the two time series.
                    
             
