Title:  A Digital Humanist-Informatician Review of Jim Ridolfo and
                    William Hart-Davidson, editors, 
Volume:  010
Issue:  1
Date:  12 February 2016
Abstract:  
                
                This is a review of Rhetoric and the Digital
                        Humanities (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), a
                    collection of essays by contemporary rhetoricians edited by Jim Ridolfo and
                    William Hart-Davidson. These essays are often notable in their thoroughgoing
                    efforts to theorize the work of digital humanities in scholarship and teaching.
                    In addition to serving as an introduction to the digital humanities for
                    rhetoricians, this book is of value to digital humanists residing in informatics
                    programs, as well as those in English studies generally
            
Full Body Text: 
Rhetoricians can boast working in a more or less unbroken conversation stretching
                back to before Corax and Tisias, two millennia before modern English was spoken. Of
                course, humans have been speaking, reasoning, and arguing long before that, and all
                over the planet. The rhetorical tradition starting in the Mediterranean is generally
                considered unique because it both produced and theorized rhetoric at the same time.
                And in the present, the teaching and study of rhetoric is consistently theoretically
                self-aware. Surveying the methodologies of presenters at the 2015 Indiana Digital
                Rhetoric Symposium and also reflecting on the state of the field, Crystal VanKooten
                assigns theory more than half of a pie chart and concludes 
                    Most of us are theorizing digital
                        rhetoric
                    
                .
That is one reason for reading this book. It has been argued (by, for example,
                Drucker and Liu in the landmark collection Debates in the
                    Digital Humanities) that digital humanities is strong on method and
                short on self-examination, criticism, and theorizing. Although most of the 23
                chapters in this collection are applied studies of one form or another, they are all
                theoretically informed. As their authors – who are mostly faculty in rhetoric
                programs – join this conversation on the digital humanities, they bring a
                thoroughgoing theoretical examination.
Drucker and Liu’s stance toward DH is reinforced when contributors McNely and Teston
                assert: 
                    Rhetorically-informed digital
                        humanists should proceed with caution — doing DH is not as simple as
                        choosing a digital tool and then combining that tool and tactic with a given
                        methodological approach; indeed, a given tactic may be at odds with one's
                        strategy
                    
                . Their observation might seem self-evident, an enthymeme grounded in how
                critics have been trained for decades: we always have a theory and some narrative of
                literary history in mind when we read. This may not be so self-evident in a time
                when it is not surprising to see a digital humanist pick up the latest technology
                and run with it just to see what happens. We might throw fifty novels at an
                algorithm to see what sticks, and think about interpretation and narrative after we
                have some results — and many might argue that this is an entirely valid methodology.
                But there is more at stake here. This book is published and I write this review in a
                moment when some argue that theory is no longer necessary — see for example Chris
                Anderson's essay The End of Theory and the cluster of
                essays it introduces in Wired Magazine
                , and the collection of essays published by Microsoft,
                    The Fourth Paradigm 
                : machines process mountains of data and find patterns and
                correlations with more predictive power than our theories can. Beyond truisms, what
                we need is an examination of how the use of theory has and is changing. Digital
                tools are (or should be – provided one's tools are not a black box) manifestations
                of theory, such as Bayes' theorem or other statistical models, along with some basic
                structuralist assumptions.
Below I account for some of the contributions to this thoughtful collection.
The positionality of the digital humanities, and how it might disrupt established
                disciplinary lines, is much discussed at the moment (for that matter, so is the
                institutional status of English studies generally). Chapters take on these
                disciplinary issues, and these are all distinguished by self-awareness. Reid argues
                that just as digital humanities disrupts the humanities, digital rhetorics are
                post-human, post-structuralist disruptions of humanist traditions in rhetoric.
                Carter, Jones, and Hamcumpai argue for viewing disciplinary lines like rhetoric and
                DH not as territory to be seized and defended but rather as kairos
                (situations, occasions of opportunity and need for rhetoric). Walls builds a theory
                of interdisciplinarity (a rhetoric of alliance), based on
                histories of native peoples in North America.
Two theoretically-aware case studies of editing projects demonstrate how we might
                proceed on practical projects while trying to maintain theoretical awareness. Eyman
                and Ball narrate their efforts to put in place a new online publishing system for
                the online journal Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology
                    and Pedagogy. This effort at digital production included rhetorical
                self-analysis at every step. Along similar lines, Boyle asks what makes an online
                archive of Quintilian's works genuinely rhetorical.
Other contributors explore new methods to conduct research in writing and
                communication. Johnson suggests ways we might model scholarly influence, beginning
                with citation data. These include factor analysis, grouping by institutions, and
                geographic mapping. How he would get all the information he plans to model is not
                always clear, but his arguments could point to future studies. The primary
                counter-argument Johnson sets himself against is that many humanists are skeptical
                of numbers and suspicious of reducing their own influence to numbers (particularly
                as these numbers could be used for tenure) and he says, 
                    Scholars who are hesitant to adopt
                        numerical values as a way to bargain for tenure and promotions are giving up
                        one of the more powerful argumentative rhetorics of the twenty-first century
                        — the use of mathematics
                    
                . While the data available are far from complete,The issue of tenure and
                    bibliometrics is timely and important enough to note the accuracy and recall of
                    citation counting. There are good reasons to be skeptical of citation numbers
                    when it comes to the humanities and social sciences: our abilities to extract
                    citation from databases of journal articles in the humanities and social
                    sciences is not as reliable as it is in the natural sciences; monographs are
                    much more important in the humanities and social sciences than they are in the
                    hard sciences, and citations in books have not been reliably mined at the
                    moment; and articles in the sciences cite more sources. There is also evidence
                    that researchers are reading more even as they cite less (see Renear and Palmer
                    2009; Larivière, Gingras, and Archamboult 2009; Marx and Bornmann 2015; and
                    Larivière and Macaluso 2011). For that matter, our current ability to gather all
                    citations in the sciences is less thane ideal. this does not mean that
                studies that map what we can see, like what Johnson suggests, cannot lead to
                important results. If, say, we can see a third or half of all citations or some
                other fraction, then generalizations we make about influence could still be worth
                investigating in the ways that Johnson suggests, even if the rate of recall would be
                unacceptable for matters of tenure and promotion.
Kennedy and Long use online interaction to view the writing process. They argue that
                sources such as the version histories of wiki pages (where every single edit is
                recorded), can be an excellent place to study authorship: 
                    these writerly moves and practices
                        reveal the authorial life of the writer . . . as well as the life of the
                        document
                    
                . They provide a short primer on qualitative approaches to online behavior,
                and discuss how the data can be collected, managed, and coded — as well as ethical
                considerations. This chapter would serve as an excellent starting point for research
                projects investigating digital authorship and online behavior more generally, as
                would McNely and Teston's chapter.
Hart describes his effort running a commercial program, DICTION, to perform sentiment
                analysis of the words in a corpus of texts with predefined genres. The corpus is
                described only as sixteen thousand
                    contemporary texts spanning the rhetorical universe
                 and I wish we were told what the texts were
                and how they were assigned to genres. He observes that 
                    DICTION cannot distinguish between a
                        sentence like the dog bit the man and the man bit the
                        dog
                    
                .
To Hart’s credit, this is the only reference in the collection to the concept of the
                    bag of words, so it was disappointing how quickly he moved past this
                important point. In topic modeling, a very popular method of text mining at the
                moment, a topic is defined as a distribution of words over a fixed
                vocabulary  and should not be conflated with a rhetorical
                    topos. Hart says that the software supposes that audiences depend on human understandings of
                    proportionality when responding to a text
                , that is, simply: the more optimistic words
                are contained in a text, the more optimistic a text is. This methodology holds up
                and shakes documents so that the words fall into a bag, defining as a text a set of
                probabilities of words. This general method, combined with the scale of corpora,
                would seem to flatten rhetorical situations and empty individual texts of their
                intentional (if we might otherwise be inclined to look for intention) and suasive
                content. I hope to hear more speculation by rhetoricians of what happens to
                rhetorical texts when they are viewed at the scale at which Franco Morretti and many
                other digital humanists prefer to operate. We can argue about whether Hart has
                adequately theorized his digital tools here, but this piece deserves credit for
                spurring exactly that argument.
Three thoughtful chapters on archives and digitization should be read by the broad
                community of researchers concerned with digital archives and libraries. Hoffman and
                Waisanen's chapter provides a survey of algorithmic tools for analyzing texts and
                corpora. Like Hart, they theorize these methods rhetorically. They bring in the
                theory of the ideograph as formulated by Michael McGee, referring to specific
                words that carry ideological weight in a given historic moment . The idea here is similar to Raymond Williams'
                    keywords, and several other formulations linking words with ideologies.
                When in DH we count words and find patterns, we hope that the words will serve as
                surrogates for something significant. But so far this is a blunt instrument and we
                cannot generalize from one case to another very well. This activity would benefit
                from more general theorizing, and contributors to this book offer some points of
                entry.
Samra Graban, Ramsey-Tobienne, and Myers do something that should be done more often.
                They survey theoretical issues – 
                    invigorating epistemological
                        dilemmas
                    
                 – raised by digital archives: location, access, authorization, digitizations,
                publics, and metadata (along with Eyman and Ball’s, this essay stands out for
                addressing issues of metadata). This is a starting point, and deeper exploration is
                still needed.
Rice and Rice describe efforts at participatory archiving, similar to many projects
                in community-based archiving and community informatics (and they would probably
                benefit from studying this body of research). The archives Rice and Rice advocate
                are bottom-up and not necessarily built to last: while its longevity may be useful for a number of
                    reasons, we would not consider this archive a failure if it is erased tomorrow.
                    The pop-up archive's focus is not in preservation but in the gesture and
                    performance of archiving moments
                . Like many contributions in this collection,
                I would love to take the essay into a seminar in informatics and ask graduate
                students to respond to this claim.
For some working in archiving and cultural heritage, this could sound like a shot
                across the bow. What I mean is: everything that Barack Obama and John Boehner say is
                carefully preserved with the intention of keeping it findable, usable, and
                trustworthy for as long as there might be persons to read it — because it is
                considered important. Many in the cultural heritage community are doing the same
                thing with the texts, artifacts, and stories left behind by members of subaltern
                groups which otherwise might be forgotten. On the one hand, building archives not
                defined by persistence is wonderfully provocative: it can prompt questions about the
                nature of memory and cultural production and narrative. On the other hand, the
                longevity of archives from Queen Elizabeth II or Donald Trump is in little doubt. We
                preserve what we value.
Potts's essay starts from a withering critique of digital archives: these systems are clunky at best and irrelevant at
                    worst; they 
                    prioritize data over
                        experience
                    
                . She states 
                    What these archives in practice and
                        the digital humanities in general desperately need is a sense of audience,
                        appeal, and interaction
                    
                . In fact, were Potts to walk into an iSchool she would find research and
                practitioners in whole subfields like knowledge organization, computer-supported
                cooperative work, community informatics, and even wonks in information retrieval who
                are constantly asking the same user-centered questions. My point here is not simply
                to refute a deficit Potts would fill, but rather to say that there are more people
                speaking her language than she seems to expect.
Several contributions cite Matthew Kirschenbaum's argument that students in the
                humanities should learn to code, and also Ian Bogost's formulation of procedural
                    literacy. Two of the most interesting pieces, by Stolley and Ballentine,
                could be read as responding directly to Potts, arguing 
                    Many of the discussions of making
                        fetishize the concept of coding
                    
                 — and this is another claim I would take into an information science seminar.
                This pair of essays by technical communication specialists makes fascinating
                arguments in favor of learning to program, and are among the most interesting in the
                volume (the editors did place them immediately following Potts' piece, and
                rhetoricians do love an argument).
Stolley discusses programming in Rails in an essay that, along with Hart's
                contribution, is probably the best read in the book. He argues that coding is an
                essentially writerly activity. In observing that Rails is installed and accessed
                entirely through the command line with no downloading, dragging, or double-clicking,
                he says, 
                    Rails can be installed, invoked, and
                        developed entirely though writing
                    
                . This is one of the most striking sentences, seeming self-evident once it is
                said yet thought-provoking, that I have read in a while.
Ballentine argues that the alternative to procedural literacy is rapid obsolescence, and our future requires...collaboration with computer
                    science and technical communication in order to not be shut out of important
                    discussions (and our own interpretive practices) because we do not have the
                    language to argue in these spaces
                . He goes on to offer a case study of a
                technical writing project, providing documentation integrated into the display of
                X-ray, MRI, and CT scans. An intimate understanding of the code controlling how the
                documentation displays and interacts with the operation of the system is necessary
                for effective writing. Lack of such understanding would render the writing alone
                useless.
This volume should be read by digital humanists in their various disciplinary homes.
                It is a good introduction for those coming from a rhetoric background, and is of
                interest not only to those in English studies generally, but also to digital
                humanists in informatics programs. Of course, it is somewhat artificial to segregate
                rhetoricians, who swim in the same water as their colleagues in English and
                Communications departments, from other scholars with research agendas in digital
                humanities. But we can go further. Reading the essays in this book, I often found
                myself thinking that if these researchers were to walk into the nearest iSchool, and
                compare notes with researchers in informatics, both would benefit from the resulting
                conversations.
