Title:  An Information Science Question in DH Feminism
Volume:  009
Issue:  2
Date:  2 September 2015
Abstract:  
                
                In 1986, Susan Harding published The Science Question in
                        Feminism in which she suggests that feminism had moved past
                    questioning What is to be done
                            about the situation of women in science? – or first-wave
                    feminist initiatives — to include more women in the work of science. Aspects of
                    the science question that
                    consider the politics underlying epistemologies of purportedly value-neutral claims and
                        practices
                     resonate for the work (the research,
                    theory, and practices) being done to build information infrastructure in the
                    humanities today — the work that I am defining here as digital humanities work.
                    Reconsidering this work by using the lens of feminist inquiry to understand the
                    concerns common to information science and digital humanities is the perspective
                    I describe here. Specifically, as my title suggests, I am proposing that
                    feminist inquiry can help us articulate and better understand the epistemologies
                    in digital humanities and information science that are shaping the
                    infrastructures we are building and using in the humanities.
            
Full Body Text: 
Introduction
In 1986, Susan Harding published The Science Question in
                    Feminism in which she suggests that feminism had moved past questioning
                    What is to be done about the situation of
                        women in science? — or first-wave feminist initiatives — to
                include more women in the work of science. Inquiry had moved on in second-wave
                feminism to wonder about the science
                    question in feminism or 
                    Is it possible to use for
                            emancipatory ends sciences that are apparently so intimately involved in
                            Western, bourgeois, and masculine projects?
                    
                . Certainly, there is still more discussion needed about including more women
                in technology fields, but aspects of the science
                    question that consider the politics underlying epistemologies of 
                    purportedly value-neutral claims and
                        practices
                    
                 resonate for the work (the research, theory, and practices) being done to
                build information infrastructure in the humanities today — the work that I am
                defining here as digital humanities work. 
This work in the digital humanities includes the development of scholarly information
                infrastructure and reflects a tie between information studies and the humanities.
                These ties include, among other things, the technology, services, practices, and policy that support 
                    publication practices, data, research
                        methods, collaboration, incentives, and learning
                    
                . Christine Borgman and others  agree that
                creating technological infrastructure in the humanities must be collaborative, based
                on common understandings that pertain to the work both information studies and
                digital humanities are doing to build and theorize this infrastructure.
                Reconsidering this work by using the lens of feminist inquiry to understand the
                concerns common to information science and digital humanities is the perspective I
                describe here. Specifically, as my title suggests, I am proposing that feminist
                inquiry can help us articulate and better understand the epistemologies in digital
                humanities and information science that are shaping the infrastructures we are
                building and using in the humanities. 
In terms of practice, the ties between digital humanities and information science
                seem obvious. Digital humanities comprises ways of practice that are afforded by
                algorithms and accessed through interfaces and visualizations; practices that are
                articulated and organized by metadata and databases and social networks that are
                designed within institutions and fields of study that have been informed by the
                sciences, the social sciences, by human computer interaction (HCI), and computer
                science; practices that are very often transacted within the context of digital
                resources from archives and libraries. Finally, these are practices accomplished by
                workers visible and invisible from scores of fields of inquiry in the humanities and
                fields associated with information science. Willard McCarty proposes
                    twenty-two fields in the Methodological Commons of
                    DH .
            
Ultimately, feminist critique concerns a responsibility to ask questions about these
                practices, to better understand the epistemologies embedded within these histories
                of knowledge production, to reframe the practices of digital humanities as
                information work and vice versa – a reframing that ultimately broadens and deepens
                the conversation. Feminist inquiry is particularly useful because its modes of
                inquiry are steeped in the sciences, the social sciences, and the humanities. Donna
                Haraway has written that the science community considers knowledge production as 
                    histories of the technologies
                    
                . Yet, from a feminist perspective, we are ultimately responsible not only to
                be self-conscious or self-aware of technologies as ways of life, social orders, practices of visualization but 
                    to become answerable to
                        what we learn how to see
                    
                . As such, in this discussion, I consider how thinking about the tie between
                digital humanities (DH) and information science through feminist inquiry can help us
                become answerable to the manner in which DH work — its ways of practice — are shaped
                by (and shape) ways of life and social orders. 
The technologies that I discuss here, however, are not always digital.
                Martha Nell Smith has very usefully defined humanist technologies as 
                    the means by which we accomplish
                        various ends — the tools and devices on which our critical suppositions
                        rely
                    
                . Smith has argued that the relationship between humanities disciplines and
                feminist scholarship in DH is reflected in four areas in which she sees fundamental
                ties revealed: technologies of access, multimedia study
                    objects, collaboration, and self-consciousness.
                In this same vein, in the three sections of this discussion, I reposition what I am
                calling the DH technologies of interdisciplinarity,
                    mastery, and self-consciousness with feminist notions
                of situatedness, plausibility, and
                    responsibility. These three sections demonstrate how feminist modes
                of inquiry that allow us to see commonalities between information science and
                digital humanities may help us articulate a concern with situated, not transcendent
                knowledges; with embodied objectivity and plausibility rather than truth; and with a
                responsibility to not only learn how systems work, technically, socially, and
                psychically but to act on that knowledge and build information infrastructures that
                reflect humanistic concerns. 

                I. The Technology of Interdisciplinarity and Situated Perspectives
                
                    The Technology of Interdisciplinarity
                    Interdisciplinarity connotes a productive, multi-perspectival
                        position that seems to fit comfortably in the humanities. Cathy N. Davidson
                        and David Theo Goldberg maintain that it is essential that the humanities
                        remain at the forefront of academic inquiry because 
                            the interdisciplinary modes
                                of the humanities . . . concern basic constitutive features of the
                                social sciences, sciences, technology and the professions
                            
                        . Similarly, Bruno Latour posits that the humanist’s job should be to
                        assemble these interdisciplinary modes instead of debunking them and to
                        offer 
                            the participants arenas in
                                which to gather
                            
                        . Indeed, interdisciplinarity (and its accompanying
                        metaphors of collaborative assembly and gathering) have been touted as
                        potential keys to resolving crisis in the humanities, which constellate
                        among a variety of practical concerns such as decreased enrollment in
                        humanist studies, decreased jobs for recent PhDs, limited opportunities for
                        publishing and therefore a weakened tenure process; and philosophical issues
                        that concern the role of the humanities in the university. Most importantly
                        for this discussion, there is also a pervasive notion that
                            interdisciplinarity is a basic and natural
                        tenet of accomplished digital work ; ; ;
                            . 
                    Certainly, interdisciplinary work is anything but easy, regardless of its
                        digital aspects. It belies a political and networked infrastructure that
                        allows for and precludes certain kinds of interactions to happen. I have
                        written about the very real and situated institutional parameters that must
                        be in place in order to support what Smith calls the technology of collaboration in DH 
                        , as well as the fact that institutional bodies
                        can facilitate or preclude interdisciplinary practices for certain fields
                        over others, including collaborations between engineering and computer
                        science over collaborations with those same fields and the humanities . Further, Patrik Svensson highlights real
                        concerns for the humanities about infrastructure that is developed within
                        existing infrastructural models (such as the library, museum, or archival
                        system) and scientific models that are based on heavy data use since these
                        models could reflect an uncritical bias towards the epistemic commitments of
                        those communities and a disregard for the more unmarked humanistic
                        technologies and infrastructures discussed in part by Smith above . 
                    Most significantly, the perspective that interdisciplinarity is somehow
                            native to digital practices and scholarship masks both the
                        great amount of work and resources needed to enact interdisciplinarity and
                        the predominance of interdisciplinarity in fields with more traditional
                        humanistic methods. Such notions of inherent interdisciplinarity can be
                        critically unproductive because the interdisciplinary mark can often occlude
                        an unsituated standpoint. For example, Willard McCarty imagines the digital
                        humanist as a metadisciplinary practitioner within a Methodological Commons of humanities
                            computing that comprises twenty-two disciplinary kinships that cover the
                        wide range of disciplines from which computing application and research
                        draw, such as cognitive science, law, performance studies, linguistics,
                        musicology, and so on . He positions
                        the DH practitioner, as both technologically savvy and consequently worldly
                        in her multiple, disciplinary knowledges that are situated outside the
                        commons: she is not the
                            scholar who engages in discussions that are strongly delimited by the scholar’s particular
                            specialism
                        ; rather, she is a migratory or itinerant project
                        participant with the performative ability to move in and out of disciplines
                        . In contrast to the scholar, the DH
                        practitioner can step outside
                            that space, so as to connect the problem in question with a method,
                            vocabulary or way of thinking uncommon to that scholar’s
                            discipline
                        . As a result, the DH practitioner has
                        the perspective of an
                            outsider’s objectivity
                        , and she is consequently best
                        positioned to effect the kind of sea change within fields of knowledge
                        production in general that crisis resolution demands . In McCarty’s paradigm, it is the
                        situated scholar who has limited vision while the interdisciplinary DH
                        practitioner is all-seeing.
                
                
                    Situated Perspectives
                    A note about the metaphor of seeing is useful here. I use word
                            perspectives consciously and critically to frame this
                        section on situated perspectives in the same sense that Haraway
                        uses vision as a critical metaphor for describing situatedness. Noting the
                        privileged knowledges that a vision metaphor has traditionally occupied in
                        concepts of objectivity and empiricism, Haraway
                        calls the all-seeing viewpoint a singular, uncritical perspective; she calls
                        it 
                            this eye that fucks the world
                                to make techno-monsters
                            
                        . Instead, Haraway proposes a feminist doctrine of objectivity that is
                            situated as specific
                            embodiment rather than a 
                            false vision promising
                                transcendence of all limits and responsibility
                            
                        . It is this notion of vision that necessarily implies an embodied
                        perspective that helps us reposition the technology of
                            interdisciplinarity in DH as a perspective from
                            somewhere rather than a 
                            conquering gaze from
                                nowhere
                            
                        .
                    Understanding interdisciplinarity as necessarily situated means
                        learning to position the work of DH within the commons,
                            within the fields that shape its practices. Feminist
                        epistemologies including standpoint theory and postmodern situated
                        perspectives emerged during the 1970s and 1980s as critical theories about
                        relations between the production of knowledge and practices of power in
                        science. Considering matters of 
                            [o]bjectivity vs.
                                subjectivity, the scientist as knowing subject vs. the objects of
                                his inquiry, reason vs. emotions, mind vs. body,
                            
                        , both standpoint theory and postmodern theory hold that all knowledge
                        is historically and geographically created by embodied participants. As
                        such, they offer this insistent embodiment as 
                            a rich tradition of
                                critiquing hegemony without disempowering positivisms and
                                relativisms and a way to get nuanced theories of mediation
                            
                        . Ultimately, standpoint theory suggests that understanding the
                        influence of multiple, embodied perspectives rather than attempting a metadisciplinary roving eye is
                        necessary to enhancing knowledge. 
                    The situated epistemologies that shape the information infrastructures we are
                        building in DH is of particular concern to this discussion; consequently, I
                        consider throughout how situating a discussion about the work of DH within
                        information science can help us better articulate the epistemological
                        underpinnings in DH that we have come to take for granted. To demonstrate a
                        basic area of intersection, I discuss in the next section how the notion of
                        the document in information science can help us think through
                        how epistemologies in literary studies concerning the text are
                        and can be engaged through the development of information systems. 
                
                
                    Text as Document
                    Geoffrey Harpham argues that the
                            humanities have the text as their object, humanity as their subject, and
                            self-understanding as their purpose; for Harpham, a
                            text may mean 
                            any material artifact — a
                                cityscape, a carved bone, an earthwork
                            
                        . Within McCarty’s Methodological Commons, the text of study
                        also includes digital images, sound, and video files as well as numbers,
                        analytical tools, and data structures. For literary scholars, in particular,
                        a literary (or poetic While Marjorie Perloff
                            distinguishes between what she considers the imprecise 18th century term
                                literature and the term poetics — which
                            she claims has a 
                                much more ancient and
                                    cross-cultural lineage
                                
                            —McCarty also uses the term poetic to refer to the
                            ergodic nature of literary language .) text is indicated by its material (such as its paper or
                        binding) as well as its linguistic and bibliographic codes. Terms that
                            McGann employs in A Critique of Modern Textual
                                Criticism
                            . Further, from Roland Barthes’
                        theories concerning text vs. work
                         to the social text theories of David Greetham
                             and Jerry McGann  to John Bryant’s notion of fluid text theory in the digital environment
                            , text can be an object or a
                        phenomenon we perceive before us in a specific time and space or a process
                        or a flow of energy
                        within a social and cultural context that spans multiple times and spaces
                            . There is little room in the scope of this
                        piece to rehearse the history of textual studies, but it is important to
                        note that theories concerning textual objects of study have had
                        wide-reaching impact on how DH scholars have developed digital information
                        infrastructures such as computational algorithms, databases, interfaces,
                        scholarly editions, and visualizations. 
                    As textual studies is, in part, concerned with the publishing and social
                        systems (the scholarly infrastructure) that help us define
                        text, document theory in information science considers the
                            document within particular contexts or systems of
                        organization and distribution concerning documentation. A brief history of
                            document theory within information science shows some of
                        the same theoretical roots in textual and bibliographic studies that Matthew
                        Kirschenbaum has identified as a significant aspect of DH’s beginnings . For example, the acceleration of
                        publication in the late 19th century came with an increase in creating,
                        disseminating, and utilizing recorded knowledge and an enhanced desire for
                        new techniques such as documentation for managing the information deluge.
                        Michael Buckland notes that the early term to denote the set of management
                        techniques including collecting, standardizing, filing, classifying,
                        copying, disseminating, and preserving documents was traditionally bibliography but became
                            documentation in
                        the early 20th century . As a result,
                            documentation replaced bibliography as the
                        term of practice to refer to scholarly information services, records management, and archival
                            work, and eventually, evolved into the more current terms information science,
                        information storage and
                            retrieval, and information management
                        .
                    Paul Otlet — whom Wikipedia calls the father of information science and
                        Michael Buckland names the most
                            central figure in the development of Documentation
                            Michael Buckland’s Paul Otlet Page
                            people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~bucklandotlet.html, Accessed
                            December 14, 2012. — was of the first to argue for an expanded
                        definition or identity for the document, one that expanded the notion of a
                        document to include its situated context. For Otlet, who published his
                        seminal text Traité de documentation in
                        Brussels in 1934, documentation work comprised the act of observing and then
                        recording facts in publications in order to make these facts an 
                            integral part of
                                knowledge
                            
                        . In Otlet’s definition of the document, however, he was also
                        concerned with social
                            facts which were groupings of documents, 
                            the appraisal of which is
                                valuable only in proportion to the number of elements which it takes
                                into account
                            
                        . In order to take these groupings into account, Otlet imagined 
                            a system of cards that would
                                allow one to make networks and to add to them: the creation of a
                                kind of artificial brain by means of cards containing actual
                                information or simply notes of references
                            
                        . Imagining a singularly subjective process for managing the cards
                        that rivaled processes as intricate and forward-looking as Vannevar Bush’s
                        Memex machine, Otlet realized that 
                            judgments here [were] as
                                complex as the matters judged
                            
                        . A document could either be the publication or the multiple
                        instantiations that make up the networked social fact or the relationship between
                        documents. Much like the Barthesian text, which is defined as
                            a methodological
                            field in contrast to the work (described as concrete, occupying a portion of
                            book-space) , Otlet’s
                            social facts are
                        the field in which evidentiary facts (i.e., each unique
                        publication) participate. Like genetic textual scholars, Otlet sought to
                        document this social system in which documents circulated by using separate
                        cards for both publications and the events and relationships that tied them, 
                            thus allowing for all the
                                manipulations of classification and continuous interfiling
                            
                        . 
                    Later, in Qu'est-ce que la documentation?,
                        Suzanne Briet  defines the document as perceived
                        and situated by those who participate in the system of its documentation.
                        First, like Otlet, she seeks to expand the definition of
                            document from fact or publication to anything that is
                        identified as or perceived as evidentiary. Arguing that the document is
                        always the result of the methods of documentation, Briet asks, 
                            Is a star a document? Is a
                                pebble rolled by a torrent a document? Is a living animal a
                                document? No. But the photographs and the catalogues of stars, the
                                stones in a museum of mineralogy, and the animals cataloged and
                                shown in a zoo, are documents
                            
                        . Because the work of documentation is 
                            a powerful means for the
                                collectivization of knowledge and ideas
                            
                        , Briet argues that the document is intimately tied to the life of a team of workers
                            or scientists or scholars, and because it can participate in a
                        multitude of industrial,
                            commercial, administrative, teaching activity, etc. contexts,
                        the content of documentation is necessarily 
                            inter-documentary
                            
                        .
                    Briet’s way of defining the document is akin to the theoretical groundwork
                        laid by D.F. McKenzie The Sociology of Texts
                        [1999] and Jerome McGann’s A Critique of Modern Textual
                            Criticism [1983] for understanding the social nature of textual
                        production. Both McKenzie and McGann argue for considering all aspects of a
                        text’s construction when determining its textuality —
                        from its production, through its transmission, to its consumption by
                        readers. In his Panizzi Lectures of 1985, McKenzie is concerned with 
                            the roles of institutions
                                and their complex structures in affecting the forms of social
                                discourse, past and present
                            
                         and he thinks critically about these roles by identifying human roles
                        in textuality including producer (author/editor) and transmitter
                        (editor/printer/publisher) and consumer (reader/user). Like Briet’s
                            document, the text theorized by McKenzie and
                        McGann is always constructed by a situated context that includes the
                        invisible hands of editors, publishers, and book sellers among others. 
                    A familiarity with how text and document theories intersect is essential in
                        understanding current thinking about the manner in which texts and documents
                        are represented by information systems. More recently, Bernd Frohman
                        discusses the document in relation to Jacques Derrida’s differance
                         in a way that is particularly instructive for
                        thinking about the work of DH infrastructure building. Arguing that
                        documents are 
                            different material kinds of
                                temporally and spatially situated bundles of inscriptions embedded
                                in specific kinds of cultural practices
                            
                        , Frohman asserts that the differences between social and
                        natural-scientific facts are epistemological rather than ontological: Differences lie in problems of
                            revealing facts, he writes . That is, Frohman argues that these facts are not essentially different
                        since each is vulnerable to the fact that writing practices that are meant
                        to reveal them or make them evidentiary actually help to obscure an item of information’s
                                own identity
                        . In other words, what a situated
                        individual would document on one of Otlet’s cards is not representative of
                        the essential or discrete nature of the fact that these documents
                        represented that documenter’s perspective. Accordingly, Frohman asks us to
                        consider the human fault lines of Otlet’s system: What befalls the privileged order of facts when
                            their signs are mechanically manipulated at will? Anyone’s will?
                        .
                    Frohman notes that a Derridean notion of iterability necessarily poses a
                        problem for a system like Otlet’s order of facts since every
                        inter-documented and auxiliaried fact could bear the trace of
                        an infinite number of situated networks. Frohman’s perspective is much like
                        John Bryant’s who sees the textual event differently than social textual
                        theorists and the geneticists by arguing that these camps measure process
                        based on product where the work is always a 
                            conceptual thing or actual set
                                of things or even discrete events 
                            
                        . Just as Frohman describes the state or process of documentation as
                        reflecting an intensity or a force, an energy
                            that feeds this obsessive documentation and the drive to reveal facts
                        , Bryant suggests that the work is a
                            flow of energy, and
                        that literary work is a phenomenon . . . best conceived not as a produced work (oeuvre) but as
                            work itself (travaille), the power of people and culture to create a
                            text
                        . Further, Michael Witmore argues that
                            a text is a text because it
                            is massively addressable at different levels of scale
                        , and he imagines that a hundred years from now, the
                            available computational objects may be related to one another in new
                            ways
                        . Texts will be defined by their
                            massively addressable nature or the extent to which the
                        reader can query (or address) the object at the level of the word, the
                        phrase, the book, or at the level of a genre of works or networks such as
                        those Otlet imagined a century ago. As such, the text’s nature becomes its
                        addressability, which would be defined by the system in which it is stored
                        and through which it is retrieved .
                        Texts will be defined by their massively addressable nature or
                        the extent to which the reader can query (or address) the object at the
                        level of the word, the phrase, the book, or at the level of a genre of works
                        or networks such as those Otlet imagined a century ago. As such, the text’s
                        nature becomes its addressability, which would be defined by the system in
                        which it is stored and through which it is retrieved . Specifically, knowledge production is
                        manifested in the objects we create (sometimes with clay or words or paint,
                        sometimes through identification or revelation) and choose to study, but
                        this knowledge is put into action, is made interpretable by an interaction
                        with information infrastructures or systems (such as the publication cycle,
                        the creation and use of Otlet’s cards, or the development of a database or
                        interface). Like Briet, Frohman, and Witmore, John Bryant questions, 
                            how shall the makers of the
                                archive facilitate and delimit our ability to construct texts,
                                editions, and knowledge?
                            
                        .
                    In other words, can we theorize an information system that can accommodate
                        literary theories of text as well as information-based theories
                        of the document? Certainly, there is a tension present in
                        infrastructure that is built to serve conceptual texts or
                            documents within a digital context that is equally
                        concerned with delivering information. In communication theory
                        from the beginning, information has been associated with
                        uncertainty (a byproduct of the amount of noise in a signal) and the
                        resolution of uncertainty instead of with a more connotative sense of
                        knowledge. Indeed, the revolutionary aspect of Claude E. Shannon’s 1948
                        piece A Mathematical Theory of Communication,
                        which is often considered the beginnings of information theory, was that he
                        statistically positioned noise against signal to
                        resolve 
                            [t]he fundamental problem of
                                communication . . . reproducing at one point either exactly or
                                approximately a message selected at another point
                            
                        . Shannon defined information as a function of the degree
                        of uncertainty or the degree of entropy that is produced when one message is chosen from the
                            set on the receiving end and that message is compared against
                        the intended message from the information source . To explain very briefly, in Shannon’s test scenario, the
                        information source (e.g., the writer or the speaker) produces a message,
                        which a transmitter encodes into a signal for transmission over the channel;
                        the receiver then decodes the signals, thereby reconstructing the message for the
                            destination or 
                            the person (or thing) for
                                whom the message was intended
                            
                        . Noise in this schematic represents disturbances in the
                        signal that create uncertainty as to whether or not the message that was
                        received was the message sent. Consequently, there is more
                            information when 
                            the received signal is
                                selected out of a more varied set than is the transmitted
                                signal
                            
                        .
                    That information and information systems are situated social and
                        cultural constructs, shaped by time and space is well-theorized in
                        information and technology studies. Wilbur Schramm labeled the
                        Shannon-Weaver communication model as the bullet theory in which communication was
                        seen as a magic bullet that transferred knowledge from one mind to another
                            . Instead, Schramm defined
                        information as 
                            any content that reduces
                                uncertainty or the number of alternative possibilities in a
                                    situation
                            
                        . The 
                            message exists as a sign or a
                                collection of signs with no meaning of their own except that which
                                cultural learning enables a receiver to read into them
                            
                        . Michael Buckland maintains that information systems must operate on
                        discrete entities (what is
                            handled and operated upon, what is stored and retrieved) or
                            information-as thing
                        , but he is clear that this idea of
                        information means situating textual and documentary theory in seemingly
                        oppositional practical constraints: information systems handle information only in
                            a sense of information dismissed by leading theorists of
                            information, Buckland writes . The same tension exists for humanists: When
                            text is bits and bytes, how do we represent and consider
                        and keep in transparent play the force and power of differánce that is of interest to DH scholars who work with
                            text while also keeping in mind that the computer requires
                        some level of classification, some 
                            privileged order of
                                facts
                            
                        ?
                    This consideration for how we perceive the nature of text and
                            document and how we interact with or move them through
                        situated knowledge production systems creates an opportunity for critical
                        inquiry into the situated contexts or the epistemic commitments that lie
                        behind our practices in DH. This section attempts to demonstrate that
                            interdisciplinarity is less productive as a technology that
                            unsituates us or removes us from a standpoint.
                        Interdisciplinarity is most useful when it becomes a technology that affords
                        our ability to better situate ourselves: to see how we see, from where we
                        see, who is interpreting the field (and who is not), the limits to our
                        vision, and what we see when what we see is situated in relation to other
                        visions. Frederic Jameson reminds us that 
                            all truths are at best
                                momentary, situational, and marked by a history in the process of
                                change and transformation
                            
                        . A feminist perspective encourages us to responsibly embrace that
                        portion of reality that concerns us (to situate ourselves) even as we change
                        and transform with the realization that (a) we cannot step outside of our
                        perspective, and (b) in the attempt to do so, we step outside the mode of
                        intellectual rigor needed to influence our position as subject and agent.
                        Thus, situatedness within a discipline reveals important
                        factors that inspire critical differentiation and, necessarily, action. This
                        very brief history about the mutual concerns within fields that are
                        theorizing textuality and documentation reveals
                        ties between literary textual studies and information studies that I will
                        consider in the next two sections with more specific examples. 
                
            

                III. The Technology of Mastery and Plausibility
                
                    The Technology of Mastery
                    A feminist perspective based on situated knowledges teaches us
                        that perspectives that seek to liberate us from the obstacles that
                        difficulties impose often result in blinding us from the opportunities that
                        difficulties illuminate. In digital humanities, the technology of
                            mastering technology has been considered a productive means of
                        combatting what is considered the general 
                            degree of ignorance about
                                information technology and its critical relevance to humanities
                                education and scholarship
                            
                        . Even if one does not code, the argument goes, one should be
                        well-versed in digital method, in project management, in data visualization
                        and so forth. I’ve spent almost
                            twenty years, Jerome McGann writes, studying this subject in the only way that gives
                            one a chance of mastering it. That is, by hands-on collaborative
                            interdisciplinary work; likening the mastery of technology to
                        language acquisition, McGann continues, 
                            You learn it by speaking it
                                and writing it. There’s no other way. Anything less is just, well,
                                theoretical
                            
                        . At the same time, there has been much debate in DH about whether
                        designing and building tools gives one an indispensable knowledge of its
                        processes and whether or not women and people of color (and others) are
                        precluded from these activities for a variety of very real and very situated
                        reasons. In this sense, the rhetoric of mastery over technology can be
                        intellectually prohibitive since it threatens an advancement of knowledge
                        production from other perspectives. Indeed, in McCarty’s paradigm, the
                        unsituated DH practitioner is 
                            liberate[d] from the censure
                                of difficulty and so allow[ed]. . . to go in heretofore forbidding
                                directions
                            
                        ; in McCarty’s paradigm, the DH practitioner and the scholar take
                            the standpoint of the
                            master, the Man, the One God, whose Eye produces, appropriates and
                            orders all difference
                        . We are blinded so we may see.
                    In contrast, literary texts have a history of inspiring us to let go of the
                        desire for single-eyed mastery. All literature is to some extent aware of itself as a
                            technology, Richard Poirier writes. 
                            But literary modernism
                                thrusts this awareness upon us and to an unprecedented degree asks
                                us to experience the enormous difficulties of mastering a
                                technology
                            
                        . Megan Simpson argues that Gertrude Stein’s writing challenges not only normative reading
                            habits but the literary values such habits depend
                            on: clarity, unproblematized reference, linearity, decodable
                            meaning, that those
                            who find Stein’s work to be quite readable not in spite of, but because
                            of the absence of these qualities seem to feel liberated from the
                            imperative toward mastery implicit in the traditional model of literary
                            interpretation
                        . Stein replaces these with what
                        DeKoven describes as anti-patriarchal modes that are 
                            incoherent, open-ended,
                                anarchic, irreducibly multiple, and focused on what Barthes calls
                                    the magic of the
                                    signifier
                            
                        . The Baroness Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven is another example of a
                        female poet whose work seemed to embody a defiance for mastery. Her
                        biographer Irene Gammel places much emphasis on Freytag-Loringhoven’s
                        ability to put herself in
                            control by putting
                            her spectators at a distance, which is accomplished by the
                        manner in which she deflates
                            the potential eroticism of her nude performances 
                            through humorous costuming:
                                vegetables adorn her body; stamps decorate her painted face; her
                                hair is shaved and head lacquered in a striking color
                            
                        . As well, the bawdy humor and the vulgarities in her poetry and work
                        had an equally disarming effect. William Carlos Williams once wrote: 
                            Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven came to
                                me as sunlight. I drank pure helicon of her. But she revolted me,
                                frightened me, beat me finally 
                            
                        . Literary theory has emphasized the perspective that literary texts
                        produce knowledge to the extent that they resist simple evaluative
                            resolutions. Two very interesting studies about the history of
                                difficulty in literary study are Diepeveen 2003 and Poirier
                            1992. Certainly, the DH practitioner working with experimental
                        literary texts For more on the political nature of experimental
                            literature by women see DeKoven 2006 1694. may not steer clear of political and
                            professional questions as Willard McCarty proposes  without rendering mute essential aspects of
                        experimentation and difficulty. 
                
                
                    Plausibility
                    The feminist notion of plausibility helps us understand how an
                        interpretive environment can foster values that concern responsibility
                        rather than mastery. Mary Hawkesworth describes this notion of plausibility
                        in science as the result of disbanding the myth of the
                            given: 
                            Once the 
                                    myth of the
                                        given
                                    
                                 has been abandoned and once the belief that the absence of
                                one invariant empirical test for the truth of a theory implies the
                                absence of all criteria for evaluative judgment has been repudiated,
                                then it is possible to recognize the rational grounds for assessing
                                the merits of alternative theoretical interpretations . . . the
                                stimuli that trigger interpretation limit the class of
                                    plausible characterizations without dictating one
                                absolute description.
                            
                        
                    
                    Accordingly, like literary histories and texts that seem to defy singular
                        readings and to demand alternative and alternating theoretical
                        interpretations, DH information infrastructure should be valued by the
                        extent to which it offers a means by which plausible
                        interpretive standpoints, framed by critical (that is responsible and
                        intellectual) judgments, can be expressed. This feminist sense of
                        objectivity, which does not offer authoritative techniques or guarantee the
                        production of truth, is useful when developing systems that are both
                        computational (of bits and bytes) and used to facilitate complex, humanist
                        critical inquiries. 
                    Here again, an epistemic tie with information science is revealed in the
                        extent to which many information science and technology studies scholars
                        have grappled with the nature of plausibility in situated information
                                systems.; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and  to name
                            a few. In particular, Melanie Feinberg has identified rhetorical
                        mechanisms in information systems that help us think critically about how
                        information systems reflect logical argument ,
                        ethos , and genre adaptation . What is particularly powerful about
                        Feinberg’s overarching question within the context of DH scholarly
                        information infrastructure is her suggestion that a system’s persuasiveness or value
                        is not based on the extent to which it creates truth but rather on the extent to
                        which the system entices the audience to explore the ways the system 
                            contribute[s] to the
                                reader’s own evolving interpretation of the domain of the
                                scheme
                            
                         — or the reader’s own sense of the plausibility of an interpretation
                        given the nature of the interpretive environment. Like Haraway’s suggestion
                        that we examine the episteme of technologies through ways and practices,
                        Bernd Frohman proposes 
                            descriptions of documentary
                                practices
                            
                         that can help us identify the field of the plausible. In particular,
                        he notes four properties for characterizing documentary practices that help
                        us articulate how the development of a system shapes plausibility: that is,
                        documentary practices are fundamentally (1) material; (2) institutionalized;
                        (3) dependent on socializations such as training, teaching, correction, and other
                            disciplinary measures; and (4) historicized or of a particular
                        time and place . To demonstrate, in
                        this section, I discuss how these four properties impact the field of
                        plausible interpretations in an electronic edition of poetry by Elsa von
                        Freytag-Loringhoven (1874-1927) that I developed and co-edited with Gaby
                        Divay called The Firstling/Erstling/He Complex
                        
                         This edition is available online at http://www.scholarlyediting.org/2012/editions/baroness/main.baroness.html..
                    The Firstling/Erstling/He Complex represents an
                        open-source collaboration that seeks to represent a poem by
                        Freytag-Loringhoven. This complex poem is a cluster of
                        works (one text in the Barthesian sense) that includes thirty-three versions
                        of a poem in two languages by Freytag Loringhoven. The entire cluster can be
                        dated between 1923 and 1924 when the poet had just returned to Berlin after
                        twelve years in the United States. About one third of the poems are in
                        German and tend to be composed in a more traditional form and style. Two
                        thirds are in English. As this versioned edition shows, Freytag Loringhoven
                        did not simply translate this poem. She rewrote her poem over time using the
                        two languages to embody adaptations or re-creations that reflected her
                        changing geography, economic status, love experiences, and poetic
                            philosophies. Please see http://www.scholarlyediting.org/2012/editions/baroness/main.baroness.html.
                        Indeed, in Freytag-Loringhoven studies, there are a variety of materials to
                        consider and languages and disciplines from which to approach her work. She
                        was a published poet, a street performer, and an artist. She published in
                        German and in English and she lived in Germany, the United States, and
                        France.
                
                
                    Material
                    Freytag-Loringhoven’s work corresponds to Raymond Williams’s assertion that
                        language in modernist writing is 
                            more evident as a medium
                                — a medium that could be shaped and reshaped — than as a social
                                custom
                            
                        . For example, in a selection of letters written to Djuna Barnes after
                        her return to Germany in 1923, Freytag-Loringhoven re-examines her
                        relationship to both American and German cultures through the manifestation
                        of English and German in her writing: 
                            I know why I beg! I ask
                                    for my soul’s honour, mental activity. I only move in English
                                    sounds. I am homesick for English language, my ear declines, my
                                    taste nauseated by German sound — and yet I lose my facility in
                                    English, words come not easy, sometimes meaning is doubtful, new
                                    expressions do not present themselves. As much as I read
                                    English, it is not alive — living, because I am not, hence no
                                    fluctuation, instigation — creation . . . must again dream in
                                    English . . . I am left drifting old wreck — no I cannot — I
                                    cannot — I cannot, I am too proud!
                                 I cannot stand the Germans, I cannot stand their language. I am
                                    traitor here!
                            
                         Here, Freytag-Loringhoven’s body is language. When her English is
                        dead, she is physically stilted. When she speaks German, she is physically
                        sick. She laments her loss of English as if she were a painter who had lost
                        use of her fingers or a dancer unable to walk. In concert with Williams’s
                        assertion that modernists who were (or interacted with) immigrants perceived
                        language not 
                            in the old sense, customary
                                and naturalized but in many ways arbitrary and conventional
                            
                        , Freytag-Loringhoven experienced language as a synaesthete might —
                        she move[d] in English sound, her
                            taste nauseated by German
                            sound. Language for Freytag-Loringhoven was a significant
                        element of what she considered her naturalized identity. As a result,
                        language functions as an essential aspect of provocation within her Dadaist
                        project — she used linguistic codes as experimental tools for play.
                        Understanding her lived presence and the posthumous literary productions
                        surrounding that presence has become an important aspect of understanding
                        her poetry, her performances, and her impact on literary studies. Given the
                        material of this poem, however, an information infrastructure that
                        facilitates access to the element of language play that Williams identifies
                        provides for a variety of plausible perspectives. 
                
                
                    Institutionalization
                    Julia Flanders considers subjectivity (our own readerly motivations) as one
                        aspect of humanist inquiry that standardized encoding practices tend to
                        disregard due to precedents set by institutional-level (libraries and
                        commercial industry) projects, which sought to represent texts from an
                        unbiased standpoint . The digital
                        files in the The Firstling/Erstling/He Complex
                        edition comprise one file that has been encoded according to the XML
                        (Extensible Markup Language) standard outlined in the Text Encoding
                        Initiative’s (TEI) P5 Guidelines. The TEI Guidelines, while restrictive in
                        some senses, are reflexive in their awareness that such encoding makes
                            explicit an interpretation
                            of a text. Please see http://www.tei-c.org/P4X/SG.html. XML (Extended
                        Mark-up Language), like HTML, is a subset of SGML (Standard Generalized
                        Mark-up Language). XML includes mark-up that describes more conceptual
                        notions text, not just how it appears on the browser page — the primary
                        function of HTML. For example, in the following excerpt, a line group
                            <lg> and the lines <l> within it
                        are marked-up or tagged with the
                        poet’s additions <add> and deletions
                            <del>: 
                            <head>Firstling</head>
                            <lg>
                            <l>Love — </l>
                            <l><del>Came</del>
                                <add>SHONE </add>
                                </l>
                            <l><del>Tore</del>
                                 <add>CLIPPED</add></l>
                            <l>Past</l>
                            
                            </lg>
                         This work facilitates incorporating Freytag-Loringhoven’s
                        texts into an environment that has the theoretical potential to provide
                        access to her language play and her social networks as well, which was our
                        primary goal in providing access to her poetic work. To this end, I encoded
                        the XML file using the parallel segmentation and location-referenced
                        encoding described in the P5 Guidelines in order to make explicit our
                        interpretations of the complex web of relationships across the changes
                        represented in the thirty-three versions of the text (which manifest across
                        twenty-two, full color, documentary images of the manuscript pages).
                            All of the versions represented here are based on images created at the
                            University of Maryland (UM), College Park, Libraries, where the original
                            manuscripts reside in the Papers of Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven (http://hdl.handle.net/1903.1/1501) in the Library's Literary
                            Manuscripts Collection. We encoded the transcriptions with
                        meta-text or annotation or
                            other marks within a text, and we used Versioning Machine
                            Please see http://vmachine.org. scripts to transform the XML file
                        into an HTML file that becomes a web interface. Using this interface,
                        readers can see the relationships we have marked across this poetic event
                        while also allowing them to manipulate comparisons (see To be sufficiently
                        and coherently critical in DH, technologies should be developed and used
                        within a culture that is not only critically self-aware about the uses to
                        which technologies are employed but also how that employment has been
                        situated by the epistemic commitments of the people behind these
                        technologies and to what effect. For example, notwithstanding its virtues,
                        encoding with a standard such as the TEI can be extremely frustrating for
                        editors attempting to realize abstract texts. As McGann points out, the TEI
                        has adopted a markup practice
                            — a linguistic and paper-based approach — that is at odds with the
                            theoretical opportunities that have been opened up by electronic
                            textuality, where the limits of the codex are surpassed; this
                        frustration, he and others complain, results from the TEI incorporating
                        hierarchies that 
                            misimagine the relation of
                                electronic to paper-based textuality
                            
                        . For better or worse, these hierarchies represent the artifacts of
                        working with computational models. On the other hand, other opportunities
                        for new knowledge are possible with TEI encoding. 
                            The Firstling/Erstling/He Complex interface using the Versioning
                                Machine 4.0
                            Screenshot of the Firstling/Erstling/He Complex
                                interface
                            
                        
                
                
                    Socialization
                    Situating our critical perspectives and employing a feminist notion of
                        objective practices that seeks to facilitate plausible readings positions us
                        to realize that systems of representation, whether digital or not, are
                        subjective, abstract models that we build to reflect our situations. This
                        realization should encourage us to work towards imagining alternative uses
                        for encodings that motivate readers to think differently and critically,
                        encodings that are not dismantled by a desire for objectivity and thus
                        mastery over truth. Flanders, for example, adopts the vision
                        metaphor to emphasize and make transparent the subjective aspect of
                        editorial practices within TEI XML encoding. By shifting our view, she writes, 
                            we can understand XML as a
                                way of expressing perspectival understandings of the text: not as a
                                way of capturing what is timeless and essential, but as a way of
                                inscribing our own changeable will on the text” and the “strategic
                                positioning of our own readerly motivations
                            
                        .
                    For example, starting with manuscripts of two traditionally crafted German
                        poems in twelve versions (Erstling and Erste Lieb), we show that Freytag-Loringhoven also
                        develops two branches of English poems (Firstling and First Love) in this
                            edition. The explanation that follows is best experienced by the
                            reader by working through the edition itself which has been published
                            online  at http://www.scholarlyediting.org/2012/editions/baroness/main.baroness.html.
                            Each of the version numbers can be located at this publication. 
                        An example of the predominant Erstling/Firstling variants appear together in versions 3.1 and
                        3.2, while the other strain of variants evolve from Erste Liebe/First Love into the less well represented He poems, making the The Firstling/Erstling/He
                        Complex of the title. In particular, the works in this edition show that
                        Freytag-Loringhoven used translation as a technique to express her
                        perspectives (and to play with these expressions) on both German and
                        American cultures and languages. Note 5.3 verso explains
                        Freytag-Loringhoven’s perspective on at least one evolving theme:
                        Freytag-Loringhoven tells Djuna Barnes (to whom she has sent this poem in a
                        letter) that the German Erstling (3.1) was
                            touching and naiv [sic], and
                        the English Firstling (3.2) bitter and grim. Further, the puns
                        Freytag-Loringhoven derives from the name of her supposed once-lover Ernst
                        Hardt (1876-1947) provide for one example of the sense of cross-language
                        play in the poems. Titles such as Firstling
                        (version 1.1), First Love (version 8.3), First Born (version 9.5), Erstling (version 3.1), He
                        (version 4.2), and Liebe (version 10), indicate
                        that the poems are referring to this first love (three versions of which are
                        shown in Figure 1. The English versions 8.3 and 11, have the title First Love for He,
                        but the first part of the word Erste (or
                            First in German) is also Er or
                            He in English. Inserting an n after Er results in
                            Ernste Lieb or Serious
                            Love, which contains Hardt's given name Ernst and
                        corresponds to the basic, non-inflected form of the German adjective
                            ernst or earnest. The playful use of the word wart
                        as an image for heart is another example of translating feelings with
                        translating words as Freytag-Loringhoven indicates in her note to Barnes on
                        version 1.3: He and Firstling, she
                        writes, These two poems are same. I leave
                            it to you – if you will print both? With that Flayed Heart -/Froze - - - -. I consider it
                            singular strong enough – to countenance the shriveling of the heart to
                            the semblance and useless appendix of the heart. Allowing the
                        reader to navigate our marked associations is an affordance of the
                        electronic edition and an invitation consider a variety of shifting vantage
                        points and plausible readings.
                
                
                    Historicization
                    Certainly, multimedia aspects of Freytag-Loringhoven’s poetry represented by
                        versions, images, and even encoded text are not new to editorial work or
                        even to digital editorial work. As well, these vantage points I describe
                        above are, in some sense hard coded into the edition by
                        the mark up I used to create the edition. Yet, scholars who reflect the TEI
                        community’s intentions for increasing interpretive affordances continue to
                        theorize how XML markup can be made more flexible. It is in the mode of
                            shifting vantage points which
                        elucidate shifting relationships
                        that Alan Renear and David Dubin continue to consider representations of the
                            document in projects such as the BECHAMEL XML
                        Semantics Project. Renear and Dubin seek to theorize the identity,
                        criteria, or individuation conditions of documents as a 
                            method for determining whether
                                an object x and an object y are the same object
                            
                        . Such differentiation in an information system is key for identifying
                        and reidentifying, counting, and distinguishing entities. Their specific,
                        situated, readerly motivations similarly affect their definitions: by document, the authors write, 
                            then we refer to the abstract
                                symbolic expression which may be physically instantiated repeatedly
                                and in various media. This use corresponds more or less to the FRBR
                                term expression [17] and
                                has the colloquial synonym text
                            
                        . Their goal is to allow for a way to conceptualize overlapping
                        elements, to move away from the representation of text as structure to the
                        representation of text as concept, a movement toward further abstraction.
                        The authors write, 
                            data structures don’t have
                                    paragraphs, they have nodes labeled p;
                                documents don’t have nodes labeled p, they have
                                    paragraphs
                            
                        . As a result, rather than using the syntactical relationships in XML
                        DTDs, their strategy is to enable the determination of semantic
                        relationships where 
                            semantics simply means the
                                basic facts and relationships that are represented by the occurrence
                                of XML constructs
                            
                        . The authors argue that using this kind of semantic markup system
                        means that similarities and partial
                            identities of various kinds can be identified. 
                    What is unique about Freytag-Loringhoven, what makes her poetry texts
                        difficult to access through traditional and new practices of literary
                        analysis in information systems pertains to the temporal and spatial nature
                        of language play that was so essential to the field of plausible
                        meaning-making engaged by her poetry .
                        Certainly, the ability to incorporate editorial subjectivity, audience
                        collaboration, and a sense of her evolving use of language into the encoding
                        that comprises Freytag-Loringhoven’s poetry reframes what can be considered
                        a plausible reading of her poetry. Considering these four properties
                        (material, institutionalization, socialization, and historicization) for
                        characterizing documentary practices in a system helps us articulate how the
                        situated development of the system rather than the mastery of a technology
                        shapes that field of plausible interpretations.
                
            

                III. Technologies of Self-Consciousness and Responsibility 
                
                    The Technology of Self-Consciousness 
                    The technology of self-consciousness in the humanities is very
                        powerful. Geoffrey Harpham sums up traditional rationales for humanistic study as 
                            [t]he scholarly study of
                                documents and artifacts produced by human beings in the past [which]
                                enables us to see the world from different points of view so that we
                                may better understand ourselves
                            
                        . He argues for complicating an element of uncertainty, which 
                            solicits its own revision in
                                an endless process of refutation, contestation, and
                                modification
                            
                        . Because it solicits its own
                            revision, Harpham notes, knowledge in the humanities is produced
                        by 
                            being aware
                            
                         or 
                            self-understanding
                            
                        . Humanists continue to ask, Who are we? What do we do? 
                    The most recent spate of debates about how we become answerable to what we do
                        in the humanities occurred at the turn into the new millennium when the
                        debate over the crisis in the humanities sparked a
                        firestorm of conferences, talks, presentations, articles, chapters and
                        special journal issues by many humanist scholars seeking to define what
                        humanists do as a reflection of the epistemological 
                            superstructure
                            
                         that considers why, as a culture, we should value the humanities.
                        Sander Gilman, for example, clarifies self-understanding specifically as
                            the self conscious awareness
                            of the methodological approaches that one uses or an awareness
                        of process . Louis Menand also
                        identifies self-aware processes as the defining technology for humanistic
                        knowledge production by arguing that in developing tools for understanding
                            ourselves and 
                            everything in the world of
                                values
                            
                         — what Latour calls 
                            states of affairs
                            
                         — humanists are instantiating the fact of situatedness and ultimately a
                        necessary skepticism to objectivity .
                    Similarly, it would be remiss to posit that self-conscious
                        processes are absent from DH discussions. One does not have to look
                        further than John Unsworth’s consideration of the importance of failure  for
                        evaluating digital methods, Willard McCarty’s notion of a via
                                negative or a negative way to knowledge in which we
                        probe failures through
                        an iterative, trial-and-error process , Julia Flander’s 
                            productive unease
                            
                        , and, of course, Smith’s 
                            technology of
                                self-consciousness
                            
                         to see evidence of the fact that DH scholars have been thinking
                        critically about how self-consciousness is manifested in DH method.
                     Specifically, DH has advanced its work as new ways of asking about the very
                        nature of traditional humanist knowledge production. Willard McCarty wrote
                            Humanities Computing, for instance,
                        as an attempt to articulate DH as a dynamic, 
                            new form of traditional
                                scholarly practice
                            
                         that seeks to identify and explore the practice and form of digital
                        inquiry as it relates to traditional methods and modes of knowledge
                        production in the humanities . He
                        notes that computing humanists use self-aware practices such as conceptual
                        modeling, which emphasizes the scholar’s search for genuineness as measured by her
                        interpretive standpoint. Calling computational models 
                            temporary states in a process
                                of coming to know rather than fixed structures of knowledge
                            
                        , McCarty explains the nature of self-consciousness in working with
                        computational models: 
                            Compromises made in how a
                                problem is formulated, the perspective chosen, the components and
                                relations defined and the model constructed from them sum together
                                into a result that in general is impossible to validate in any
                                absolute sense against the real-world object. For the humanities the
                                only possibility is comparison between the result and the scholar's
                                own interpretation, hence the privileging of that interpretation
                                from the beginning.
                            
                         As such, McCarty, and others 
                        posit modeling as the most rigorous method of analysis as it encourages an
                        engagement with the processes of knowledge production as opposed to its
                        product. 
                    On the other hand, it seems that one of the greatest complaints concerning
                        digital humanities work is not, as some have argued, the lack of
                        self-consciousness critiques about the humanities that have long been the
                        purview of the humanities, but rather the lack of self-conscious critiques
                        about the information infrastructure that affords these critiques. Christine
                        Borgmann, among others, calls for a social studies of the digital
                            humanities; she asks, Why is no one following digital humanities
                            scholars around to understand their practices, in the way that
                            scientists have been studied for the last several decades?
                        . More recently, Don Waters invoked this divide
                        between practices in the sciences and the humanities by discussing a piece
                        by Steve Nichols entitled The Anxiety of Irrelevance:
                            Digital Humanities and Contemporary Literary Theory in
                        which Nichols, in turn, seems to recapitulate C.P. Snow’s two cultures argument
                        [1959]. Nichols argues that while engineers and computer scientists ask
                            How
                            possible questions (or investigations that seek to describe, explain,
                            control, or predict material things), humanists ask inherently
                        divergent Why
                            possible questions based on critical intelligences . These critical intelligences entail 
                            distinguishing what is
                                    real or given from
                                what our process of thinking about the object contributes to our
                                cognition of the thing
                            
                        . In short, or, in the words of Waters (who is, in turn, paraphrasing
                        Nichols), critical intelligence comprises an emphasis on 
                            objects of study in the
                                humanities [that] are characterized by
                                    contingency and irony
                                rather than truth or falsity
                            
                        . While Nichols disregards the possibility of a transdisciplinary
                        digital humanities based on the premise that How and
                            Why questions are incompatible, Waters (like Borgman) uses
                        Nichols’s argument to encourage more crossover between the sciences and the
                        humanities in order to better understand 
                            the disciplined methods and
                                tools associated with the application of critical intelligence in
                                various kinds of humanistic research
                            
                         that comprise DH projects. 
                    In contrast to this perspective, rigorous DH scholarship demonstrates that
                        opportunities for critical work are foreshortened when the value of DH is
                        measured by its potential to produce tools that simply validate pre-existing
                        theoretical suppositions, rather than DH’s potential to help question these
                        regimes of theory. As McCarty has argued, all meaningful uses of computing are heuristic,
                            and therefore that mere delivery is dangerously
                            misleading
                        . Others have written critically about
                        objective versus subjective DH method , the mind
                        over body divide , and the fact that the
                        technologies of access in DH can reify the canon . Most recently, the National Endowment for the Humanities’ Office of
                        Digital Humanities has changed its start-up grant description, which has
                        historically been an important funding resource for supporting a generation
                        of new DH tools and method to include developing new technologies of
                        self-consciousness including 
                            scholarship that focuses on the
                                history, criticism, and philosophy of digital culture and its impact
                                on society
                            
                        . So too I have shown here that infrastructural developments reflect
                        pre-existing epistemologies about truth and
                            objectivity than can shape the knowledge-production that is
                        facilitated by systems. I have demonstrated how grounding digital humanities
                        in work being discussed within information studies affords a perspective
                        that allows us to see that information systems are themselves situated
                        within ways of practice that shape our understanding of the plausibility of
                        certain interpretative standpoints – regardless of whether or not the
                        objects of study are literary texts or not. 
                    At the same time, while DH has proclaimed and demonstrated (as I have done
                        here) a self-conscious awareness of process, a sense pervades that this
                        focus on self-conscious method reflects an unproductive tendency to view
                        digital humanities as a partial fix for an epistemological and ontological
                        stasis in the humanities. For Julia Flanders, this tendency is 
                            confusing: it is vague,
                                utopian, and self-contradictory . . . The rhetoric of digital
                                changes exists, for the academy, as a way of producing a new
                                narrative of progress which generates research, and a rhetoric of
                                transformation that can carry the self-critique that is built into
                                academic life
                            
                        . In other words, while measuring a research method’s value by how
                        well it facilitates our ability to think critically about our own
                        interpretations is valuable, this focus seems positioned for the sake of
                        self - consciousness itself — as such, it becomes a technology of
                            self-consciousness that serves as a means to accomplish
                        self-critique. A feminist standpoint reminds us that while it is not enough
                        to say that DH should employ self-conscious methods, it is equally
                        insufficient to merely be self-conscious about methods, even when this work
                        is still necessary.
                    A position shaped by feminist inquiry means understanding that it is our
                        responsibility to ask if it is possible to use DH work (in this case, the
                        development of information infrastructure) for emancipatory ends – a
                        question I am situating within the context of this discussion as an
                        information science question in DH feminism. In keeping with this
                        disciplinary viewpoint and to conclude this section, therefore, I will end
                        by sharing examples of information infrastructure development in DH that
                        reflect the sense of responsibility DH must engage to go beyond
                        the technology of self-consciousness toward actions for change.
                
                
                    Responsibility and Located Accountability in DH
                    The questions that Lucy Suchman posits as a kind of checklist for
                            located accountability represent an extremely
                        productive means for making more transparent how we can be responsible for
                        the kinds of work practices that our developing information systems
                        engender. Working
                            relations, Suchman writes, 
                            are understood as
                                sociomaterial connections that sustain the visible and invisible
                                work required to construct coherent technologies and put them into
                                use
                            
                        . Suchman, who describes that for which we are accountable or
                        responsible as a reframing of 
                            the locus of objectivity from
                                an established body of knowledge not produced or owned by anyone, to
                                knowledges in dynamic production, reproduction and
                                transformation
                            
                        , poses some questions for evaluating the manner in which system
                        production relates to system use that are particularly useful for
                        disentangling work in DH that reflects activist progress based on humanist
                        inquiry. Below, I have posed her questions  to introduce some observations about areas in DH where we are
                        making great strides in critical actions toward emancipatory ends: 
                            Recognizing the various forms of visible and invisible work
                                    that make up the production/use of technical systems, locating
                                    ourselves within that extended web of connections, and taking
                                    responsibility for our participation. The #altac or
                                alternative career movement, shepherded by Bethany Nowviskie and
                                popularized on Twitter has done phenomenal work in making the
                                invisible hands of alternative academics or
                                non-tenure track staff and faculty part of a now common parlance for
                                attributing credit broadly across many digital humanities projects
                                    . As a result, professional
                                organizations such as the Modernist Language Association and the
                                American Historical Association have sponsored #altac panels and
                                have published guidelines on evaluating digital humanities projects
                                as scholarly work. Further, to set this conversation in context,
                                    Evaluating Digital Scholarship
                                 was published in the MLA journal in
                                    Profession (2011) to delineate the
                                difficulties of assessing aspects of digital scholarship. These
                                difficulties include the fact that the creation of digital
                                    infrastructure for scholarly inquiry relies on the traditions of
                                    scholarly editing, bibliography, and philology long relegated to
                                    second-class status in the academy . This movement not only
                                serves to professionalize graduate students for a wider range of
                                professional careers outside of the academy, it also serves to
                                provide a platform for more conversations about the work of humanist
                                inquiry and the role that information infrastructure must play in
                                the academy in the digital age.
                            Understanding technology use as the recontextualization of
                                    technologies designed at greater or lesser distances in some
                                    local site of practice. Jay David Bolter and Richard
                                Grusin’s Remediation [1999], Wendy
                                Chun’s Programmed Visions [2013], Lisa
                                Gittelman’s Always Already New: Media, History,
                                    and the Data of Culture [2008], and Matt Kirschenbaum’s
                                    New Media and the Forensic
                                    Imagination [2008], Lev Manovich’s Software Takes Command [2013], and Johnathon Sterne’s
                                    MP3: The Meaning of a Format [2012]
                                are just a few of the seminal texts in digital humanities that have
                                been essential in identifying historical, social and cultural
                                contexts behind text, images, and sound that affect our current
                                practices of building and imagining digital humanities
                                infrastructure. These texts form a platform off of which more work
                                must be done to articulate not only the new media technologies that
                                shape how we perceive and build information systems but the humanist
                                technologies that also influence (and have always influenced) these
                                practices. 
                            Acknowledging and accepting the limited power of any actors
                                    or artifacts to control technology production/use.
                                Continued conversations concerning Open Access Scholarship
                                and online education are other areas of deep concern to professional
                                DH organizations. The digital humanities community has been
                                particularly keen on advocating for open access with the ODH
                                requiring open-source software and the community developing a
                                variety of open-access, peer-reviewed journals (Digital Humanities Quarterly and Digital Studies / Le champ numérique) as well as
                                publishing a slew of seminal texts in open-access book venues [; ; ;  to name a
                                few]. Further, the ACH (Association for Computing in the Humanities)
                                has gone to great lengths to help support open access and fair use
                                in DH by joining the DH community in filing two amicus briefs in
                                lawsuits related to digitization of in-copyright and orphaned works
                                in the Google Books and HathiTrust corpora. Spearheaded by Matthew
                                Jockers, Matthew Sag, and Jason Schultz on behalf of the DH
                                community, the briefs describe how DH scholars employ innovative
                                    data-mining techniques in ways consistent with fair use, and how
                                    scholarship could be held back if this kind of research is not
                                    well supported by the courts.Please see http://www.ach.org/ach-advocacy-news. As of
                                October 11, 2012, based in part on the evidence from these briefs,
                                the United States district court ruled favorably for continued fair
                                use in digital research. 
                            Establishing new bases for technology integration, not in
                                    universal languages, but in partial translations. This
                                notion, that technological integration can never be universal, that
                                some voices are and will always be excluded, is crucial for
                                understanding this recommendation in terms of DH movements that seek
                                to include multiple perspectives in DH. Virtual communities such as
                                NITLE (National Institute for Technology in Liberal Education),
                                HASTAC (Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology Advanced
                                Collaboratory), and DHCommons as well as the DH Training
                                    NetworkThe Training Network includes the following
                                    international training institutes: DHSI at the University of
                                    Victoria, DH@Oxford at Oxford University, DH@Leipzig at Leipzig University, DHWI at the
                                    University of Maryland, College Park, DH@Bern
                                    at the University of Bern, and Brown at Brown University. institutes have
                                provided essential virtual and real networking spaces for students,
                                emerging and experienced scholars to become familiar with the
                                theories and technologies of DH. Other grassroots movements have
                                included THATCamps Please see http://thatcamp.org/. which are locally organized
                                    unconferences where participants gather at low
                                costs to familiarize and deepen their understanding of DH debates
                                and practices. Further, ADHO (Alliance of Digital Humanities
                                Organizations) — which has recently expanded to include the
                                Australasian Association for Digital Humanities (aaDH) and the
                                Japanese Association for Digital Humanities (JADH) — has developed a
                                    Conference Code of Conduct [2013]
                                in the tradition of code4lib, the American Library Association, the Digital
                                    Library Federation, and the Association for Computing Machinery, which lays out
                                principles to encourage a welcoming
                                    conference environment that respects personal, cultural, and
                                    linguistic differences. Please see
                                    http://adho.org/administration/conference-coordinating-program-committee/adho-conference-code-conduct.
                                Further, groups such as Accessible Future (link: http://www.accessiblefuture.org/), Postcolonial Digital
                                Humanities (link: http://dhpoco.org/), and Transformative Digital
                                Humanities (link: http://transformdh.org/) seek to include voices in DH
                                from communities that have not been well represented. Finally, DH
                                continues to see a surge of interest and activity around the world
                                from groups such as the Red de Humanidades Digitales (RedHD) (link:
                                    http://humanidadesdigitales.net/) and new centers in
                                Brazil, India, Israel, and South Africa (link: http://www.dhcenternet.org/).
                            Valuing heterogeneity in technical systems, achieved through
                                    practices of artful integration, over homogeneity and
                                    domination. With multiple grant categories that support
                                increasing access through digitization to supporting training and
                                research institutes to funding advanced method and tools and
                                international collaborations, very few entities have made as great
                                an impact in their attempt to diversify the thinking and the work of
                                DH than the Office of Digital Humanities at the National Endowment
                                for the Humanities or the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation which has
                                repeatedly supported projects for change in research, scholarship,
                                and teaching. Don Waters sees the road ahead (situated in terms of
                                what Mellon is already and would, in the future, like to fund)
                                leading into six areas: (1) institutional infrastructure development
                                that serves expressed scholarly needs; (2) digital media
                                preservation; (3) tools and infrastructure that span the three
                                primary areas of work in digital humanities (i.e., textual, spatial,
                                and visual analysis) such as annotation, named entity
                                identification, and prosopographies; (4) more tools that facilitate
                                analysis in visual, spatial, and audio as well as areas outside the
                                three areas mentioned above; (5) a better understanding of scholarly
                                needs in publishing and curation and the necessary infrastructural
                                capacities in cultural and academic organizations for such work; (6)
                                training for scholars and students to understand and engage
                                imaginatively in tool-based modes of intellectual pursuits is a
                                further imperative .
                        
                    To conclude, these are just a few examples of areas of information
                        infrastructure development projects in DH that directly relate to the
                        emancipatory design goals outlined by Suchman. As Haraway has written, 
                            We need the power of modern
                                critical theories of how meanings and bodies get made, not in order
                                to deny meanings and bodies, but in order to build meanings and
                                bodies that have a chance for life
                            
                        . Using feminist inquiry to understand the nature of information
                        science questions within digital humanities helps us to articulate how we
                        might fulfill our responsibility to become answerable to how information
                        infrastructure impacts meaning-making in the humanities as well as action in
                        the digital humanities.
                
            
