Title:  Digital Humanities on Reserve: From Reading Room to
               Laboratory at Yale University Library
Volume:  014
Issue:  3
Date:  25 September 2020
Abstract:  
            
            A 1930s reading room at Yale University Library is the site of an architectural
               transformation that seeks to make DH praxis visible in a collaborative, open setting.
               What design and policy interventions lead to the best use of this central and
               symbolic space? Ethnographic study, user-centered design and a focus on the
               materiality of both physical and digital collections combine to suggest one pathway
               for research libraries to support collaborative digital work in the humanities. In
               this article, two digital humanities staff at Yale Library discuss the relationship
               between inclusion v. separation, security v. transparency, and historicizing v.
                  modern design in the context of a space for Digital
               Humanities.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            
               The Franke Family Digital Humanities Laboratory. Photo
                     credit: Mara Lavitt.
               
            
            A historic reading room from 1931 is the site of one of the newest scholarly support
               environments at Yale University: The Franke Family Digital Humanities Laboratory.
               While neither the first renovation of the space — the room shifted from reserve books
               to periodicals in the 1970s — nor the first home of the lab, which relocated from a
               room requiring a campus ID for access to a publicly accessible, much larger space —
               the transition of a reading room to a digital humanities (DH) laboratory represented
               a new kind of commitment from the Library that required structural, aesthetic, and
               programmatic transformations. The goal was to create a collaborative, open workspace
               where the practice of digital humanities would be visible, accessible, and supported
               within Sterling Memorial Library, the so-named heart of the
                  university
               . Specific design and policy interventions informed the
               reimagining of this central and symbolic space. This article considers the role of DH
               labs as humanities infrastructure, with a focus on how
               location, materials, and services could be designed to support DH research and
               training within libraries.
            The transformation of this particular room, and the services found inside it, are
               part of a larger process of libraries formalizing their support for digital
               humanities in response to local needs and resourcing 
               . As staff members in Yale University Library and DH
               practitioners ourselves, we chronicle the project from the perspective of both
               library service design and new forms of academic collaboration. Ethnographic study,
               user-centered design, and a focus on the materiality of both physical and digital
               collections combine to suggest one pathway for research libraries to create spaces
               that offer localized support for collaborative digital work in the humanities.
         

            From Reading Room to Digital Humanities Lab: Reimagining a Library Support Space 
            
               The Reserve Book Room in April 1931, shortly after opening. Photo credit: Yale University Manuscripts & Archives.
               
            
            In the 2019 Debates in Digital Humanities, Neil Fraistat
               calls for a reimagining of lab programming, one that moves away from faculty
               fellowships toward incubator models that provide more training and capacity-building
               support . We extend this call to consider how the
               physical design of labs contributes to the services offered therein. Many
               universities and colleges have built successful models where a DH lab or center is
               affiliated with a single department or faculty lead: Stanford’s Literary Lab was at
               one point physically housed within the English department, for example. More and
               more, however, labs are forming within libraries. Joan Lippincott observes that
                  more libraries are recognizing that they may want to invest
                  resources, including staff expertise and time, technology infrastructure such as
                  repositories, and physical spaces such as digital scholarship centers or labs, to
                  make a more formal commitment by the library to this type of scholarship
               . This extension of library support for digital
               training spans the United States, with examples from the University of California Los
               Angeles, the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Rutgers University, University of
               Virginia, and Brown University, to name a few. But even within libraries, the focus
               and design of labs vary. Katy Kavanagh Webb’s recent survey of digital support
               separates labs into groups covering Digital Media, Digital Humanities, Data
               Visualization, and Makerspaces (2018), each of which has its own spatial constraints
               with respect to the kind and amount of hardware needed, which in turn affects its
               design flexibility.
            At Yale, the Digital Humanities Lab (DHLab) has always been physically and
               organizationally located within the Library, tasked from the beginning with
               supporting scholarship across the humanities broadly considered. In addition to
               departmental diversity, the audience for DH support has included a broad set of
               clients, from Yale College students, graduate students, faculty, curators, and
               librarians to occasional collaborations with external partners. This range of
               disciplinary and professional perspectives presented unique opportunities and
               challenges for designing a space that would be inspiring, inclusive, and
               functional.
            Moving DH labs into libraries invites a rethinking of library spaces that were
               originally designed for oftentimes siloed engagements. Completed in 1931, Sterling
               Memorial Library contains nearly 450,000 square feet of space to support learning and
               research. Positioned immediately to the left of the main entrance, the Reserve Book
               Room (Figure 2) was an integral part of architect James Gamble Rogers’ design. The
               room and its support areas total over 4,000 square feet and were designed to hold
               10,000 volumes on wooden shelves that flank the northwest and southeast walls. Large
               expanses of leaded glass windows bring filtered natural light into the room, rising
               to a ceiling of decorative plasterwork and chandeliers. The abundance of
               craftsmanship is characteristic of Sterling Memorial Library as a whole, completed at
               a time when the Great Depression enabled new campus construction nationwide at
               relatively low cost. Yet the Reserve Room itself was described by contemporary
               observers as a place of relative moderation: Inasmuch as the
                  Reserve Book Room is really a work room where students go for study, wrote
               alum Ellery Husted in the Yale Library Gazette the year
               of Sterling’s opening, its architectural treatment is more
                  restrained than the other large reading rooms which filled the main floor
               of the new library . The Reserve Book Room served its role
               as designed well into the 1970s, when the construction of the new underground
               Cross-Campus Library (now renamed Bass Library) opened up more modern space for
               perusal of reserved books. As a result, in 1973, the room changed its function to
               housing periodicals, continuing in that capacity through a renovation in the late
               1990s that included new furniture and a renaming to the Franke Family Reading Room in
               honor of a gift from Barbara and Richard Franke (Class of 1953), who share a longtime
               commitment to supporting the humanities.
            By the early 2010s, consensus had built on campus that the room could serve a more
               prominent role in the future of research in the arts and humanities. With the
               availability of other rooms within Sterling to hold print periodicals, the space
               seemed ripe for reimagination. Discussions imagined a Digital Center for Arts and
                  Humanities, modeled on the successful launch of the Center for Science and
               Social Science Information (CSSSI) in a 1960s building in 2012 
               . That renovation project successfully provided a home
               for the science and science libraries, 24-hour study space, and support for data
               analysis in the basement of a science building. Subject specialists in that new space
               worked in glass offices surrounding a central collaborative work area, where advanced
               statistical consulting was also provided by graduate students. CSSSI thus provided a
               new template at Yale for how subject specialists, technology, and data services could
               complement traditional library offerings such as print collections and periodicals.
               The challenge was how to adapt this support model for a significantly older, and less
               flexible, space.
            Indeed, the design and materiality of the Franke Room was naturally much different
               than the 1960s environment in which CSSSI was built. Instead of the basement of a
               mid-century building, the Franke Room contained wooden carvings, leaded glass, and
               plasterwork designed to evoke the early English Renaissance. Built-in bookcases lined
               the room up to a height of nine feet, transitioning to walls that were designed to
               appear uneven, as if finished by hand. 
            At the same time, the integration of the Franke Room into the architectural and
               material fabric of Sterling Memorial Library also offered advantages (Figure 3). In
               contrast to the disciplinary-specific reading rooms on higher floors (and behind
               access gates that require Yale IDs), the Franke Room is near the main entrance on the
               ground floor, open and accessible to all, making it a strong candidate for a large
               and welcoming space designated for the exploration of new ideas and methods. 
            As a design team of architects and library staff examined the room’s complex
               materials and physical adjacencies, several intriguing possibilities emerged. Given
               the room’s close proximity to the library’s physical collections, the reimagined
               space could position DH as contiguous with older traditions of humanities research
               rather than a radical break from it. The presence of a substantial print collection
               in the building could serve as a reminder that the root material for many digital
               projects is the print book or periodical. From a workflow perspective, this proximity
               could also streamline the research process: if the lab had equipment available for
               digitization, researchers could pull books from the stacks and bring them straight to
               the lab where they could transform them into machine-actionable data.
            
               The Franke Family Digital Humanities Laboratory (lower left) in the context of
                  Sterling Memorial Library.
               
            
            The original infrastructure of the room also contained large amounts of hidden
               reserve book shelving behind a long, adjacent wall that was accessible only to
               library staff. The design of the DHLab re-imagined this back-of-house area,
               opening it up to support collaborative meeting spaces and on-site offices for lab
               staff. The 1930s ideal of hiding the mechanical aspects of scholarly support space
               would give way to exposing this previously backstage area to the patrons in the main
               room. 
         

            Requirements Gathering: Identifying and Responding to Local Needs 
            Planning for DH support at Yale coalesced in the early 2010s, ranging from
               conferences 
                to graduate student-led working groups and informal
               committees. (For an overview of reactions to this effort, see Svensson 2012.) The Library first advertised a
               Librarian for Digital Humanities Research in the late 2000s, but did not fill the
               position until 2013. Throughout this time period, graduate students, librarians, IT
               staff, and faculty continued to advocate for more structured support — along with
               dedicated space — for DH inside the library. These conversations were focused into an
               informal committee led by the Deputy Provost for Humanities and Initiatives,
               resulting in, among other things, a comprehensive survey of faculty and graduate
               students who self-identified as having DH interests. This report  was essential in cataloging and characterizing the ways
               that scholars on campus wished to combine humanistic inquiry with new digital
               techniques, and it laid the groundwork for coordinated effort to further Yale’s
               support for scholarship in this area. In 2015, Yale University Library received
               support from The Goizueta Foundation to inaugurate a comprehensive initiative in
               science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics (STEAM) education by
               launching the DHLab . Recognizing the Franke Family
               Reading Room as a natural home for the new initiative, the Library began a multi-year
               design process with student, faculty, and staff stakeholders to identify campus needs
               and aspirations for DH support, which would inform the design of the space.
            Whereas the sciences have long-established models for constructing lab spaces
               outfitted to their research needs, the humanities have operated more in a tradition
               of individual work. DH labs create opportunities for collaborative work that brings
               together different sets of expertise and equipment to pursue humanistic inquiries at
               varying scales. The challenge in designing such a space revolves, in part, around
               striking the right balance between different needs and possibilities. For example,
               should the room be a fully open workspace, or should it provide areas explicitly
               marked out for different functions? Which is more likely to spur activity: a space of
               unstructured possibility, or one that actively suggests particular modes of
               engagement? Is a computer with a large monitor actively displaying an interactive
               visualization more, or less welcoming, than an open table? In describing Penn
               Libraries’ integration of DH, Anu Vedantham and Dot Porter underscore that [s]paces designed to encourage brainstorming and discussion need to
                  look, feel, and function differently from those designed to support deep reading,
                  note taking, writing, or presentation practice
               . Connected with the desired activity of the space,
               however, is the overhead required to maintain it, from both a staffing and budgetary
               consideration. What happens when the computer needs replacement – much sooner than
               the table? Who will produce and update the content displaying on the digital screens? 
            A workspace unencumbered by machines affords different kinds of engagement with a
               space and the people inside it than does one filled with monitors. The computer
                  lab concept, with rows of fixed workstations, seemed to the design team to
               belong to an older model, which was confirmed by site visits to newly designed spaces
               that were more flexible in their layout, with some equipment balanced by open
               workspaces (Northeastern, Brown, and others). In their 2015 survey Building Expertise to Support Digital Scholarship: a Global
                  Perspective for CLIR, Lewis et al. noted variation in
                  the kind of facilities these organizations occupied;
                  collaborative space seemed to be more important than top-notch hardware
               . Columbia University’s Studio@Butler, for example, launched in 2013 with an explicit goal to
               de-emphasize computing equipment in the service of foregrounding human collaboration
                  . At the same time, access to specialized hardware and
               software normally out of the reach of students can lower barriers to casual
               experimentation and initial engagement with digital forms of scholarship. The
               question seems to be, then, what percentage of the room should equipment (computers,
               scanners, virtual reality headsets, 3D printers) occupy? 
            To acknowledge, anticipate, and address, the specific DH needs on our campus, the
               Library engaged design anthropologist Nancy Fried Foster, formerly the senior
               anthropologist at Ithaka S+R, for an information-gathering phase during which she
               helped collect input from the Yale community. With Fried Foster, the design team
               conducted interviews during 2016 with current clients of the DHLab, as well as those
               who had not used such services in the past. The goal of including researchers who did
               not identify as digital humanists was to ensure that the design team did not
                  overfit the service portfolio and architectural design to those who had
               already availed themselves of DH support services on campus. Fried Foster describes
               the user-centered design process as one that begins with an
                  understanding of work practices and obstacles and then designs solutions to
                  support workflows and address identified problems. It is inclusive and
                  participatory, and is intended to improve outcomes by building a foundation of
                  valid, up-to-date information about the community for use by designers and
                  architects
               . This phase of information gathering was
               critical for grounding our assumptions of scholars’ spatial and technical needs with
               respect to DH research. The user-driven assessment included three types of
               engagements: 
                  in-person interviews with students, faculty, and staff from different
                     disciplinary backgrounds — though predominantly from the humanities — many of
                     whom had been involved in DH activities on campus in some way, whether that
                     meant they attended workshops, came in for consultations, or had their own
                     projects underway (for more on the interview process, see Library Design and Ethnography, which describes a comparable
                     information-gathering process at the University of Rochester ).
                  design workshops during which participants were asked to imagine different
                     spatial, personnel, and technical configurations of the DHLab, and 
                  benchmarking research informed by colleagues’ experiences at other
                     institutions via site visits, Skype conversations, and reading. 
               
            
            The design workshops were particularly illuminating for seeing how researchers
               imagined engaging with the new space. The first workshop asked participants to draw
               their ideal spaces, including what technology they would like to see in the room and
               what sort of activities should be supported. The outputs from the first workshop
               became the basis for the second workshop, which took the list of imagined equipment
               and activities that might take place in the space (such as designated workshop areas,
               staff offices, desktop computers, flexible workstations, reception desks) and printed
               them on separate strips of papers. Participants then arranged those pieces of paper
               around a space roughly scaled to the Franke Room. Each strip had multiple copies so
               that if, for instance, a participant thought there should be five desktop computers
               and two workshop areas, they could arrange the room accordingly. There was no
               requirement that participants use strips from all of the different resource or
               activity types. 
            Patterns from the sessions helped inform priorities for the renovation, including the
               need for separate programmatic spaces for consultations, collaborative work, and
               project exhibitions. Participants wanted to have ready access to DHLab staff, but
               they recognized the need for staff to have occasional privacy as well. Large display
               screens emerged as a significant request for both collaborative work and exhibitions,
               which drove conversations among the design team toward the notion of a large-scale
                  data canvas as a possibility for visualizations. Meanwhile, conventional
               desktop machines were lower on the list of must-have equipment: most students,
               faculty, and staff preferred working from their own laptops, but they acknowledged
               that a few high-end desktop computers in the DHLab would be helpful for accessing
               software and for more computationally intensive projects.
            While the feedback received during the information-gathering phase was generally
               consistent, Fried Foster’s summative report  indicated a
               few trends that appeared specific to university affiliation: faculty expressed the
               most interest in defining the DH as a field, graduate students engaged the most with
               DHLab activities (training and funding opportunities, sponsored talks, projects), and
               undergraduates displayed the most curiosity and willingness to experiment, as well as
               the strongest interest in combining the Arts and Humanities and STEM (a concept
               denoted on campus as STEAM). Providing insight into researchers’ expectations and
               work practices, the formal information-gathering phase shaped subsequent
               conversations with architects over how to optimize the Franke Room to serve DH
               scholars on campus.
            During the time that design team was gathering requirements and beginning the
               architectural rendering process, the newly-formed DHLab — consisting of a Director
               (formerly the Digital Humanities Librarian) and the newly hired Engagement and
               Outreach Manager, User Experience Designer, and Digital Humanities Developer — began
               work in the repurposed rooms on the third floor. The constraints and opportunities of
               this temporary space led to several lessons that would, coupled with the design
               team’s assessment, inform the eventual design of the Franke Family Digital Humanities
               Laboratory. In particular, the team learned that placing its reference print
               collection of DH books on the old wooden shelves started innumerable conversations
               with curious visitors as well as clients who made appointments to meet with staff or
               other collaborators. As every book was placed on a metal stand that displayed its
               cover to onlookers, the breadth and diversity of scholarly publications in titles as
                  Music Data Mining
                and Text Analysis with R for Students of
                  Literature
                spurred conversation and thought even among
               self-professed DH skeptics. In addition to theoretical and practical books on DH
               methodologies, the Lab also selected critical texts that sought to cast a
               complicating light on the larger, current Big Data moment: The Master Algorithm
               , Debates in the Digital
                  Humanities
               , Algorithms of Oppression: How Search
                  Engines Reinforce Racism
               , How to Lie with Maps
               , and New Digital Worlds:
                  Postcolonial Digital Humanities in Theory, Praxis, and Pedagogy
                were among the titles that sought to bring nuance and
               different perspectives to scholarly conversations around digital approaches. The
               oldest book on the DHLab’s shelf reflected the uncertainty for how computational
               methods would (or would not) be incorporated into humanistic pursuits: Computers for the Humanities? (1965) contains the
               proceedings of a conference held on Yale’s campus, with the sponsorship of IBM, with
               the terminal punctuation mark still an area of active debate amongst humanists and
               digital humanists alike. Having Computers for the
                  Humanities? on the shelf of the DHLab creates a connection between Yale’s
               early, little known — even to us — interest in how the humanities would take up
               computation, and its present-day, expanded commitment to providing support for DH
               research and teaching.
         

            Informed Design: Building Out Spaces for Digital Humanities Support
            
               Figure 4. Early-stage (2017) design concept. Photo credit:
                     Apicella + Bunton Architects.
               
            
            
               Service Points
               Serving as a focal point for — and for many, an introduction to — DH on campus, it
                  is especially important for labs to be inviting, inclusive spaces, welcoming to
                  long-standing DH practitioners, the curious but unsure, and everyone in between.
                  In conceptualizing the layout of the space (Figure 4), the team advocated for
                  modular designs that would support multiple kinds of DH engagements. DH is a
                  robust, rapidly developing area of research and teaching, and the goal was to
                  design a space that could respond to new needs and forms of collaboration that
                  might surface. Nearly half of the DHLab would thus consist of an open workspace
                  occupied only by wheeled tables and chairs. The tables, which can be linked
                  together at the ends, can be easily reconfigured into pod formations, long rows,
                  or U-shapes to support workshops, presentations, working groups, collaborations,
                  and individuals working on laptops or reading books. Walls would feature
                  alternating panels that incorporated both print book collections and digital
                  visualization monitors. 
               One service point with a track record of inspiring initial conversations was the
                  print book collection that had lined the shelves of the temporary space. The team
                  wanted to expand and highlight this collection in the new, larger room — gesturing
                  towards the original function of the space. With new support from central
                  Collection Development funds, the books became a consistently growing resource —
                  as well as a dramatic visual characteristic of the space. The collection was
                  ingested into the central Yale Library catalog thanks to the work of the Technical
                  Services team, who adjusted their workflow to accommodate call letter labels that
                  would not obscure cover designs and who added custom bookplates designed by the
                  User Experience specialist in the DHLab. In the higher-profile location along the
                  walls of the renovated room, the books encourage patrons to take up theoretical
                  debates in the field, develop specific coding skills for their research, or read
                  up on DH applications within specific disciplines. 
               Thematically organized, the books provide a snapshot view of the four DH areas the
                  DHLab is most equipped to support (text, image, network, and spatial analysis), in
                  addition to highlighting several books on data visualization, web development, and
                  the DH field at large. The goal for the collection is for it to be a resource to
                  which scholars can turn for instruction and inspiration. With the increasing
                  uptake in e-resources and library services where books can be pulled from the
                  shelves for patrons, there is less browsing — and by extension, fewer
                  unanticipated connections being made — in the stacks. To stimulate engagement with
                  the DHLab’s print collection, the architects designed slanted shelves that could
                  display books covers facing out, as the DHLab team learned from the temporary
                  space that researchers coming to the lab for a table to work at might also find
                  themselves drawn toward a book on telling stories with data visualizations. 
               A challenge but also affordance of an open workspace is the lack of sound
                  barriers. While the sound carryover can be distracting for work that requires
                  intense concentration, it also opens up the possibility for serendipitous
                  connections. Organic collaborations, as the DHLab witnessed in the temporary
                  space, often form in such communal spaces, where a group working on a given
                  project realizes they had something to offer a group working on a different effort
                  and vice versa because of overheard conversations. In this way, the team hopes
                  that the opportunity for collaborations encouraged by the open nature of the room
                  outweigh any disadvantage from sound travel. 
               Despite the attention paid to collaboration in library design, a significant
                  fraction of DH activity occurs as an individual activity. This consideration
                  emerged during the information-gathering phase, with participants requesting a
                  space where they might, as Fried Foster described it, work alone together
                  . Individuals working in the space want to be
                  able to focus on their own projects at the same time that they want to be a part
                  of the energy growing around DH on campus. The team wanted to ensure that scholars
                  working on their own could find places in the room that supported their needs for
                  privacy and concentration. The flexible table arrangement in the front portion of
                  the room and the relaxed but more isolated furniture in the back enables
                  researchers to reconfigure the space and find a seating option that works for
                  them. 
               Sterling Memorial Library contains a multitude of dedicated quiet spaces for
                  solitary research; what it has fewer of are designated collaborative discussion
                  spaces where researchers can analyze, debate, and discover out loud. Fried
                  Foster’s report reflects this need as well, with students, faculty, and staff
                  expressing the expectation that the DHLab would be a space conducive to interaction and the sharing of ideas and information. They
                     envision an environment in which seeing others, working in company, and finding
                     opportunities to talk will foster serendipitous connections
                  . To identify the renovated space as one that not only
                  allows but welcomes conversations, a floor-standing stanchion positioned exactly
                  in the middle of the front entrance doorway explicitly informs those who enter the
                  space of this expectation. 
               But an effective discussion space requires more than just encouragement to talk
                  out loud. Certain kinds of furniture are more conductive than others to grouping
                  around a text or computer screen. The architects, who were provided with a copy of
                  Fried Foster’s 2016 report and who met regularly with DHLab and Library staff,
                  were mindful of the kinds of engagements that might take place in different
                  quadrants of the space when they made their furniture recommendations. Ergonomic
                  considerations, such as whether chairs in front of computers should have armrests
                  or not, together with a focus on accessibility for patrons using mobility devices,
                  informed the choice of furniture and surfaces in the space.
               Teaching workshops in an open space rather than a computer lab offers serious
                  advantages as well as disadvantages that must be taken into account when
                  determining the layout and equipment for a DH lab. To begin with the
                  disadvantages, participants are required to bring a computer with them, and not
                  everyone has access to a personal laptop. Many libraries have laptop checkouts
                  available to students, faculty, and staff; however, they do not usually grant
                  administrative access, meaning participants would be unable to download any
                  software. Tablets can also be insufficient substitutes for laptops when it comes
                  to certain software. Even for the participants who can bring laptops over which
                  they have administrative control, other challenges emerge. Personal laptops can be
                  slow, low on memory, limited in storage space, and/or suffer from low battery
                  capacity, which can pose a problem depending on where and how many outlets are in
                  the space. 
               Conversely, these latter disadvantages point to some of the benefits of
                  participants working from their own machines. Since installations can be quirky
                  and setting up software environments daunting and confusing, it can be helpful for
                  participants to walk through the process with an instructor. If they’re able to
                  get everything up and running during the workshop, they can then leave it and
                  continue practicing without having to learn first how to install everything from
                  scratch by themselves. This is why Software Carpentry, of which Yale Library is
                  affiliated through the New England Software Carpentry Library Consortium
                  (NESCLiC), operates under the expectation that participants will work from their
                  own machines.
               Hosting workshops in an open space also yields a more collaborative environment.
                  Rather than being hidden by monitors, participants can see one another, along with
                  the instructor. Additionally, anyone working in other sections of the DHLab can
                  also see and hear the workshop. While workshop registration is capped at a
                  manageable number, the open space provides an opportunity for those who did not
                  register to listen in and, if they are so inclined, to follow along on their own
                  laptops. 
            
            
               Security and Transparency: The Special Projects Cube
               Efforts to ensure that the work of DH had a place in the room led to
                  discussion of how to best highlight the specialized equipment and activities that
                  characterizes some (but not all) of this newer form of humanities research. Fried
                  Foster’s final assessment report captures that much of the on-campus excitement
                  for a dedicated space for DH emerged from the hope that the space might catalyze
                  new work by making DH research visible. In the report, Fried Foster notes that
                  researchers want the set-up of the space to build excitement
                     and stimulate new work; [students, faculty, and staff] see this supported
                     through exhibits, displays, books, and perhaps even a museum, of projects,
                     artifacts, images, and sounds. Displays and exhibits should be visible
                     throughout the space and include screens
                  .
               In some cases, the specialized nature DH equipment created conditions requiring a
                  secured space. The glass Special Projects Cube seeks to fulfill that requirement
                  while still making DH practice visible. One half of the cube includes equipment
                  for transforming print materials into machine-actionable corpora, while the other
                  half includes machines geared toward high-performance computing. Researchers
                  passing through one end of the lab to the other can see the labor involved in
                  running a collection of texts through optical character recognition (OCR) software
                  or generating scripts to process thousands of images. 
               Scholars have been duplicating library material at self-service copiers for
                  decades, subject to the fair use provisions of US copyright laws. But advanced
                  text-mining projects call for a more comprehensive approach: the transformation of
                  physical collections into digitally-actionable research objects. For this reason,
                  the Special Projects Cube includes book- and microfilm scanners to aid humanists
                  in the creation of textual corpora. Crucially, this research digitization
                  practice is not about the reproduction or preservation of an original material
                  object: in most cases, the scanned images are discarded as soon as the textual
                  extraction process is complete, leaving only a transformed digital text.
               The bound volume is of course not the only form of raw material: Sterling Memorial
                  Library’s microfilm collections is large, but often under-utilized due to
                  difficulties in handling and extracting the thousands of images often present on
                  each reel. The DHLab, in conjunction with other library departments, installed a
                  microfilm scanner capable of extracting documents from microfilm reels more
                  efficiently. The resulting images, segmented by a machine vision algorithm, can
                  then processed through OCR software installed on the DHLab’s machines to create a
                  textual corpus for later analysis. 
            
            
               Materiality and View Corridors
               One of the aesthetic challenges that emerged during the information-gathering
                  phase was how to incorporate old furnishings with new technologies. The Yale
                  researchers who participated in our process indicated a preference for modern
                  equipment alongside a desire to retain a feel for the a library setting.
                  The design team knew that preserving the character of the room would thus be
                  essential. The architects did make two changes to bookcases: re-orienting the
                  shelves to display book covers facing outwards, and installing digital screens
                  carefully-matched to the scale and structure of the bookcases, flush with the wall
                  envelope. The result was an updated look for the room without changing the
                  fundamental geometry or finishes.
               The orientation of the room along a long axis is reinforced by the way that
                  patrons enter at one end: the foyer has a much lower ceiling that creates a sense
                  of compression. Proceeding into the room itself draws the eyes forward to large
                  windows on the far wall. Subdividing the space with any materials or objects that
                  blocked this axial view would fundamentally change the room and the experience of
                  entering it. A key design priority was thus to preserve as much of the view
                  corridor throughout the room as possible. This dictated the dimensions and
                  placement of the Special Projects Cube, which is located offset from the center of
                  the space but directly in the line of view of a patron entering the room (Figure
                  3). The surfaces of the cube are made of glass, which allows the transmission of
                  light and motion from all directions. In addition, the intervention of a
                  semi-transparent object in the middle of the room heightens the visual drama of
                  the space, as viewers have both a filtered view of the length of the room, and the
                  people working in the cube.
            
            
               Staff Spaces
               The fact that DHLab staff, in the temporary space on the third floor, worked in an
                  open environment right beside computer workstations meant we experienced auditory
                  interference from overheard conversations, along with a constant sense of being
                     on call for impromptu tech support. On the one hand, this arrangement
                  provided valuable insights into the projects people were taking on and the
                  technical or methodological difficulties they were encountering. On the other
                  hand, it meant that professional staff might be interrupted at any moment and
                  pulled away from other support efforts that required sustained concentration.
               For the renovation, the DHLab staff wanted to retain awareness of the kinds of
                  work clients were doing in the space, along with being visible ourselves so that
                  we could provide support, but we (as well as the faculty and students Fried Foster
                  interviewed) also recognized the need to work quietly without interruption at
                  times. The final design result was to locate the staff offices along the periphery
                  of the main space, with a glass wall on the one side that faces the space, thereby
                  enabling staff to see out and researchers to see in. An open door signifies staff
                  are available for questions, while a closed door asks that you return later. The
                  signs on all offices display the schedule for the DHLab’s open office hours, a
                  regular time during which staff are reliably available for drop-in consultations
                  (researchers who cannot meet during office hours can schedule consultations for
                  other times).
               Implementing this design involved creating several openings in a structural wall
                  to transform what was the former bookstack annex into a space for human
                  specialists. DHLab staff worked alongside architects to optimize the offices for
                  DH workflows. For instance, the DHLab’s User Experience Designer and Developer
                  share an inner sliding door they can push back so that they can, on occasion, turn
                  their two offices into one, allowing them to more easily converse during
                  production sprints. The repurposing of the annex created designated, visible
                  spaces for expertise and support that also provided DHLab staff with mechanisms
                  for signaling availability. 
               The meeting room, a rectangular space that occupies part of the former annex and
                  is therefore also adjacent to the main open lab space, provides DHLab staff and
                  collaborators with a sound-controlled location for presentations, meetings, and
                  smaller classes. Display screens are affixed to each of the shorter walls in the
                  room to facilitate presentations. On one of the longer walls, there is a magnetic,
                  glass whiteboard to help with sketching ideas and designs, while the opposite wall
                  acknowledges Yale’s early interest in humanities computing. A poster of Father
                  Roberto Busa working on a teletype at Yale in 1956 is affixed to one end of the
                  wall, while a poster of the cover page to the proceedings of the Computers for the Humanities? conference held at Yale in
                  1965 is at the other end. Between the posters are windows that look out into one
                  of the Library’s hallways. Given the DHLab’s investment in making DH work visible,
                  these windows remain uncovered so that people passing through the Library can have
                  a glimpse into what the DHLab is working on. 
            
            
               Campus Connections
               Although DH labs can serve as effective hubs on campuses for computational work,
                  they are often not the only places where digital work occurs. Studying the larger
                  ecosystem of where such work takes place can help to identify opportunities for
                  cross-unit collaborations, whether that take the form of shared expertise or
                  equipment. At Yale, two centers that predate the DHLab — the Center for
                  Engineering Innovation and Design (CEID) and the Center for Collaborative Arts and
                  Media (CCAM) — have 3D printers available for researchers to use, along with
                  training sessions to help people get started. When it was time to make a decision
                  about what to include in the DHLab, the team decided that the strength of other
                  campus units in 3D printing meant that we could refer clients to those existing
                  service points (and their accompanying expert staff). This freed up space in the
                  Special Projects Cube for other kinds of equipment less readily accessed by
                  humanists on campus.
               To bring the expertise of subject librarians and curators — those most familiar
                  with the promise and idiosyncrasies of the Library’s holdings — into DH
                  conversations, the DHLab has designated four touchdown spaces where Library staff
                  can meet with researchers or demonstrate projects of interest. Located in the four
                  corners of the main space, the touchdown desks signal specialized support. For
                  instance, the Geographic Information Specialist (GIS) Librarian, whose office is
                  located in CSSSI, holds weekly office hours in the DHLab. She meets with
                  researchers at the corner desk that is located next to the GIS books in the space
                  so that she may easily refer to texts in the collection that might be helpful
                  resources. Even when she is not physically present in the DHLab, researchers may
                  still find her contact information on the desk. Along with serving as touchdown
                  spaces for library and museum professionals on campus, the corner desks also
                  provide a workstation for visiting scholars who might be on campus to give a talk
                  or workshop in the space.
            
         

            Conclusion
            The transformation of a 1931 Reserve Book Reading Room into the Franke Family Digital
               Humanities Laboratory involved new ways of thinking about location, materiality,
               transparency, security, collaboration, and adjacency. The challenge of adaptive reuse
               of a historic (and historicizing) space is undoubtedly different from the process of
               renovating a newer, less decorative facility — or constructing a completely new room.
               The diverse team that came together to accomplish this — student and faculty
               participants, library and IT professionals, external architects, and university
               facilities specialists — were well aware of the significance of this room to Sterling
               Memorial Library’s design and history, as well as the scholarly practice that is
               emerging around DH on campus. The various interventions in structure, materials,
               function, and organization of the room to transform it into the Franke Family Digital
               Humanities Laboratory involved both empirical evidence, discussions with campus
               stakeholders, and educated guesses about what DH scholarship might evolve towards in
               an era when interdisciplinarity is increasingly inflected by the algorithm and the
               dataset. Yale’s deep commitment to the Humanities, and its Library’s scholarly
               support for the same, has always been expressed in world-class physical holdings and
               subject specialist expertise. The design of the Franke Family Digital Humanities
               Laboratory is an effort to reflect that same commitment, and that same support, in a
               new lab embedded within a historic room.
         
