Title:  Modeling Amerindian Sea Travel in the Early
                    Colonial Caribbean
Volume:  014
Issue:  4
Date:  15 December 2020
Abstract:  
                
                It is difficult to discuss pre- and early post-European contact
                    life in the Caribbean. In part, this is due to the nature of European record
                    keeping, which often failed to fully capture Amerindian practices.
                    Archaeologists have long attempted to resolve these difficulties through the
                    analysis of early colonial Caribbean materials and objects that reflect both
                    Spanish and Amerindian influence. Through the use of computer modeling it is
                    possible to approach this issue from a new perspective, that of discerning
                    mainland–island or inter–island connections across the pre–Columbian and
                    historic divide. Modeling hypothetical canoe routes based on the location of
                    inhabited sites (between 1000 AD – 1550 AD) across Trinidad and the mainland
                    coast of South America towards the Windward Islands can help to explore possible
                    avenues of travel that were changed or interrupted during the early colonial
                    period. This paper will approach this debate by looking for the location of
                    early colonial Amerindian sites and determining if connections between them
                    would reflect use of European influenced areas in this region.
            
Abstract:  
        	Es difícil discutir la vida colonial en su etapa
                        inicial en el Caribe. En parte, esto se debe a la naturaleza de los
                        registros europeos, que a menudo no lograron capturar completamente las
                        prácticas amerindias. Los arqueólogos han intentado durante mucho tiempo
                        resolver estas dificultades mediante el análisis de materiales y objetos del
                        Caribe provenientes del período colonial temprano que reflejan tanto la
                        influencia española como la amerindia. A través del uso o modelado por
                        computadora, es posible abordar este tema desde una nueva perspectiva, que
                        distingue las conexiones entre las islas y el continente o entre las islas a
                        través de la división precolombina e histórica. El modelado de las rutas
                        hipotéticas de canoas basadas en la desaparición o aparición de sitios entre
                        Trinidad y la costa continental de Sudamérica hacia las Islas de Barlovento
                        puede ayudar a explorar posibles vías de viaje que fueron cambiadas o
                        interrumpidas durante el período colonial temprano. Este artículo aborda
                        este debate explorando la ubicación de los primeros sitios amerindios
                        durante el período colonial temprano y determinando si las conexiones entre
                        ellos pudieran reflejar esfuerzos para evitar las áreas controladas por
                        Europa en esta región.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Considering the written record is a vital component in evaluating the effect of
                    early colonial encounters on Amerindian life in the Caribbean. Documents that
                    reference Amerindian practices provide insight into everything from foodstuffs
                    to the basics of canoe use or construction (ex. Benozi 1563; Columbus 1498;
                    Mendez 1933; Oviedo Valdes 1851). In turn, there are some detailed references to
                    the movement of these, and the people who used them, between different islands.
                    The specific routes by which these goods moved, and their alteration after the
                    arrival of Europeans, are unfortunately difficult to trace through text and
                    traditional archaeological analysis alone. Inconsistencies in the areas of
                    coastline surveyed, the small number of objects relating to seafaring toolkits
                    documented in the archaeological record, and the limited references concerning
                    the specifics of canoe use by Amerindians in the historical record make these
                    investigations challenging. Yet knowledge of the location of these pathways
                    would help us understand specifics about Amerindian connections and social
                    interactions not made explicit in the historical record.
                Digital humanities approaches, or humanist theory as applied to or analyzed by
                    computer applications, can provide a solution to this issue. Through the
                    application of archaeological inquiry and computational analysis, the movement
                    of materials and peoples in this region can be modeled as representations of
                    past canoe routes between two points. These generated routes can offer insight
                    into connections that developed long before Columbus’ arrival and continued as
                    prime canoe pathways after European colonization. The trajectory of canoe travel
                    corridors, or the routes people followed by South American mainland and Lesser
                    Antillean communities were likely altered by European contact (1498–1650 AD),
                    something that is unlikely to be represented explicitly in historical texts. 
                
                    Map of the case study region, including Guyana, Trinidad, Tobago, and the
                        Windward Islands.
                    A map of the northern coast of South America.
                    
                
                To explore the location heavily used for voyaging by Amerindians I modeled
                    hypothetical canoe routes between communities in contact, as referenced in the
                    historical or archaeological record. Specifically, I used least-cost pathway
                    analysis to determine travel corridors taking the least amount of time that may
                    have existed. Such methods are drawn from previous landscape models (ex. 
                    ) and seascape 
                    , which rely on algorithms to calculate these time
                    costs. In many cases, these algorithms are either A* or Djekstra  and tabulate the cost to movement by adding the
                    difficulty of moving between regions of topography together until the lowest
                    value between two points on a map can be determined.
                The area from the north coast of mainland South America to the Windward Islands
                    provides an interesting perspective for this approach. Though contact with
                    Europeans in the Caribbean occurred in 1498, Amerindians were still using
                    traditional seafaring lines well into the 1700s. Contacts between Amerindian
                    peoples from South America and Europeans as referenced in early colonial
                    accounts and the archaeological record, were taken alongside modeled least–cost
                    pathways that consider the areas where interaction between these communities may
                    have taken place. The results of route modeling are used to evaluate where and
                    to what result Amerindians’ travel corridors may have related to Europeans into
                    the region. These efforts can help to provide a base for further analysis of
                    Amerindian culture across the pre–Columbian and historic divide.
            

                Routes Demonstrated in Pre–Columbian and Historical Record in the
                    Caribbean
                Seafaring practices covered the maintenance of a complex web of social and
                    material mobility networks that linked these communities. When the Europeans
                    arrived in the Caribbean at the end of the 15th century, peoples from the north
                    coast of South America to the Windward Islands formed complex groups of
                    multi–lingual and multi–ethnic individuals 
                    
                    
                    ). These cross–island/mainland relationships were
                    built on the sea, and the connections and materials that could be gained by
                    traveling it. This often meant that island communities were more focused on
                    inter–island rather than intra–island connections (see ). Excavated sites dating to the colonial period
                    possess materials that suggest substantial interactions existed between peoples
                    on different islands .
                Though the evidence used as the base for the discussion in this paper primarily
                    comes from the archaeological record, we also see support for these connections
                    in ethnohistoric accounts. The first written information about peoples from
                    Trinidad and Tobago appears in the logs of Columbus’ third voyage in 1498  (see also ).
                    Later writers reported on Spanish efforts to take over the Orinoco River area as
                    well as the islands off what today is the Venezuelan coast (Boomert 2016). Due
                    to their proximity to Amerindians, these early chroniclers were thus able to
                    view the comings and goings of seafarers between specific regions and islands,
                    accounts often document the location of prominent canoe travel corridors used by
                    Amerindians moving from the mainland to the Windward Islands and back. One of
                    the earliest records of such a voyage comes from Columbus on his first voyage,
                    where he mentions abducting a man mid-voyage between two points. Others also
                    have made note of these types of voyages. Raymond Breton wrote during his stay
                    on Dominica (1635): They are descended from the people
                            of the mainland closest to the island… The friendship they maintain with
                            them and their commerce with them are signs of it. [Breton and la Paix
                            1926: 45‑46] ).
                Though these records are not from the region in question, it does set an example
                    for Europeans meddling in Amerindian transportation routes from the time of
                    initial contact. Breton, in addition to mentioning voyages near Dominica,
                    recounted that South American Kaliña had branched out from their coasts to
                    colonize the islands . Others disagreed and considered
                    these connections between Island Carib peoples on St. Vincent at the period in
                    question were mere associations and not deeper ties, as suggested by de
                    Rochefort . Another example comes from reference to
                    contact between peoples of Trinidad and Grenada by Dutch sailors in 1628 
                    
                    .
                Historical accounts also mention canoe crews using Tobago as a waypoint on their
                    way to raid Arawak communities on the mainland . The
                    governor of Tobago in 1654 noted that both mainland Kaliña and island Kalinago
                    canoers used the small island as a rest area for traveling between the two
                    regions (Mollens, in ). The governor of
                    St. Kitts, in the late 1620s, suggested it was too hazardous to colonize Tobago
                    because of the number of Carib vessels traveling by the island . What is clear, even in the historic record, is that
                    these groups were linked. Information concerning the movements of Amerindian
                    peoples within these European sources can provide insight into past practices of
                    Amerindian seafaring, as well as context for connections shown by least–cost
                    pathway modeling.
                Historical records from early contact periods can also be problematic, not only
                    because they often ignore large portions of Amerindian culture, but also because
                    what they do mention often paints only the vaguest of pictures. For example,
                    while canoeing Amerindians and their watercraft were popular topics for European
                    chroniclers, reports about specific construction techniques or navigation
                    practices were often glossed over. Likewise, none of these documents included
                    detailed description of Amerindian canoeing activity. Most often they simply
                    referred to the speed, size of the vessel or crew, and rough design of the canoe
                    (ex. 
                     Bernáldez, in ), without
                    discussing specific details about construction or navigation practices. For
                    example, Columbus describes seeing Amerindians in a large war canoe, or pirogue,
                    holding 25 men off the west coast of Trinidad in his 1498 dairies 
                    
                    . However, the full picture of the
                    technology and canoeing strategies goes unmentioned. Others also go into detail
                    about the great length of these vessels, some extending 26 paces. Depictions of
                    canoes seem to indicate that pre–Columbian travel was conducted without the use
                    of sails. This absence would have limited the reach of seafarers, making their
                    voyages targeted to areas within paddle distance of coastlines. It is from these
                    limits that we can discern a base for modeling watercraft and site locations to
                    retrace routes referred to by European chroniclers and observed in the
                    archaeological record. It is in the margins or sparse commentary that
                    researchers must look to contextualize what is found in the archaeological
                    record.
                While colonial records provide possible insights into pre–Columbian seafaring
                    technology, the introduction of new technologies and people into the region
                    began to alter inter–island relationships. There were changes in technological
                    toolkits, such as the sporadic adoption and adaption of the sail 
                    . Tracking population fluctuations and movement to
                    new settlements, and the role of European contact in these developments, can
                    show regional changes in relationships . The decline
                    of island populations because of the impact of forced removal of the populations
                    and the spread of disease also influenced the construction of regional mobility
                    patterns.
                Record of this movement was not always positive. Interaction between Amerindians
                    and Europeans often resulted in violent encounters. The fact that Tobago
                    remained free of colonization until midway through the eighteenth century, in
                    part due to persistent attacks by Kaliña (mainland Amerindian communities) and
                    Kalingao (Windward Island Amerindian communities) peoples from the Windward
                    Islands 
                    , speaks to its importance as a waypoint along the
                    mobility corridors connecting mainland and island communities. That control of
                    the eastern side of Trinidad remained difficult for Europeans  also points to the desire of Amerindians to keep
                    these travel corridors clear. These waypoints, or areas where there were safe
                    portages for canoes, needed to be preserved to maintain the connection between
                    Kaliña and their island Kalinago counterparts (see Figure 2).
                As time passed, it is probable that Amerindians canoeing between the islands
                    sought to minimize contact with Europeans. These patterns of avoidance may have
                    been based on techniques learned from previous generations, as many of the
                    groups in this region participated in raiding of other settlements 
                    
                     and possibly learned evasive maneuvering. The
                    placement of canoe corridors may have centered on whether they took paddlers
                    near to or away from coastlines, either to take advantage of an easy rest point
                    or to avoid contact that may lead to an unfavorable result. In the case of the
                    early European contact record, the location of interaction around the island
                    like Margarita for pearl fishing, could have reinforced links moving to the
                    eastern coast of Venezuela to the islands, which was a popular travel corridor
                    prior to European contact, as referenced in the archaeology.
                Though the historical record provides some information on Amerindian mobility
                    corridors, the majority of evidence for direct contact between peoples of this
                    region comes from the archaeological record. Materials — mostly ceramics — that
                    connect sites on different islands tie stylistically to designs developed on the
                    mainland 
                    .
                The Amerindian peoples of the Windward Islands were influenced by several avenues
                    of exchange, both from the islands in the north and the mainland in the south
                    (see 
                    
                    
                    
                    . Similar styles of ceramic vessel shapes and
                    decoration can be seen between ceramics found in the Guianas, or Koraibo
                    ceramics, and in the Windward Islands, or Cayo ceramics, that date to periods
                    directly before and after European contact (1250–1600 AD) 
                    
                    . Comparable shapes include Cassava brewing ceramics,
                    for example, which can be found in both Kaliña and Kalinago assemblages . Stylistic similarities include adornos, or ceramic
                    elements adorning vessels, fashioned in anthropomorphic motifs and found on the
                    upper sections of ceramic objects . Rim decoration,
                    common in mainland Koriabo ceramics, found on Late Ceramic Age (AD 1200–1500)
                    and early colonial period (AD 1498 to 1600) island–produced wares from
                    Guadeloupe to Tobago, also indicate a connection 
                    
                    .
                Island–made Cayo ceramics likely resulted from local attempts to fit within
                    macro–regional interaction networks 
                    
                    . In fact, the rise of Cayo style vessels largely
                    coincided with the inception of mainland Kaliña materials, also known as the
                    Koriabo style 
                    . Cayo ceramics have been considered a simplified
                    version of Koriabo ware 
                    . Currently there are roughly 20 sites that possess
                    Cayo ceramics within the Lesser Antilles , the
                    majority of which are centered around the islands of Grenada and St. Vincent.
                    Replicating these connections through least–cost pathways should center on
                    modeling routes between Cayo sites on Grenada or St. Vincent and the area off
                    the coast of Guyana, following the trajectory of both stylistic and linguistic
                    transfer, including references to canoe–centric names or to shared words around
                    travel or connection . For example, the connection
                    of settlements and canoe use is indicated in the term hueitinocou,
                    meaning both villager and member of a canoe crew .
                    That these patterns are noted in the archaeological record and by Europeans
                    throughout the early contact period points to the longevity of these travel
                    corridors, despite possible adversarial encounters between
                    Europeans and Amerindian groups.
                These systems of interactions and mobility corridors stemmed from routes created
                    during early micro– and macro–regional explorations that brought migrating
                    communities from the South American mainland into the islands 
                    . It is likely that avenues of movement developed as
                    lifelines for Amerindian island settlers 
                    
                    
                    
                     and solidified into deeper patterns of use for the
                    exchange or raiding practices described by Europeans after 1500. However, as
                    pointed out by Hofman and Carlin [2010, 111],
                    the maintenance of these networks was tied to the shifting priorities of
                    Amerindian communities both in the islands and on the mainland. These shifts
                    were based on a desire to adapt social ties, develop avenues of exchange, or to
                    engage in conflict. Therefore, a discussion of the location of routes modeled
                    from around the northern coast of mainland South America past Trinidad or Tobago
                    towards the Windward Islands furthers our understanding of the location of
                    travel corridors from long–standing exchange patterns to those encountered by
                    early colonial visitors.
            

                Methods
                The physical processes of moving through the Caribbean have traditionally been
                    evaluated through ethnographic and historic accounts. For example, many
                    researchers refer to the ease of movement linked with following known
                    environmental patterns, such as the South Equatorial or Guiana Current, and the
                    prevailing northeastern trade winds associated with movement to and from
                    Trinidad 
                    . Adding lines of evidence for movement
                    through computer–based modeling allows us to ask new, more detailed questions
                    about connections between Kaliña and Kalinago communities. When combined with
                    traditional text–based and archaeological analysis, modeled movement between
                    these areas is an important aspect of the broader analysis of social networks in
                    the region, both pre– and post–European contact.
                The routes analyzed here can be tied to the theory of least–cost pathway
                    analysis, in which pathways are generated based on the cumulative effort of
                    either the caloric or time expenditure it takes to travel from one geographic
                    point to another 
                    
                    
                    . Least–cost pathway analysis is a common technique
                    used in archaeology to evaluate possible connections between sites. The method
                    is often applied to movement through landscapes, where the cost of the journey
                    is tied to movement with or against slopes within a terrain (e.g., 
                    
                    
                    
                    ; ). These methods are
                    often based on Dijkstra's algorithm, which most commonly is used find the
                    shortest paths from a fixed source point to all other grids within a raster
                    surface, resulting in a shortest-path tree. These calculate the environment to
                    assign portions of the area with a cost in time or energy, which then can be
                    added together as a path is charted through these areas.
                In most cases, several least–cost routes are modeled between various points that
                    correspond to archaeological sites within a landscape. These routes are then
                    compared against existing knowledge and theory of connection in the area to draw
                    conclusions about social relationships between sites. In recent years, interest
                    in modeling this type of movement on waterscapes has increased, inspiring work
                    on regional connections from the Pacific (see 
                    
                    ) to the Caribbean (see 
                    ). This interest is likely to grow as access to more
                    robust and higher resolution climate data sets, both modern and reconstructed,
                    become available.
                Previous work in the Caribbean region has largely focused on analyzing models of
                    large scale migration or colonization routes. Richard Callaghan 
                     has completed extensive work in this area,
                    describing migration and travel patterns for both drift and non-drift voyages
                    from the coast of South America to the Greater Antilles, as well as along the
                    South and Central American coast. Others who have followed in his footsteps have
                    either focused on similar scales of migration  or
                    similar areas, such as the Greater Antilles . The
                    goal of this paper is to explore maintained relationships between island and
                    mainland communities at a finer scale and in as yet little modeled areas in the
                    Caribbean using this underutilized digital method (see also ), to compare with the historic and archaeological
                    record.
                For this work, I applied an isochrone approach to least–cost pathway modeling to
                    examine seafaring routes. An isochrone method simply refers to a model that
                    evaluates movement over the generated environmental surface based on where an
                        agent, or individual, can move within a particular set
                    time (see 
                    
                    ). Here I use the modified isochrone method, as
                    based on Hagiwara, where movement is calculated using a variant of Dijkstra's
                    algorithm. Specifically, I focused on the distance it is possible for a modeled
                    canoe to move from where the boat was launched within a set time period.
                    Although many possible directions of travel are evaluated, consecutive route
                    segments are chosen based on the direction of travel where the canoe can move
                    the furthest during the set time period  derived
                    from calculations using modified isochrone method based on a global
                    understanding of the environment or the anticipation of all possible routes.
                    This process is repeated until the landing point — in most cases a known
                    settlement area — is reached. These segments are then linked together to form a
                    continuous route that suggests where it would have been easiest for canoes to
                    travel between two points (see for example Figure 2).
                As such, routes can reflect traditional navigation practices, as seafarers may
                    have reevaluated their boat’s heading several times during a journey, which is
                    reflected in the length of time between isochrone generations in the model.
                    Keeping with the theme of modeling hypothetical travel corridors taken by real
                    world canoers, there was an option to set a canoe speed within the model. This
                    speed is reflective of the paddling power of those on board. Here, the canoe
                    speed was set at 3 knots (see also ) or the typical
                    speed achieved by canoers on experimental canoeing voyages in the region (.
                I used modern day environmental data, such as current and wind direction and
                    strength, as the base for the surface on which these segments were modeled (see
                        ). Specifically, surfaces were based on modern
                    environmental data captured for the Caribbean Sea; water current data was
                    gathered from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric (NOAA) Amseas 3D
                    program and wind data from the NOAA Global Forecast System (GFS) (for a more
                    detailed discussion see ). These two data sets have
                    a particularly robust iteration period, i.e., the time intervals over which
                    environmental data is captured; new current or wind is data generated which
                    allows for the model to evaluate updated currents every three hours.
                    Additionally, the Amseas 3D program captures information every 3 km2, while the
                    GFS can only return information in 25 km segments. As a result, the tool
                    includes a function that allows for these surfaces to be interpolated, or
                    meshed, together. In this way current and wind are both reflected in the
                    underlying surface on which the route segments are based on.
                Though sequential modern current data was used as the base for this analysis, it
                    is important to note that others have used randomized or past-forecasted climate
                    data. However, due to the lack of change in bathymetry (or under water
                    topography) in this region, combined with the relatively stable current and wind
                    data from the periods discussed , modern data was
                    deemed acceptable due to the high rate of iterative data provided by NOAA. Using
                    this type of current data is also effective due to the geographic unit and time
                    iteration of the NOAA models, as it allows for a finer resolution within the
                    cost surface than has been used in other examples where nautical sailing charts
                    were used 
                    .
                Additionally, this iterative data allows for the capture of extreme weather (ex.
                    hurricanes) in the return of high cost routes. In the future, more types of
                    environmental constraints (i.e. wave height) should be considered. In keeping
                    with the iteration period of both data sets, routes were modeled every three
                    hours, during the months of January, April, August, and November due to the
                    seasonal fluctuations observed in the underlying data sets (see ).
                Routes modeled were connected to the Amerindian and European contact period by
                    using launch and landing points known for their extended use leading up to and
                    directly after the contact period. Though not to be taken as an exact
                    representation of the past, routes modeled in this way can suggest avenues of
                    contact between mainland and island Amerindian communities.
                Due to limitations with the extent of the underlying data set used to model these
                    travel corridors, I was unable to model routes directly from communities from
                    the southern Guianas. By viewing routes modeled from an area at the farthest
                    extent of the underlying environmental data set, however, it was possible to
                    evaluate routes that passed by large areas of Guyana that were inhabited by
                    Kaliña peoples who were likely in contact with island communities. Routes
                    examined in this study were modeled from off the coast of Guyana (Figures 2 to
                    5). In order to ensure efficiency in comparisons for this work, routes towards
                    only sites on only two islands, Grenada and St. Vincent, will be discussed.
                Routes for this paper were taken from the author’s PhD research on movement to
                    and from the coast of Guyana and the Windward Islands . The evaluation of these routes centers on how they can be used to
                    hypothesize the location of known connection points and on how peoples following
                    these mobility routes may have reacted to European arrival. As such, examples of
                    routes referenced here (Figures 2 to 5) were chosen for their relationship to
                    point of contact between newly–arrived Europeans and established Amerindian
                    travel corridors mentioned in the ethnohistorical record (ex. Mollens, in ). Due to limited space provided by this
                    article, I will briefly discuss two examples of travel corridors modeled from
                    the South American mainland to the Windward Islands using this qualitative
                    analysis.
            

                Modeled Routes and Comparisons to the Historical Record
                Examples of European style pottery within site depositions on Grenada and St .
                    Vincent  indicate that some level of exchange was
                    being sought by Amerindian peoples to acquire these materials, even if they
                    indirectly acquired them through down–the–line exchange with other Amerindian
                    groups. Amerindian–produced pottery also indicates the strength of these ties,
                    showcasing the longevity of contact between mainland and island communities.
                    Stylistic motifs used in Kalinago pottery are viewed as connected to those
                    produced by mainland populations . Modeling these
                    corridors, established through connections recognized from archaeology and the
                    historic record, we can begin to assess possible travel corridors which carried
                    these peoples and materials.
                One of the travel corridors analyzed in this paper suggests movement along the
                    coast of Tobago, while the other looks at movement towards the northern coast of
                    Venezuela, where Amerindian canoers were more likely to have encountered the
                    newly arrived Spanish. As mentioned above, routes were modeled between sites
                    from suspected Cayo sites dating to AD 1250–1600 ,
                    which in some cases overlapped with European arrival. This allows for a brief
                    discussion of the differences in contact opportunities for peoples along each
                    possible corridor.
                
                    Modeled isochrone route between the Guyana and the east coast of Grenada
                        launched November 17 at 3 pm .
                    A map of an isochrone route between Guyana and east coast of Grenada
                        depicted with a black line.
                    
                
                The travel corridor over the north coast of Trinidad towards the northeast coast
                    of Venezuela was indicated by several routes modeled between the Guianas and the
                    Windward Islands. Movement along the north coast of Trinidad was likely a
                    crucial aspect of the mobility network around Venezuela to the Windward Islands.
                    This is due in part to the ability for persons to see the Windward Islands from
                    the northeast coast of Trinidad . Routes that pass
                    by the northern coast of Trinidad commonly travel past the eastern coast of the
                    island as well. The separation of communities from the western and eastern sides
                    of the island is evident in both the archaeological and historic record . This may have played into preferences for routes
                    that avoided the western half of the island as well, in connection with later
                    notes on island habitation from colonial sources.
                The acknowledgment of Tobago being used as a through–point of connection, both in
                    the archaeological record and by European Governors of St. Kitts and Tobago,
                    indicates that in some cases avoidance of Europeans was not possible or sought
                    out. In addition, routes modeled from Guyana run directly past the site of
                    Blanchisseuse, possibly highlighting the importance of finding natural rest
                    points along routes . In the case of Figure 2, the
                    route ran directly into the area adjacent to the site. The placement of this
                    circa AD 1200–1500 site supports the focus of peoples in this region towards
                    inter–island connections, and the site may have acted as a waypoint for travel
                    between Kaliña and Kalinago communities. Though use of this site was largely
                    ended by the time Europeans arrived in this region, it does support the link
                    between settlement use and the trajectory of routes returned by this model. The
                    strong connection between the suggested routes and active use by Amerindians
                    indicates that other modeled routes can stand in for past avenues of mobility.
                    We might also ask archaeologists to question why natural stopping points used in
                    earlier periods are not reestablished after European contact, as many sites or
                    areas are typically part of a habitation season or cycle in the ceramic age.
                
                    Modeled isochrone route between the Guyana and west coast of Grenada
                        launched November 9 at 12 am, which connects with the Península de Paria
                            .
                    A map of an isochrone route between Guyana and the west coast of
                        Grenada depicted with a black line.
                    
                
                Modeled routes following the trajectory in Figure 3 also go further to the west,
                    keeping to the northern coast of Trinidad in its entirety and on rare occasions
                    making contact with the Península de Paria. Peoples moving along more westerly
                    routes could potentially have made contact with the active mobility corridors
                    around coastal Venezuela. Pathways like these would also have brought peoples
                    from Trinidad and the Guianas into contact with Europeans who settled within
                    this region to gain access to pearl harvesting areas (see ). The intensity of use of these routes thus may have
                    been altered due to this presence. This may explain why ceramics at sites like
                    Blanchisseuse, inhabited or before conflict, show a change in this period.
                    However, it may also be that increased raiding activity in the region or
                    conflict between peoples on the west coast of Trinidad and the Venezuelan coast
                    linked to this avoidance, as well. Re-evaluating routes within this mobility
                    corridor, from the coast of Venezuela towards the Windward Islands needs to be
                    done alongside considerations of materials found within the sites used as origin
                    points needs to be done. It may help researchers to understand better if or when
                    peoples traveled from the Guianas to the north coast of Trinidad post AD
                    1500.
                Another prominent corridor indicated by modeling routes between the Windward
                    Islands and the area off the coast of Grenada covers the east and west coast of
                    Trinidad (Figure 4). That many of the routes modeled between St. Vincent and
                    Guyana’s coast show movement past Tobago comports with the multiple references
                    in the historical record that point to the island’s importance to Amerindian
                    peoples as a waypoint for travel between the Windward Islands and the mainland.
                    These references make note of altercations between Amerindians and Europeans,
                    where the former was perhaps intimidating the others who were populating Tobago
                        . Efforts to keep the island clear may have been
                    linked to its prominence as a waypoint, with the need to protect travel
                    corridors between Windward Islands settlements and the mainland
                        homeland communities. That Tobago is referred to
                    multiple times by Europeans as an Amerindian waypoint between these two regions
                    further highlights the island’s significance.
                The consistent movement of peoples past the island of Tobago, which was known by
                    both Amerindians and Europeans to be a waypoint for Amerindian travelers, shows
                    a commitment to this travel corridor. The strong response by Amerindians to
                    protect Tobago, and its lack of European settlement until the late eighteenth
                    century, indicates that these corridors of movement may have been only partially
                    disrupted by Spanish settlement on islands off the Venezuela coast. Even the
                    east coast of Trinidad remained relatively free of European influence,
                    protecting through lines of traffic from disruption. As such, it is likely that
                    only towards the eighteenth century did these routes truly suffer the full
                    impact of outside influences.
                Routes that pass by Tobago originated in all points used for the start and end of
                    voyages, both for the Guyana and the Grenada or St. Vincent start/end points
                    (example Figure 4 and 5). This showcases the wide variety of peoples who may
                    have taken advantage of stopping at this island. Unfortunately, there are still
                    many stretches of Tobago’s coastline left to be surveyed by archaeologists and
                    connections between specific mainland sites and those from the island are
                    difficult to draw. In the future, areas that lie along modeled routes, areas of
                    survey, and the specifics of European mentions of Tobago should be compared.
                
                    Modeled isochrone route between St. Vincent and Guyana launched November
                        15 from 9 pm .
                    A map of an isochrone route between St. Vincent and Guyana depicted
                        with a black line.
                    
                
                
                    Modeled isochrone route between the Guyana and south coast of Grenada
                        launched November 10 at 3 am .
                    A map of an isochrone route between Guyana and the south coast of
                        Grenada depicted with a black line.
                    
                
                It is also possible to evaluate the position of these routes not in terms of how
                    they may have been affected by the presence of outsiders but by the efforts of
                    Amerindian peoples to preserve them. The existence of these exchange and raiding
                    corridors has been referred to as vital to the social structures of Amerindian
                    Islanders. The desire to protect these connections was likely high and is
                    conceivably reflected in the response of the Amerindians who fought to keep
                    Europeans out of this area.
            

                Conclusion
                This paper explores possible routes that connected the Late Ceramic Age/early
                    European contact period Kaliña peoples of the mainland and the Kalinago peoples
                    of the Windward Islands with the idea of connecting them to the location of
                    canoe routes referenced within the ethnohistoric record of the early colonial
                    period. Here, I specifically relate to the mentions of Amerindian peoples in
                    canoes that pass the area between St. Vincent and Grenada between 1492 and 1650
                    AD. These references to the location of Amerindian travel corridors provide some
                    insight into where Caribbean canoers paddled, but they only make up one brush
                    stroke of the larger painting of these networks.
                This paper provides an example of how computational archaeology methods can act
                    as a context for knowing the location of routes these comments were based on, as
                    well as where these routes passed when out of sight of Europeans. The use of
                    computational least-cost pathway modeling — a digital approach to humanities —
                    is a vital addition to traditional modes of analysis of Amerindian mobility
                    during this period. This is due to the limited European knowledge of the canoe
                    routes that traversed this area. The methods used to generate the hypothetical
                    canoe routes discussed above reveal new layers of understanding that would be
                    impossible without computer modeling. These avenues of inquiry highlight the
                    importance of using digital humanities techniques to supplement traditional
                    text–based analysis.
                The level to which these travel corridors remained in the minds Amerindians prior
                    to or after the arrival of Columbus is unknowable. However, studies like these
                    can provide a unique opportunity to examine the existing historical and
                    archaeological record. The fact that the possible location of these corridors in
                    some cases lie close to known archaeological sites from this period support some
                    preliminary theories as to the underlying process of movement between these
                    groups. However, to what extent Europeans encountered Amerindian peoples, and
                    vice versa, cannot be learned through modeling alone. These modeled routes can
                    only be discussed as a reflection of the singular least–cost path between two
                    areas rather than as corridors reactive to social stressors. Further examination
                    of textual resources, archaeological sites, and additional modelled routes needs
                    to be conducted in order to determine if shifts in Amerindian population areas
                    around the time of European contact met with them on the travel corridors that
                    crisscrossed the expanse between the mainland and the Windward Islands.
            

                Acknowledgments
                I would like to thank Corinne Hofman for the guidance she provided on my PhD
                    research, on which this article is based. I would also like to thank Jan
                    Athenstädt and Jan Hildenbrand for their work in creating the seafaring
                    isochrone model used in this research.
            
