Title:  One Loveheart at a Time: The Language of Emoji and
               the Building of Affective Community in the Digital Medieval Studies
               Environment
Volume:  014
Issue:  3
Date:  25 September 2020
Abstract:  
            The Old Books, New Science (OBNS) Lab began using Slack in May 2016 to facilitate the
               work of a diverse research group at the University of Toronto. Yet the OBNS Slack
               does not simply facilitate scholarly communication: it also serves as a powerful
               affective network, bringing together scholars in new and sometimes unexpected
               configurations. The affective language of emoji is fundamental to the growth of this
               community. Lab members coin new emoji that are taken up by the community eagerly,
               many of which are meaningful only within the OBNS environment. It is common to
               reference Slack emoji in in-person conversation; equally, the OBNS Slack is often
               home to advising sessions or meetings that in another workplace would take place
               face-to-face. In this way, the online environment of Slack and the in-person
               environment of the lab are mutually constitutive. Such usage of Slack may, however,
               also have a dark side: by celebrating affective community in the workspace, what
               happens to the distinction between home and office, and consequent erosion of leisure
               time? We consider whether the affective practices of the OBNS Slack might allow
               personal and professional boundaries to be blurred in such a way as to prioritize the
                  personal.
         
Full Body Text: 
The online messaging software Slack was originally developed to streamline business
            communication within companies, and has been been embraced in that context for offering
            increases in productivity.A key example here which we will revisit is Bunce 2018, a yearlong ethnographic study of Slack in a
               newsroom. They found that introducing Slack as a tool in the workplace enhanced
               communication efficiency and enabled new and better collaborative projects, but also
               eroded boundaries between personal and professional life by giving managers greater
               access to their employees, allowing professional expectations to intrude upon
               previously private time. Other studies of workplace usage of Slack include Wang’s (2019) use of machine learning to predict the
               performance of project teams based on their conversational patterns in Slack.
            With its increasing popularity, Slack has also been used for communication within
            different kinds of groups, including research labs and classrooms. The existing
            scholarship on the uptake of Slack within these non-commercial environments still tends
            to focus on productivity or effectiveness.For example, Gofine (2017) and Perkel (2017) both
               discuss the use of Slack within scientific research groups, emphasizing the
               convenience of increased and rapid communication for project management. More
               pedagogical uses of Slack are discussed in Sabin
                  (2018), Tuhkala (2018), and Ross (2019), which describe classroom implementations of
               Slack in order to communicate in a way which will feel up to date to young
               adult students. These papers pay more attention to the idea of encouraging
               collaborative interactions between peers within Slack, but maintain an emphasis on
               the professionalizing nature of Slack, as in Tuukala’s (2018) assessment that introducing students to Slack is valuable
               because it is similar to what students would expect and
                  experience in the workplace. For the wider context concerning the
               emergence of productivity as a measure of job performance and the way it
               negatively impacts workers’ efforts to define work limits, see Gregg 2018.  However, particularly in an
            educational context, we challenge the idea that efficiency and
               productivity are the most important features for a tool to offer a community;
            we therefore examine our team’s use of Slack for its ability to nurture affective
               connections. While Gregg et al. (2010) notes, in the introduction to The Affect Theory Reader, that there is no single, generalizable theory of affect, they define affect as a gradient of bodily capacity — a supple incrementalism of
                  ever-modulating force-relations — that rises and falls not only along various
                  rhythms and modalities of encounter but also through the troughs and sieves of
                  sensation and sensibility
               . 
         
The Old Books, New Science (OBNS) Lab,https://oldbooksnewscience.com a group of faculty, postdoctoral
            fellows, graduate students, undergraduates, and digital librarians at the University of
            Toronto (U of T), has been using Slack since May 2016. As members of this lab, and users
            of its Slack, we argue that Slack creates virtual spaces for informal interaction which,
            when embraced by a community, can substitute for the accidental collisions that enable
            collaboration in shared physical spaces. Because of how we choose to use Slack, it does
            not simply facilitate our scholarly communication: it also serves as a powerful
            affective network, bringing together scholars and technologists across generations in
            new and sometimes unexpected configurations.This affective network is sustained,
               in part, by the exchange of virtual objects — emoji — which serve as happy objects, as formulated by Ahmed (2010), whose sticky quality establishes
               and cultivates affective bonds that link the members of the network: Affect is what sticks, or what sustains or preserves the connection
                  between ideas, values, and objects
               . Our online Slack communities and the
            local in-person communities do not perfectly overlap, but they do intersect.The
               authors of this article, for example, have a range of connections with each other,
               but have not all been part of a single project together before writing. Lawrence
               Evalyn (U of Toronto), C. E. M. Henderson (U of Toronto), Julia King (U of Bergen),
               Jessica Lockhart (U of Toronto), Laura Mitchell (St. Thomas More College, U of
               Saskatchewan), and Suzanne Conklin Akbari (Institute for Advanced Study) are all
               members of OBNS Slack in different capacities. Mitchell joined on Day 1 of OBNS
               Slack, 13 May 2016. Evalyn, Henderson, and Lockhart joined on 6 June 2016, Akbari on
               7 June 2016, and King on 27 June 2016. King and Mitchell have since moved to other
               universities, but were affiliated with the University of Toronto until Summer 2018;
               Akbari moved on in Summer 2019. Affective connections are supported both
            through the informal language of Slack comment threads and through the richly
            communicative emoji used by lab members. As we will discuss more fully, our particular
            usage of emoji in these virtual spaces differs from usage described in previous research
            on emoji, which focuses on romantic relationships and purely professional work
            communication. We will show that, by using emoji with community-defined meanings to
               react publicly to others’ posts, members of our Slack fortify community norms
            and build affective bonds. Such usage of Slack may, however, also have a dark side: by
            celebrating affective community in the workspace, what happens to the distinction
            between home and office, and consequent erosion of leisure time? We argue that
            communities have a choice in how to adopt technologies, and that the affective practices
            of the OBNS Slack allow personal and professional boundaries to be blurred in such a way
            as to prioritize the personal.
Our survey of OBNS Slack usage includes graphs summarizing channel participation and
            representative samples from user practice. We go on to address particularities, focusing
            on the ways that the supple and adaptive nature of the channels –– and especially the
            generative language of emoji –– participate in the evolution of our affective
            professional community. We will suggest that the flexible nature of Slack channels and
            emoji vocabulary permits a level of control and independence that allows
            individual users to shape the local Slack community, and thus participate collectively
            in the formation of online virtual spaces that provide safety to their members and –– at
            least potentially –– serve as a site of resistance.

            Slack Overview and Initial Adoption
            The OBNS lab was modelled after a science or engineering department’s lab
               system, where individual researchers share their own work as well as contribute to a
               common project. As the lab evolved, it grew from a weekly group supervisory session
               for Alexandra Gillespie’s graduate students to become the nexus for a grant-funded
               research endeavour, Digital Tools for Manuscript Study
               (DTMS), which involved multiple units at U of T, including scholars from CMS and
               librarians from ITS.The OBNS lab has now been involved in two major
                  grant-funded projects. The first, Digital Tools for
                     Manuscript Study (https://digitaltoolsmss.library.utoronto.ca), which set out to create a
                  toolbox of digital humanities programs to facilitate research on medieval
                  manuscripts, ran from 2015-2018, and received $773,000 USD from the Andrew W.
                  Mellon Foundation (reference #31500651), with Principal Investigators Alexandra
                  Gillespie and Sian Meikle. Akbari has joined Gillespie and Meikle as PI on OBNS’s
                  current project, The Book and the Silk Roads, also
                  funded by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation ($920,000 USD, reference
                  #1802-05532). The collaboration necessary to meet project goals required
               constant communication and regular supplementation of project-related context from
               each of the two teams. However, while ITS members worked together in a central
               office, CMS-based OBNS members did not have dedicated space and were based at two
               different U of T campuses. This limited opportunities to meet face-to-face outside of
               the weekly lab meeting.
            When we started using Slack about halfway through the first year of the project, it
               significantly lowered our email burden (especially planning and scheduling emails),
               while also opening up new possibilities for informal communication outside of the
               weekly lab meetings. If anyone had a question that did not seem serious enough for
               email, they could send a quick Slack message instead. This became especially useful
               for OBNS graduate students away on research trips. The paleography channels
               #digitaltoolsmss and #canyoureadthis continue to provide opportunities for instant
               collaboration and advice when an OBNS member is working remotely, enhancing the
               group’s collaborative culture. Furthermore, since Slack conversations (unlike emails)
               are a semi-public record that anyone in the Slack workspace can access, new students
               or employees who were not present for previous conversations found they were able to
               contribute to existing communications as soon as they had joined.The exception
                  to this is direct messages and private channels. New users can be added to private
                  channels and view the previous conversation; however, it is still accessible only
                  to the members of those channels.
            
            We created individual channels for discussing development needs and giving detailed
               feedback on usability issues during the testing phase of DTMS. In addition, we were
               able to invite external collaborators as single-channel guests to discuss tool
               development, stakeholder meetings, or grant applications. For example, one of our
               projects, VisColl (2018), involved substantial
               collaboration with Dot Porter, Curator of Digital Research Services in the Schoenberg
               Institute for Manuscript Studies at the University of Pennsylvania; rather than work
               with unwieldy conference calls or expensive in-person visits, we did most of our
               collaboration on Slack. U of T’s instance of VisColl relied upon Porter’s data
                  model, described in Porter (2017). 
            
            Having outlined the initial adoption of Slack in the OBNS lab, including the basic
               channel configurations, usage patterns, and user experiences, we turn now to the
               development of the OBNS Slack over time, focusing especially on how the virtual
               spaces of the Slack environment serve its users. We deliberately use the term
                  virtual spaces (in the plural) because while Slack is often represented as
               a virtual space (singular) that provides an alternative or a complement to the
               physical, in-person meeting environment, OBNS experience of Slack has consisted
               instead of a wide range of interlinked virtual rooms that members enter,
               participate in, and leave at will. In this respect OBNS’s findings are similar to
               those of other Slack communities.For a description of a Slack community’s
                  purposeful enforcement of distinctive channels, see Melvær (2017). Of their practice of regulating channel separation,
                  Melvær writes, We have adopted the Slack’s :raccoon: strategy
                     of redirecting discussions to their respective channels. This is to reduce
                     channel noise, but also for purposes of finding the discussion later. It can be
                     useful to start the redirection with a link posted to OP message, to create a
                     cross reference. However, rather than invigilate the division of
               these channels to ensure that channel activity stays separate, members of our Slack
               participate in different channels in an ad hoc and flexible way, with little to no
               moderation. Some of these channels are shared, some private; some last over a long
               period of time, others are contingent. Some channels are intended for specific
               projects, others to serve a community-based need. 
            In the paragraphs below, we describe the ways in which channel usage developed over
               time, offering the outlines of an ontology of OBNS experience with Slack. We
               emphasize that this usage is not prescriptive, but descriptive, recognizing that
               other research communities will take different paths with their Slack usage. We then
               turn to emoji, focusing on how these too developed over time. We note differing
               patterns of emoji usage across our Slack, and describe the wide variety of user
               experience in the OBNS community. In particular, we distinguish between different
               modes of emoji usage, ranging from the affective (which purposely seeks to comment on
               and inflect the text input of other group members) to what we have labelled the
                  decorative, which serves a very different function — although the
               decorative emoji, too, add to the overall affective community grown and fostered in
               the OBNS Slack environment.
            
               All public channels created for the OBNS Slack, in order of creation, showing
                  duration of use. Orange channels have been archived.
               
            
            
               All public channels created for the OBNS Slack, in order of creation, showing
                  the pace of creation. Orange channels have been archived.
               
            
            Channel activity within the OBNS community quickly expanded beyond the default
               #general and #random channels. We now have, among other channels, #pedagogy,
               #tolkien, #grumbling, and, the most popular, #daily_cat, where members of the team
               post their cats (and dogs, and birds, and even turtles). Figure 1 shows a detailed
               breakdown of OBNS Slack’s public channels and their lifespans. Each bar stretches
               from the channel’s creation to the date of its most recent message.Data
                  collected January 17, 2019. Orange channels are those which have reached a
               natural end, and are no longer in active use. These retired channels fall into
               two broad categories: most were created to support time-limited projects which were
               ultimately completed (e.g., #ncs2018 for the New Chaucer Society conference hosted at
               U of T); the other two channels, #daily-check-in and #asana (named for the
               productivity tool containing several projects’ to-do lists), were
                  accountability channels which faded from use due to shifts in the OBNS user
               culture. The evolving nature of the culture can also be seen in the needs met by each
               new channel. As Figure‌‌ 2 shows more clearly, channel creation ebbs and flows over
               time. Early channels like #digitaltoolsmss, #stow, and #canterburytales are all
               project-focused workspaces.These channel names refer to different parts of the
                  Digital Tools for Manuscript Study project. #digitaltoolsmss was for general
                  project discourse, #canterburytales for the portion of the project focused on
                  collating the Canterbury Tales for use with VisColl,
                  and #stow for the portion of the project that used the annotations of English
                  antiquarian John Stow (1524/5-1605) as a use case for development of an Omeka
                  plug-in. The addition in August 2016 of #humanresources (a slightly
               tongue-in-cheek name for the channel in which research assistants working on various
               projects are reminded with animated gifs to submit their monthly timesheets) reveals
               the Slack’s burgeoning role as the centre of multiple financial relationships. It was
               not until the emergence of #daily_cat in November 2016, six months after OBNS began
               using Slack, that the first purely non-work-related channel beyond #random was
                  created.It is notable that although we stuck to business-like channel
                  formats for six months, a relatively long time in the lifetime of the Slack,
                  channels like #general and #daily-check-in contained messages that mixed the
                  professional and the personal before the adoption of #daily_cat. See below for
                  further discussion on this phenomenon. It was followed by #grumbling, a
               distinctly personal space to vent negative feelings and receive sympathy, but also by
               #canyoureadthis, a work-oriented channel for lab members to share illegible
               manuscript images. As the Slack grows, each channel constitutes its own space, with
               distinctive social patterns and norms. Some project-focused channels host extended
               ongoing conversations, such as the #slackmetachannel that shaped this very paper.
            When someone initially enters such a channel, they often need to catch up on previous
               messages in order to respond, and much conversation occurs as live back-and-forth.
               Conversely, some channels, such as #daily_cat and #poetry_channel, are more
               asynchronous: members can browse the back catalogue of posts if they choose,
               but can also contribute a cat photo or a poem without addressing previous posts. Most
               channels fall between these two ends of the spectrum, including #general. 
            The #general channel, as the only channel to which every full member must subscribe,
               is usually intended to be a low-traffic channel for major announcements only.
                  Slack provides tips for managing #general, which suggests this usage . However, in our Slack, announcements often spur
               conversations, giving the channel more a feeling of a common room than of a podium.
               Indeed, 91% of the members of #general have posted in the channel, indicating that it
               is a space in which even junior members of the lab are able to converse. In
               contrast, #humanresources was specifically created to be a place where little
               conversation happens and thus urgent materials would not get lost in a flood of
               commentary. Only 53% of its members have posted messages.
            
               The total number of messages sent between all users each month, as direct
                  messages, posts in public channels, and posts in private channels.
               
            
            Despite their importance to the Slack as a whole, all of the public channels combined
               are home to less than half of the total messages sent in OBNS Slack. As Figure 3
               shows, messages in public channels are always outnumbered by direct messages.
               Messages are counted by Slack as direct messages (DMs) regardless of whether
               they are sent between only two people or are in ad hoc groups defined by their
               participants, as in a group text message. Such DMs massively outnumber private
               channels, the other method by which members can talk outside of public
                  channels.In early 2017, private channels were used for a few projects that
                  required external collaboration from people who were not full members of the
                  Slack; after these were completed, private conversations shifted to DMs. Slack’s
                  pricing model charged by the number of full members, and for external
                  collaborators who functionally only needed to be in one channel, we took advantage
                  of the single-channel guest membership option, which was free. The switch
                  to DM occurred, practically, because the OBNS team was able to get educational
                  pricing approval from Slack — and thus was no longer paying for members active in
                  public channels. However, some lab members, including Gillespie, began work on
                  projects early in 2017 and collaborated via DM with one or two members of the lab.
                  Other spikes in DM activity occurred around the time of the 2018 NCS Congress,
                  when members of the lab served as conference management and volunteer support, and
                  contacted each other via Slack DM rather than text message. The lab’s
               reliance on DMs is somewhat unusual: in an educational application of Slack described
               by Spencer Ross, for example, private channels were the most popular communication
               venue (making up 43% of all messages sent), followed by DMs (33%), and then public
               channels (23%) .Ross uses Slack as a professor
                  teaching undergraduate courses in marketing. Although the context of a class, in
                  which students are evaluated by a central instructor for a grade, creates a
                  hierarchical environment, one of Ross’s findings is that students felt that Slack transformed the course into a team-like atmosphere,
                     reducing the monolithic feel of the instructor–student relationship and
                     transforming the content into one that felt more student-centric,
                     collaborative, and egalitarian
                  . The OBNS lab’s high volume of direct
               messages overall shows that the lab prioritizes the affective structures of
               one-on-one or small-group conversations. While private channels are defined by their
               subject matter and talk within them is therefore restricted to a single purpose, DMs
               are defined by their participants, not their topics. Private conversations without
               set topics allows mingled discussion in which nothing is off topic. In the
               course of one DM thread between two co-authors of this article, for example,
               conversational ground covered the logistics of cat-sitting, the intensive work of
               writing a report for a different department, and career advice — topics that are all
               unrelated to any official lab project. 
            The presence of such a robust DM environment speaks to the lived-in feeling of the
               Slack. OBNS Slack culture is more than the representative digital space in which
               members operate publicly , both because of the robust and multiple levels of exchange
               that take place within the Slack, and because private conversations that take place
               in DMs support the development of personal friendships that are manifested both
               virtually and in person. The accessibility of contact via DMs contributes to a sense
               that one’s labmates are always close by, easily contacted for a casual
               question or to share an anecdote. In a physical, in-person workspace, it is
               impossible to truly separate the personal and professional because of personal
               interactions that are spurred on by directly perceivable traits that
               people cannot hide (like a new haircut, or an upset facial expression). On a Slack
               with a low DM ratio, one could see an artificial professional talk only space
               begin to develop that would not be possible in a real-world workplace. In contrast,
               OBNS Slack’s high DM count reinforces the manner in which it operates as a true
               virtual work space, with varied methods of communication and
               interaction.
         

            Emoji and Affect
            Our examination of emoji has little precedent in the existing literature. Bai 2019’s systematic review of 167 research articles about emoji
               identified several common approaches to studying emoji in different fields. Research
               in computer science, marketing, medicine, and education (85 articles, or 50%)
               typically attempts to understand the meanings of specific emoji, or presents case
               studies using emoji to conduct surveys.For example, in computer science, Sari (2014), Cahyaningtyas (2017), Felbo (2017), and
                     LeCompte (2017) all develop methods to use
                  emoji in sentiment analysis. Or, in medicine, Marengo
                     (2019) describes using emoji-based surveys to diagnose warning signs of
                  depression, and in education Fane (2017) and Fane (2018) describe using emoji to communicate with
                  children. Psychology and communications research (53 articles, or 32%)
               largely seeks to describe personal or cultural contexts which shape emoji usage,
               especially the quantity of usage.For example, in psychology, Hall (2013) and Li (2018)
                  associate emoji usage with personality traits. Or, in communications, Tossell (2012), Prada
                     (2018), and Derks (2008) find patterns in
                  men and women’s use of emoji, and Lin (2018) compares
                  emoji usage in China and Spain. Research in linguistics and behavioural
               science (31 articles, or 18%) explores questions most similar to our own: scholars in
               these fields examine the content and function of specific communications taking place
               with emoji, and describe the interpersonal motivation and impact of these
               communications. Some linguistics research, such as Jibril
                  (2013) and López (2017) has tried to assess
               whether emoji can function as their own language, but most linguists (such as Alshenqeeti (2016) and Na'aman (2017)) instead seek to describe how emoji contribute nonverbal
               content to impact the interpretation of written language. Most directly related to
               our own case study of our communication with each other, behavioural science
               researchers have described how emoji can manage and maintain interpersonal
               relationships 
               
               , or construct and express a personal identity 
               . However, even in this last category of research,
               describing the role of emoji in personal relationships and identity, there is no
               direct comparison for our case study. Existing work discusses emoji use in either
               private one-on-one personal conversations or in large-scale public or semi-public
               social networks like Twitter and Facebook,Scholarship on emoji in Twitter is
                  particularly prevalent, as in Barbieri (2016),
                     Sari (2014), and Park
                     (2014), likely because of the availability of data from Twitter’s public
                  conversations. Scholarship on private conversations typically examines text
                  messages or text-like instant messages, as in Pettigrew (2009) and Perry (2011), both
                  of which study romantic couples. both of which have different core dynamics
               than the medium-sized group conversations which take place on Slack. It is a sign of
               the affective nature of our usage of Slack that the best parallels to our emoji use
               come from the papers on intimate relationships, such as Kelly (2015). In their study of two-person text message exchanges,A
                  major difference between a two-person text conversation and a group chat in Slack
                  has to do with the position of emoji in the conversational tempo. Two people
                  texting are in a pattern of constant back and forth, where one person is always in
                  the position of needing to respond to the other; in a texting app, emoji can only
                  be sent in or as text messages. Sending an emoji in a text to one’s partner just
                  means saying that image to them in the moment. In a group chat, however,
                  there is no sense of whose conversational turn it is at any given moment,
                  since anyone can respond. Moreover, in addition to allowing emoji to be sent in or
                  as messages within the conversational flow, Slack also has a feature for emoji
                     reactions to be attached to other people’s messages. These
                     reaction emoji provide a response to someone’s statements without
                  interrupting them, or without reviving the whole conversation if the main flow of
                  discussion has moved on. As a result, rather than keeping a conversation going
                  without words, as Kelly (2015) describes in text
                  conversations, we argue, emoji reactions in Slack provide a backchannel that gets
                  outside the conversation to build a more general sense of an activated social
                  space. Kelly and Watts identify three overlapping uses of emoji that are
                  relationally meaningful, each of which are at play in
               lab communications: emoji are used to maintain a conversational connection, to permit
               play, and to create what they term a sense of shared and secret
                  uniqueness
               .
            
               June 7, 2016: A :leaves: emoji reaction on one of the first-ever posts on OBNS
                  Slack, using the image of a set of drifting leaves to represent feeling
                  peaceful.
               
            
            Although creative use of emoji was a part of the OBNS Slack culture from its first
               day, emoji usage increased and gained complexity over time. A turning point in both
               channel development and emoji usage occurred in our early experimentation with a
               #daily-check-in channel. Each morning, a bot would message each Slack member to
               generate the channel’s content by asking in sequence for each member to define
               yesterday’s accomplishments, today’s goals, and current obstacles. As each member
               wrote about their daily tasks, however, the affective side to the lab unfolded.
               Obstacles of sickness, frustration, and personal grief were met first tentatively and
               then confidently with demonstrations of care. The lab’s early emoji use is
               comparatively sparse, clustering around expressions of illness or frustration with
               emoji indicating empathy, and around photos of pets shared to cheer or comfort.
                  The default emoji :fire:, easily bringing to mind burning rage,
                  dumpster fire,
                  I want to burn everything down, and I’m on fire (a phrase used in
                  lab to indicate a desperate, urgent need for assistance or graduate supervision),
                  was particularly popular as an empathetic response to a wide variety of adverse
                  circumstances. Over time, as lab members became more comfortable with
               sharing the personal and affective, emoji use expanded to celebrate or cheer on
               personal goals and victories in teaching, academic work, or administration. 
            
               November 4, 2016: Mitchell shares a cat photo in #daily-check-in.
               
            
            November 2016 saw the creation of a new channel, #daily_cat, which was the first
               channel after #random to have a specific non-project focus, and which confirmed OBNS
               Slack’s focus on care as an integral part of the digital workplace experience. As
               #daily-check-in filled with expressions of empathy and personal struggles in addition
               to its original more narrow aim of self-assessment and goal-setting, lab members
               began sharing pictures of cute animals to cheer each other up. Originally intended to
               save #daily-check-in from increasing numbers of cat photos, #daily_cat became a
               voluntary, recreational place where members of OBNS, no matter their employment
               status or place in the academic hierarchy, were equal in their love of felines. Lab
               members posted photos of their own cats, or of cats they encountered in the
                  wild; others contributed pictures of internet cats or other cute animals.
                  Cat soon came to mean any animal: lab members have posted photos of dogs,
               turtles, birds, and more.
            
               May 1, 2017: Chloe’s adoption, announced on Slack.
               
            
            Certain cats, especially those owned by lab members, became celebrities. Jacquelyn
               Clements, one of #daily-check-in’s prolific cat-posters, fostered cats for a few
               months just as #daily_cat was becoming active and shared photographs with the
               channel. Soon lab members became invested in the saga of Chloe, a beautiful black and
               white longhair, and her search for a forever home. After a near-miss with a
               potential adopter, Chloe eventually became a foster fail and was adopted by
               Clements, much to the jubilation of #daily_cat. Chloe’s adoption elicited a
                  platter (i.e., long string) of emoji, including the first example of a
               custom lab cat emoji. In Figure  6, the fourth emoji reacting to the news is itself a
               custom emoji created from the photograph of her at her adoption. Custom emoji for
               specific cats have become commonplace in #daily_cat; the creation of a new custom
               emoji indicates that the cat is now part of the wider OBNS community. These custom
               emoji serve not only as a way of welcoming new cats into the #daily_cat rotation, but
               also creating a sense of permanence and belonging for the new lab member. These emoji
               may then be used throughout the Slack as an expression of care. One example is that
               of :cat-hug:, which is commonly used to denote reassurance and caring for a team
               member in need of encouragement. Originally a photograph of Akbari’s cats Bob and
               Charles snuggling, captioned Hold still and let me wash
                  you, its wider use transcends its origin in #daily_cat — so much so that
               one lab member was unaware that it represented specific lab cats.
            
               All the custom lab cat emoji as of time of writing.
               
            
            These personalized cat emoji led to a wave of tea emoji, celebratory emoji including
               a rainbow sheep and dancing Mr. Darcy, and finally the outgrowth of emoji as specific
               as Voynich ladies (a medieval image of naked women in a
               green spa, which denotes a rare and surprising luxurious experience, or alternately a
                  conspiracy).The image comes from the famously unintelligible Voynich
                  manuscript (Beinecke MS 408).
               Decorating a post with one or more emoji now operates as a language of digital
               gestures showing interest, comprehension, appreciation for the other’s presence, and
               (with greater intensity depending on the number or creativity of emoji) excitement or
               approbation for an idea. We lifted a number of reward animals from Asana, a
               project management tool we used early in the first grant project; when someone did
               not want to do a task, a common encouragement was to shout Think of the
                  unicorns!Asana randomly rewards task completion by sending a unicorn, a
                  yeti, a narwhal, or a phoenix across the user’s screen. This does not happen with
                  every completed task; rather, the potential of possibly getting a reward animal
                  incentivizes the user to continue completing tasks. Needless to say, we were
                  quickly hooked. While we gradually abandoned Asana and returned to a more
               ad hoc and decentralized mode of task organization, we kept the part that still fit
               with the more horizontal and distributed way that we conceived of our work — namely,
               the reward animals. 
            Our most common emoji currently include this^,
               100%, thumbs-up, smiles, frowns, and lovehearts, but many Slack users have
               individualized emoji that have come to represent them –– the boar, the two cats side
               by side, the frantically typing cat, the dancing party wizard. Many of these
               individualized emoji were created by Slack members or downloaded for the Slack, but
               others are default emoji that have taken on additional personal meaning in OBNS
               Slack. For example, King told the Slack a story about her parents’ home in Hawaii
               playing host to wild boars each winter, an unusual situation which elicited the
               heretofore little-used :boar:. Months later, she greeted the Slack with a tale of a
               bizarre situation on public transit (see Figure  8 below). Lockhart reacted with a
               small emoji platter, including :boar:, and declared that :boar: now had an extra
               meaning, signifying incredible story that could only happen to
                  @juliaking. Now regular news updates from King featuring less fantastical
               happenings still elicit :boar:, which has become personalized. 
            
               The creation of :boar: as a personalized emoji (abridged).
               
            
            The impact of these emoji is due to the affective work underlying them.For
                  further discussion and definition of affective work,
                  see Ahmed (2010). As each lab member
               contributes a novel use of emoji, their in-the-moment play builds over time into a
               unique shared language. Kelly and Watts note that [i]n
                  interaction design, effort is typically seen as something that should be
                  minimised; the less work a user has to do, the better, but that in
               interpersonal relationships, effort can hold value, since invested effort can indicate caring towards others
               . Accordingly, deploying a rarer emoji indicates
               special attention to the post thus decorated. Adding a new custom emoji to decorate
               the post indicates that something very important has been said and/or that a new need
               has been identified in the Slack. For instance, :eyestoothless:, an emoji of fierce,
               catlike staring eyes, made from a screen capture of Toothless the dragon in the first
                  How to Train Your Dragon film, is one example of
               Kelly and Watt’s relationally meaningful emoji. Originally added in December 2016
               because of a need in #daily_cat, :eyestoothless: now represents unwavering attention
               and judgment in other contexts and is one of the most widely used and enduring emoji
               across the Slack. It subsequently took on a secondary significance within #daily_cat
               to refer to Akbari’s cat Bob, whom it resembles. 
            
               December 13, 2016: the creation of :eyestoothless:, in which it indicates a
                  cat’s fierceness.
               
            
            
               March 19, 2018: @alexandrabolintineanu using :eyestoothless: to represent her
                  academic work in #general, in which the emoji plays on the idea of close
                  reading.
               
            
            As these examples show, the emoji moves between literal and figurative references, in
               which different details are salient. As a representation of the kitten’s fierceness,
               the first use draws on a reference to Toothless the dragon in the source film;
               elsewhere, in #daily_cat, this meaning is expanded to represent Bob even when he is
               not fierce due to a literal resemblance in colouring. For the joke on close reading
               in Figure 10, the second use draws on the intensity of the eyes, and on the
               community’s pre-existing association of the emoji with fierceness. It is the history
               of :eyestoothless: within the lab that makes it more appealing than the default
               :eyes: emoji, which could also humorously indicate intense scrutiny of a text. The
               creative invention of new meanings over time, in itself, constitutes the value of
               these emoji. Our experience thus counters Ian Bogost’s general claim that emoji are becoming more specific and less flexible as more icons
                  appear, with the result that [m]atching icons to
                  words encourages fixity of meaning, especially as it becomes harder to find any
                  single emoji by scrolling
               . On the contrary, the coining of additional emoji within
               the OBNS community has facilitated an exuberant proliferation of new meanings. This
               proliferation, in turn, has fuelled the interpersonal engagement of the OBNS lab
               members. While Kelly and Watts studied partnered relationships in their survey of
                  relationally meaningful emoji usage, their findings
               nonetheless effectively describe the lab’s experience, highlighting the affective
               nature of the conversations occurring within this work
               space .
            The affective role of emoji production and use is also evident in the soft
               distinction between reactive and decorative emoji in the OBNS Slack. Reactive emoji
               express a direct emotional response to the affect of the post: a screaming face in
               response to a terrible story; a thumbs-up to express agreement; a loveheart to
               express adoration. By contrast, decorative emoji convey reader interest and
               understanding by representing the content or subject matter of the post in symbolic
               or literal form. Emoji reactions in OBNS Slack show the original poster that their
               post has been read by the community. In Figure  11 below, the emoji represent
               passages and themes from the Old English poem Beowulf as
               well as the autumnal day observed by Bolintineanu. Decorating a post with emoji in
               this way enables the reader to interact creatively with both the content of the post
               and its creator. The purpose is to delight or surprise the original poster by
               conveying a response beyond a conventional reaction. These reactions can be obvious
               referents (:fallen_leaf: directly referring to my tree slowly losing its
                  leaves), in-group referents (only Slack members familiar with Beowulf will recognize :dragon:’s relevance to Beowulf
                  lecture), obscure referents that may require explanation (:amphora:
               representing the hoard of the last survivor), or purely symbolic or metaphorical
               responses (a night sky standing in for coldness, transience, death, an emotional
               response to Beowulf, or any other feeling a reader might
               attribute to it). Decoration takes advantage of the range of emoji available in the
               Slack interface, a functionality that invites these kinds of surprise encounters. 
            
               September 29, 2016: a platter of decorative emoji responding to a post about
                  Beowulf.
               
            
             As we have shown above, both channel structures and emoji usage developed over time
               in the OBNS environment, and both of these contributed substantially to the
               development of a community that is at once professional and personal, work-oriented
               and open to spontaneous play, intellectual and affective. While some channels were
               set up deliberately, geared toward a particular project’s needs or addressing a
               well-defined set of tasks (some time-limited, some ongoing), other channels emerged
               more organically in response to the needs and desires of the lab members. Similarly,
               emoji usage within the OBNS Slack serves not just a utilitarian function (e.g.,
               :thumbsup: signalling agreement with a plan of action) but also an affective one,
               building rapport both bilaterally and communally. Decorative emoji reactions,
               in particular, offer a kind of group communication distinct from other described
               emoji usage, by mirroring a member’s own message back to them visually to show that
               they are being heard. The coining of new emoji also signals an additional level of
               affective engagement, based on the time and effort devoted to the task. In the
               following section, we explore the economic circumstances that underlie the affective
               community, considering to what extent the virtual spaces of the OBNS Slack permit the
               growth of a horizontal network of interpersonal connection, and to what extent
               hierarchical structures persist within even this horizontal network. We then consider
               how the virtual spaces of the OBNS Slack community both work within and resist the
               economic imperatives of the university.
         

            Affect and Profit
            The OBNS lab is in many respects a horizontal community, with a strong sense of
               shared goals and responsibilities. The tone of the community has from the beginning
               been set by Gillespie, the lab’s founder and PI, who has established a work
               environment that seeks to enhance inclusivity and access and to model practices of
               care of self and of others that promote well being and personal growth.While we
                  use work environment here and elsewhere, OBNS is, unlike a science lab, not
                  first and foremost a working lab with a shared project. Work for us refers
                  to the variety of duties that lab members undertake, which includes teaching and
                  research unrelated to the lab’s project(s). While all of us have performed
                  research, administration, or consultation for the lab at some point or another,
                  our degree of involvement has varied widely. Most new lab members enter the lab
                  not as new project employees but as Gillespie’s graduate students (who then may
                  later be given work related to an OBNS grant project). At the same time,
               however, it is undeniable that a vertical structure underlies the community,
               generated by the economic and administrative environment of the university workplace.
               Some regular OBNS members hold senior faculty positions, including chair or director
               roles, and are tenured; others hold faculty positions, but are untenured or
               pre-tenure; some have short-term hourly contracts following the completion of the
               PhD, while others inhabit staff positions prior to entering doctoral study or without
               the intention of entering a graduate program; others are current students whose
               income comes from a variety of sources which may include OBNS research grants. In the
               following pages, we consider how this paradoxical nature of the lab — both
               horizontal, in terms of shared tasks, workflow, and affective community; and
               vertical, in terms of economic and administrative structures — is expressed within
               the virtual space of OBNS Slack, and suggest that the dynamic character of those
               spaces might challenge the economic imperatives of the university.
            Our assessment of the role of emoji runs counter to Luke Stark and Kate Crawford’s
               work highlighting the use of emoji in workplace communications . In The Conservatism of Emoji: Work,
                  Affect, and Communication, Stark and Crawford compile a history of emoji,
               particularly in the workplace, contextualized alongside phenomena like the original
               smiley face, emoticons, digital stickers, and reaction gifs. They describe an oscillating dynamic, whereby affect is captured by capital through
                  proprietary cultural representations and subsequently escapes, only to be
                  recaptured through new technocultural forms
               . Although new methods for the expression of
               emotion can initially provide a burst of affective liberation, Stark and Crawford
               write, the top-down technological insistence on conformity ultimately repurposes
               affective expression to serve the exploitative demands of capitalism. The restricted,
               standard forms of emoji ultimately foreclose individualized personal expression.
               Their examination of emoji in workplace communications focuses on the tendency for
               employers to demand an ultimately hollow performance of cheerful sociability from
               employees at work. At best, they argue, emoji are a prophylactic
                  against the visceral traumas of what Melissa Gregg
                  terms the worker’s schizophrenic and unpredictable encounter with a culture
                  of white-collar technical work characterized by a cynical, mediated
                  sociality
               . Two interlinked aspects of the emoji usage in the
               OBNS Slack seem to depart from this grim picture in which the
                  emancipatory potential of emoji is restricted by their industrial and commercial
                  limitations
               : first, the flourishing of custom emoji created by
               and for OBNS members which allow individual expression without invigilation or
               regulation by any governing body or administrator; and, second, the intentional
               blurring of professional and personal interaction in order to prioritize the
                  personal. 
            Custom emoji inhabit a very special place within the overall landscape of the OBNS
                  Slack.The custom emoji have particular impact within the affective community
                  of our Slack, following Ahmed’s account of individual agency within the economy of
                     happy objects: We are moved
                        by things. And in being moved, we make things. An object can be affective by
                        virtue of its own location (the object might be here, which is where I
                        experience this or that affect) and the timing of its appearance (the object
                        might be now, which is when I experience this or that affect). To experience
                        an object as being affective or sensational is to be directed not only
                        toward an object, but to whatever is around that object, which
                        includes what is behind the object, the conditions of its arrival. What is
                        around an object can become happy: for instance, if you receive something
                        delightful in a certain place, then the place itself is invested with
                        happiness, as being ‘what’ good feeling is directed toward. Or if you are
                        given something by somebody whom you love, then the object itself acquires
                        more affective value: just seeing something can make you think of another
                        who gave you that something. If something is close to a happy object then it
                        can become happy by association.
                      Scholars examining the history
               and use of emoji often draw attention to the unexpected role of the Unicode
               Consortium as a centralized authority dictating the emoji with which everyone may
                     converse.Kim (1992), for example, has
                  examined the political implications of the inclusion and exclusion of
                  language-based character sets in the broader Unicode standard, and [Berard 2018]
                  has applied a similar framework specifically to the definition of standard emoji.
                  Kim and Berard both assert that the technological standards defined by the Unicode
                  Consortium’s paid membership of corporate, institutional, and governmental actors
                  have political implications for the representation of marginalized communities: as
                  Berard notes, when it costs $10,000 to $18,000 a year for a membership to be
                  allowed to vote on proposed new emoji (or $7500 a year for a half vote), and when
                  these voting members must have a technical background, many viewpoints will be
                  excluded from the decision-making process. However, custom emoji introduce
               the potential for personal creativity and expression. Standard emoji are used
               alongside custom emoji borrowed from other internet contexts, and those created by
               lab members specifically for lab use.
            
               July 11, 2017: A celebration of a completed dissertation, with a full emoji
                  platter.
               
            
            An example of our varied emoji vocabulary, including custom emoji, can be seen in
               Figure 12, which includes a congratulatory emoji “platter” in which multiple emoji
               are woven together to indicate a subtly nuanced feeling of praise. The platter opens
               with :party_parrot:, an animated, colour-changing emoji based on Sirocco, an
               internet-famous kakapo.https://cultofthepartyparrot.com/ Available as a free download
               for any Slack, :party_parrot: has many costumes, and, crucially, a slow frame rate
               that enables editing. (During one lab conference trip to Italy, Mitchell edited the
               default :party_parrot: to become :italian_parrot:, which flashed the colors of the
               Italian flag.) In this platter, default Slack emoji like :heart_eyes: and :tada:
               mingle with custom emoji including :catamazed:, :asana_yeti:, :disco_darcy:, and
               :hwaet:. This last emoji is taken from the first word of the Old English Beowulf, and is used as an exclamation of excitement,
               sometimes signalling a new beginning. The detailed and highly specific nature of
               these custom emoji, and the rich background and context that each of them carries,
               contributes meaningfully to the formation and maintenance of the community. Beyond
               this, however, the creation of a custom emoji is an act of affective labour. The
               process involves research, to locate suitable base images, and the application of
               technical skill, to modify them and upload them. The voluntary role of creator of
               custom emoji is a specialized one: three lab members (Laura Mitchell, Lawrence
               Evalyn, and Jessica Lockhart) have added 90% of the OBNS Slack’s custom emoji. All
               three describe emoji-creation as not just a procrastinatory amusement, but a public
               service: a new emoji contributes a new mode of expression for the group as a whole.
               Evalyn, in particular, cites emoji creation as a crucial personal connection while he
               was away from the physical lab space in Toronto and not part of any of the ongoing
               medieval projects. The labour of creating custom emoji is not insignificant: on the
               contrary, it serves as a kind of “gift” to the OBNS community that cements its
               affective bonds. The emotional labour devoted to the community surely results in
               common profit, as long as an ethic of self-reflection and openness continues to
               inform our work. But how is such labour to be accounted for, or compensated?
            In considering the labour that is required to sustain the affective community —
               which, in turn, enables the professional productivity of the OBNS lab and its
               contributions to the university, both academic and economic — we must turn to the
               implied corporate setting that underlies usage of Slack. As in other workplace
               environments, Slack usage in OBNS is conducive to creating workflows in many ways,
               ranging from the punctual submission of timesheets by research assistants to the
               generation of proposals and reports for granting agencies. This quality, however,
               extends more broadly into the lives of lab members, embracing both professional and
               personal spheres. Such blurring existed from the outset: Slack was running constantly
               in the background while students were in class, staff members were in their office,
               and instructors were teaching, so that the overall shared project labour was
               consistently present and lab members were available via Slack for consultation even
               while other activities were underway. This meant that, whether we were working or
               not, we were connected to an online chat room filled with many of our closest peers,
               colleagues, and mentors. The #daily-check-in channel, with its bot-enforced demands
               for details, particularly emphasized the public display of to-do lists. It would be
               all too easy for the omnipresence of Slack to be a looming Panopticon, invigilating
               the participants to make sure that the appropriate measure of labour would be
               extracted from each one. OBNS Slack, however, has evolved as a very different digital
               environment, in a number of respects. Because of the plural nature of our digital
               spaces, engagement in a wide range of professional and personal modes is possible,
               while the fecundity of our emoji coinage and usage provides a way for community
               members to express care, whether self-directed or directed toward others. 
            The extent to which our space is one that resists the workplace’s demand for constant
               labour is evident in the kinds of things for which we hold ourselves accountable: not
               the constant completion of ever more tasks, but the self-protective measures of
               saying no, taking breaks, and acknowledging when we have done enough.
               This significantly contrasts with Bunce's (2018)
               ethnographic study of the IRIN (Integrated Regional Information Networks)
                  NewsThis organization is now known as The New Humanitarian, and is a global,
                  digital only news outlet which provides field reporting on humanitarian
                  crises. newsroom as it adopted Slack as its primary mode of communication.
               Although the study’s authors describe Slack as encouraging collaboration and
               deepening relationships, they mean more effective professional relationships, rather
               than friendships. Perhaps as a result, users of the IRIN News Slack describe
               experiencing more negative impacts from always-on culture than in our Slack.
               Journalists describe working later than intended because they can see indicators that
               their coworkers are still online, feeling the need to compete with them; they also
               describe finding it difficult to step away from Slack, to accomplish needed work or
               to enjoy a break. They concluded that the infiltration of work into personal time was
               likely due to the strong role of managers in hierarchically directing the creation
               and use of the Slack, by creating channels and providing feedback to employees
               publicly. In the case of an academic work environment, where work schedules are often
               fluid and are not constrained to the 9 to 5 demands of an office, the
                  always-on mentality has long been a feature of the
                  profession.Graduate students are especially prone to non-traditional work
                  schedules, in part because they are rarely afforded individual workspaces to serve
                  as offices and must do much of their work at home, in the library, or in a
                  third space. This mentality, developed during graduate study, often follows an
                  individual through their career. Perhaps because academics are used to a
               non-traditional work schedule, a horizontally collaborative space like Slack is less
               jarring for them than it would be for a traditional office worker. Overall, the
               newsroom offers an interesting contrast to our own experience of Slack, which reveals
               that increasing horizontal collaboration and fostering affective community are not
               the same.
            In this respect, an environment of shared accountability in OBNS Slack promotes the
               sense of flattened hierarchies, a shared horizontal community. This is evident in the
               Slack channel now dedicated to this purpose, #accountability. This channel originally
               began in July 2018 as #votenow: lab founder Alexandra Gillespie, having found she was
               agreeing to do more things than she had time for, asked lab members to weigh in on
               individual requests for her service. For two months, the channel functioned as
               originally intended, with graduate students and other more junior lab members
               furnishing yeses, nos, or praise (for already having said no) as appropriate.
               However, at the end of September, one lab member (a recent PhD) chipped in with their
               own question, and soon after Gillespie asked the channel to ensure she completed a
               specific set of tasks by 10 a.m. the next day. The purpose of the channel had
               suddenly enlarged, and its usage accordingly boomed. The newly renamed
               #accountability immediately became popular, with several updates, requests, and
               jubilant reports of task completion within hours of being opened more widely. Six
               people joined on the first day, and at present nineteen members (~36% of the
               population of the Slack) now use the channel regularly for requests for sympathy,
               updates on task completion, grumbling, workshopping tasks, and co-working sprints.
               Accountability, in other words, is not simply understood as the employee’s obligation
               to the employer: on the contrary, it is understood as the obligation to take care of
               oneself and one another, in a horizontal framework of shared expectations and mutual
               support. Moreover, the use of the explicit task-setting channel, #daily-check-in,
               eventually collapsed in favour of the completely work-free daily channel, #daily_cat,
               as described above. These two examples emphasize how the OBNS lab has rejected
               Slack’s intended “productivity” and “efficiency” uses in favour of community
               building. Papapanagiotou (2018) observes the rise of social machines
               structuring an increasing proportion of human interactions, in which participants typically have limited autonomy to define and shape the
                  machines they are part of
               . As part of their call for the
               development of decentralized participant-driven social machines, they note the danger
               in the fact that monolithic platforms provide useful services,
                  but they stifle innovation, and enforce centralised notions of what sociality may
                  or may not be
               . Our lab operates within Slack’s
               social machine, but we contend that nevertheless this is a freeing and creative
               experience for its users.
         

            Conclusion
            Looking back on OBNS Slack usage over time, and the ways in which the channels served
               as virtual rooms for our community, we see how the dynamic quality of our
               Slack is fundamental to its success and to the level of satisfaction experienced by
               its users. Initially, we organized and labelled our Slack channels to reflect the
               different aspects of the research project: discussions about conferences we were
               attending had an individual channel that was separate from the channel about
               publications we were producing, and we used the two Slack default channels, #general
               and #random, for their intended purpose. Team members could respond to messages in
               the assigned channel, through direct message, or by creating an emoji reaction to the
               message, and we made substantial use of all three methods of communication. However,
               we soon found that #random was insufficient for the amount of non-project-related
               conversation and collaboration that was taking place. We discovered that our use of
               Slack was growing in such a way that was, although unanticipated, one of the greatest
               benefits of the entire undertaking. In addition to the official designated channels
               we had put in place, other unrelated projects were beginning to spring up in private
               channels between team members. Team members worked on articles, organized guest
               lectures in one another’s classes, and applied for grants and funding. Slack became a
               valuable internal resource: those engaged in university teaching talked about the
               classes they were taking and teaching, while doctoral students talked about their
               dissertation research and writing, and members generally talked about how to navigate
               the various stages of graduate school and beyond. Because of the diversity of the
               team, with people at many different stages of their academic careers as well as PhDs
               who have taken non-academic career paths, there was a wide variety of experiences
               that the graduate students could draw upon. It is clear that Slack allowed all
               members of the OBNS team to get to know one another better and to create shared
               spaces for our geographically scattered team. OBNS Slack now exists for itself; we
               have overcome the limitations of physical space availability on our campus to create
               our own virtual social-professional space. In fact, team members, including some of
               the authors of this article, have moved across the country and abroad for other jobs
               and continue to be active within the non-project channels, which is an indication of
               how OBNS Slack has grown beyond its origin as a project management tool. The story we
               have told in this article is illustrative but not prescriptive: we recognize that
               different research and work communities will grow their Slack in other ways. If there
               is an exemplary quality in OBNS Slack, that quality lies in its organic, adaptive
               nature. The tension between the horizontal structure of our self-reflective affective
               community, and the vertical structure of the administrative and economic landscape
               that OBNS inhabits within the university, is a productive one. The virtual spaces of
               our OBNS Slack are not static, prefabricated rooms but (to use a metaphor) garden
               spaces, which grow and change over time, responding to changes within our community
               and in the world around us.
         
