Title:  Infrastructure and Social Interaction: Situated
                    Research Practices in Digital Humanities in India
Volume:  014
Issue:  3
Date:  25 September 2020
Abstract:  
                
                The computational tradition in India goes back to the two historic archival
                    projects Project Madurai, a digitised collection of ancient Tamil classics and
                    Bichitra, a digital variorum of Rabindranath Tagore’s works which remarked the
                    genesis of Digital Humanities in India. Subsequently, few public and private
                    universities, non-academic organisations and individual scholars are actively
                    involved in digital humanities projects: digital library, digital archive and
                    digital databases. Though these digital establishments underpin Indian
                    humanities scholars to engage in digital humanities research practices, the
                    challenges in infrastructure impede them from leveraging the computational
                    techniques and resources. In this paper, we will study the specific challenges
                    of physical infrastructure such as digital humanities lab, digital humanities
                    pedagogy, digital tools and software, and institution and government support. We
                    will also discuss the brief survey report and few interviews which we conducted
                    from the Indian DH community to reinforce our arguments.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                In 2016, P.P. Sneha published a report Mapping Digital
                        Humanities in India. This is the first and foremost article that
                    attempts to define Digital Humanities (DH) in Indian context and highlights some
                    significant current DH projects. She records that DH is in incipient stage in India .
                    However, the several key events in the recent past indicate that DH in India is
                    steadily moving from an incipient stage to a progressive
                        stage. These events include the recent launch of Digital Humanities
                    Alliance of India Digital Humanities Alliance of
                        India (DHAI) has been renamed as Digital Humanities Alliance for Research
                        and Teaching Innovations (DHARTI)., the inaugural conference of
                        DHAIThe secretariat of DHARTI is hosted by Indian Institute of
                        Technology (IIT) Indore and its inaugural conference was jointly organized
                        by IIT Indore and Indian Institute of Management Indore. DHARTI recently
                        conducted the Twitter Conference 2020 which received much attention from the
                        national and international DH communities . and introduction of DH courses and programmesMajor Research
                        Projects (MRP) is a thrust area being developed the University Grant
                        Commission (UGC) recognizes DH as one of the important areas that need
                        emphasis and research support.. The government schemes for public
                    institutions such as Scheme for Promotion Academic and Research Collaboration
                        , Impacting Research Innovation and Technology
                         and Impactful Policy Research in Social
                    Sciences  include DH/DH related areas as a domain
                    and subdomain. Besides these initiatives, we can also see the increase in the
                    number of DH courses, conferences, workshops, and seminarsFor instance,
                        IIT Gandhinagar offers two courses: Digital culture and new media and
                        Introduction to Digital Humanities which have been offered from 2014
                        onwards. The latter one is a special topic course which is mainly for
                        doctoral students who take DH as their research area. The recent conferences
                        and workshops on DH as a main and sub theme were conducted in Banaras Hindu
                        University, Varanasi, St. Xavier's College, Jaipur, St. Xavier’s College,
                        Mumbai etc. The upcoming conferences and seminars will be conducted in
                        Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, Mother Teresa Women's University,
                        Kodaikanal, University of Calcutta, Kolkata etc. For further details : http://people.iiti.ac.in/~dhiiti/index.php/2019/04/18/news/?preview_id=305&preview_nonce=8a9d25352f&post_format=standard&_thumbnail_id=-1&preview=true
                    that are located in the India map (See Figure 1).
                The map represents various DH activities of the few universities and colleges
                    from the south, north, east and west parts of the country. The
                        blanks in the map, reminds us that India is a
                    geographically big country and houses to a large number of public and private
                    institutions — and, by nature, DH requires sources such as funding and
                    high-technology, that is not possible for small colleges and universities that
                    have limited sources. However, this map illustrates the nascent stage of DH as
                    an emerging discipline in India. Though the term DH has begun to be noticed in
                    the academic circle in 2010 , the
                    computational tradition of humanities in India goes back two decades with two
                    important archival projects such as Project Madurai 
                    a digitised collection of ancient Tamil classics and Bichitra , a digital variorum of Rabindranath Tagore’s works
                    which remarked the genesis of DH in India. Together with this, the recent
                    mainstream attention of both central and state governments on Digitize India (https://www.digitizeindia.gov.in/) and Digital
                        India (https://www.digitalindia.gov.in/) facilitate many large-scale
                    investments in digitization, digital library, curation, and preservation.
                    Digitize India, Delhi Archives and National Digital Library etc. are key
                    projects of this digital establishment. One of the primary objectives of these
                    projects is to make digital content available to the wider public, researchers
                    and academics. These kinds of digital initiatives open up a new horizon in the
                    landscape of humanities to engage in DH research practice by harnessing digital
                    tools and techniques. Nevertheless, there has been little attention and
                    investment in deploying these digital contents for advanced scholarly practice
                    which entails robust infrastructure.
                
                    Map of DH activities in India
                    
                    Map of India with circles of various colors to depict locations of
                        research groups, DH courses, DHAI participant locations, and upcoming or
                        recent conferences.
                
                The lack of engagement in integrating humanities and digital lead to many
                    challenges in infrastructure which impedes leveraging computational resources
                    and techniques for DH research practice in India. Hence, the questions we ask:
                    what are the specific challenges of infrastructure? and how do that affect DH
                    research practice in India? We endeavor to answer these questions along with a
                    case study which includes a brief survey and a few interviewsThe survey
                        was conducted through online platform SurveyMonkey. We began it in 16
                        January and was open to the participants till 30 January 2019. The
                        interviews were also collected in the same period mainly through telephone
                        and emails. conducted for our paper from academic and non-academic
                    organizations, and individual DH scholars respectively DHAI and CIS, DH group at
                    IIT Gandhinagar and few individual scholars and faculties in various
                    universities from different parts of India. For the survey, we shared our
                    questions with 55 DH scholars and faculties from 25 academic institutions
                    including public and private universities from different parts of the country.
                    The responses were relatively low, and we have received 17 responses to the
                    survey (See Appendix 1). This paper aims to detail both the challenges and
                    opportunities of the institutionalization of the Indian DH community. In the
                    following sections, we will examine the critical issues and challenges in
                    infrastructure such as the lack of physical space, DH pedagogy, digital tools
                    and software, institution and government and support which hinder DH research
                    practice in India. We will also discuss the interviews and survey report to
                    substantiate our arguments and finally, we will present the conclusion of this
                    article.
            

                The Challenges in Infrastructure
                What is infrastructure? Infrastructure provides more effective technical systems
                    and services, for instance, from road to electricity, train, telephone and
                    Internet and so on. The characteristics of infrastructure are to enable,
                    facilitate, organize, support and manage any given system 
                    
                    . Such infrastructure is the backbone of any
                    organization. It is also apposite to the infrastructure of DH. Many scholars
                    have been discussed the term infrastructure for DH (e.g. ; ; ; ; . There are few terms
                    such as real infrastructure, research infrastructure, academic infrastructure
                    and cyberinfrastructure are used to refer to the necessities of DH structure.
                    These terms employed to discuss various components which include from digital
                    libraries to digital artefact, data organization, digital tools, publication,
                    digital pedagogy, digital literacy, data management etc. In his book Big Digital Imagining: a Meeting Place for the Humanities and
                        the Digital Humanities, Patrik Svensson discourses the various
                    components of humanities and digital humanities infrastructure which he draws
                    from his experience in various DH projects as a director of HUMlab Umeå
                    University. He says, 
                        It is not possible to imagine digital humanities — or
                            any kind of humanities — without infrastructure. However, most of the
                            humanities may not think of itself in terms of infrastructure, and the
                            digital humanities must engage with infrastructure not just where doing
                            so may come most naturally, such as language technology and archaeology,
                            but wherever there is a need. Engagement is required not just in terms
                            of building and using infrastructure but also in terms of
                            conceptualizing and critiquing infrastructure.
                His observation on the concept and critique of building the infrastructure for DH
                    is applicable to the Indian context. In India, as we have seen in the
                    introduction, the rise in the digital initiatives is an impetus for Indian DH
                    scholars to engage in knowledge practices and take part in the global context.
                    Nonetheless, the local exigencies of conceptualizing and
                        critiquing infrastructure of humanities encumber digital research
                    practices . For instance, if a scholar is
                    interested in analyzing the data from the open-access archive through
                    computational methods, he/she requires digital tools and software, training and
                    finally a platform for publishing his/her outcome. Or if a scholar is interested
                    in digitizing and archiving some historical document online, he/she requires a
                    workspace (DH lab), computational skills, digital machine for scanning the
                    documents, knowledge in organizing the data etc. In some cases, if DH scholar
                    collaborates with a computer specialist for an archival project — he/she
                    requires the basic knowledge of how the interfaces of digital intricacies work
                    in the archive and how to maintain the archive for its sustainability. These
                    paradigms demonstrate that [i]nfrastructural systems are
                        not and have never been one thing and the multifaceted
                    infrastructures are indispensable for a holistic approach to digital research
                    practices . It also conveys how the
                    material and non-material infrastructures shape the outcome and how the
                    deficiency in one will affect the other one.
                DH scholars, in general, should have facilities of various components such as DH
                    lab, digital infrastructure, digital pedagogy, funding and institutional
                    support. The below chart illustrates such kind of a global perceptive of
                    components that build DH infrastructure which creates a conducive DH research
                    environment for scholars (See Figure 2). In this paper, we will argue how the
                    dearth of these facilities affects the establishment of DH in the Indian
                    humanities spectrum.
                
                    Components of DH infrastructure
                    Chart showing five circles, with a pentagon in the center labeled
                            DH Research. Each cicrcle shows a component of DH
                        infrastructure (DH Lab, DH
                            Pedagogy, Digital Infrastructure,
                            Funding and Institutional support, and
                            Communication and Collaboration) and a few elements
                        of each component.
                    
                
            

                DH Lab
                The nature of laboratory as a physical infrastructure of
                    science that usually comprises of various resources of machines, devices,
                    instruments, tools; several activities which include training, research,
                    service; practices such as collaboration and team work-based; methods of
                    experiment, prototyping and tinkering. DH labs rely on the
                        same general principles as laboratories in the sciences, including
                        collaborative work, practice-based and tool-based research, and an emphasis
                        on practicality and innovation
                    . DH lab hence is a place for
                    heterogeneous activities as scholars deploy multiple technologies ranging from
                    programming languages to 3D printing, photogrammetry, digital tools and software
                    to create a new content or to find or to study text or map or archive or images
                    and so on. Such kind of DH environment is minimal, or in other words,
                    non-existent in many Indian universities. A few DH avenues such as Centre for
                    Digital Humanities at Institute of Advanced Studies in English , The Digital Humanities at Presidency University  and a few research groups such as Digital
                    Humanities and Publishing Studies at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Indore
                        , Digital Humanities at Indian Institute of
                    Technology (IIT) Gandhinagar , Digital
                    Humanities and Cultural Informatics at Jadavpur University  and Srishti Institute of Art, Design and
                    Technology  to a certain extent are
                    equipped with digital technologies such as high performing computing, access to
                    various digital databases, workspaces, access to a few digital tools, software
                    and machine, training etc. Unfortunately, other public institutions and
                    universities, where we can locate some DH research practices of text mining,
                    digital archive, GIS, Social Network Analysis and more, lack the basic
                    infrastructures as the existing institutional
                        infrastructure is often inadequate, and mostly outdated
                    .
                During our survey, some of the respondents mentioned about the lack of a physical
                    space and bureaucracy constraints which inhibit their DH research:A physical space or a lab space is important. We need both
                        human resources as well as softwares to sustain DH at our institutes. It is
                        difficult to acquire a space and explain the space and its need to people
                        [T]here are a number of official formalities which one has to do for using a
                        lab or to start some new works in the University
                Nonetheless, there are a few scholars, who are interested in deploying digital
                    technologies for their research, scattered in various state and public
                    universities such as Jawaharlal Nehru University, Bharathiar University, St.
                    Xavier’s College, Victoria College etc. In these institutions, the absence of a
                    number of DH scholars deters the development of the DH research group that would
                    have led to push the bureaucracy in building their own DH space. Though these
                    isolated individual scholars assimilate their computational skills and
                    heuristics for their research through online resources, how do they collaborate
                    or discuss their research with their peer groups? how do they access or use
                    digital tools without much technical support and training? DH center and lab
                    hence, play key isolation reduction role by providing
                        technology; expertise; information about tools, standards, and ongoing
                        projects; as well as introductions to prominent figures in the digital
                        humanities community who can serve as guides and mentors
                    .
                
                    The responses to the question of if the participants have DH lab/research
                        group or not
                    Pie chart showing if participants are in a DH lab or group. 65% of
                        responders are not, 23% are in a research group, and 12% are in a DH
                        lab.
                    
                
                
                    The responses to the question of the challenges in setting DH lab
                    Pie chart depicting the challenges of a DH lab. 55% responded money and other resources; 27% responded lack of research scholars; and 18% responded
                            lack of infrastructure. 
                    
                
                We asked in our survey whether the participants have DH center/ lab/research
                    group at their institutions. Very few responded that they have DH lab (12%) and
                    research group (23%). Most of them (65%) wrote that they have neither lab/center
                    nor research group (see Figure 3). Then, we asked about the challenges in
                    building the DH space in their institutes. Not surprisingly, the majority of the
                    participants (55%) responded that money and other resources (human and
                    technological resources) are the primary challenges in setting up the DH
                    environment in their institute. 27% respondents stated that the lack of research
                    scholars and 18% said the lack of infrastructure (see Figure 4). Besides the
                    dearth of money, infrastructure and research scholars, there are other
                    overarching components such as the inadequacy of DH programmes, courses and
                    course materials, experts and training that prevent building DH center/lab in
                    the public institutions. These human and non-human sources are fundamental to
                    produce mass DH scholars who will later then develop DH centers, labs and DH
                    scholarship by seeking institutions’ support and funds.
            

                Digital Humanities Pedagogy
                The few universities and colleges such as Jadavpur University, Koti Women’s
                    College, Srishti Institute of Arts and Design and Technology offer Post Graduate
                    diploma, Bachelor and Master-level programmes in DH. Other pioneer institutions
                    such as Presidency University, Bharathiar University, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT
                    Delhi, FLAME University, Delhi University and Aligarh Muslim University offer
                    courses on DH. DHPSR at IIT Indore is exploring initating a
                        dual MS (Research) + PhD programme in Digital Humanities which is still in
                        the works and hopefully will commence soon and IIT Jodhpur recently
                        has plunged headlong and instituted a full-fledged PhD
                        programme in Digital Humanities
                    . These initiatives of premier institutions offer the
                    hope for establishing DH in India.
                We conducted a survey of more than 50 public university programmes and their
                    curricula for one of our upcoming essays . We found
                    that DH as a programme and course is few (which are from the above-mentioned
                    institutions) but some cross programmes aligned with Computer Science such as History-Economics-Computer Application and
                    History-Political Science-Computers Application etc. are more in number.
                    Computer Application as an appendix of various disciplines
                    implies that the investment in leveraging computer knowledge system for the
                    disciplines of humanities to ensure the employment opportunities in the digital
                    era and to meet the global demand. Given this discourse of humanities
                    programmes, the Vision 2020 report by the Planning
                    Committee embraces the plan to deploy Information Technology (IT) to improve the
                    sectors of employment, education, infrastructure and
                        governance
                    . Subsequently, several other government initiatives
                    such as National Mission in Education and Information and Communication
                    Technologies (NMEICT), National Commission for Higher Education and Research
                    (NCHER), National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL) and National
                    Knowledge Network (NKN) reinforce the access of higher education to the
                        last-mile through the digital infrastructure such as
                    distance education, video lectures, virtual academy and leveraging ICT for
                    teaching and learning processes . As a consequence of
                    these digital enterprises, Humanities and Social Sciences have experienced
                    impressive growth over the past several years in terms of its integration with
                    digital technologies for accessing, learning and teaching. For instance, NPTEL
                    provides 38 online courses for Humanities and Social sciences which are taught
                    by IIT professors  Also, the digital repository and
                    digital library respectively Shodhganga and National Digital Library (NDL) offer
                    resources for the scholarly community through open access system. However, the
                    humanities-based critical inquiry through deploying digital tools, software,
                    methodologies and theories and incorporating learning goals which focus on intermediate-to-advanced integration of
                        methodologies-such as text encoding analysis and topic modeling, data
                        visualization, and geospatial analysis
                     and so on is absent in the curricula of
                    the academic universities (except in few institutions as mentioned above). While
                    there is an evidence of engagement with digital technologies for higher
                    education and digital pedagogy, it is often unaware and unwilling to extend that
                    in the critical realm of inquiry and investigation of humanities.
                Nevertheless, we had the opportunity to meet a few humanities faculties, during
                    various workshops and conferencesDigital Humanities in India Workshop,
                        11and 12 April 2018 at New Delhi (http://wp.lancs.ac.uk/dhindia/events-2/?fbclid=IwAR1I3wC2NmuaHmgLQAI2cHNbaHWjboLEZybv-vXbiC8b4rTZkQz3DTK6Hn8)
                        and DHAI Inaugural Conference,1 and 2 June at IIM Indore. pertained
                    to DH, have manifested a particular interest in teaching digital tools and
                    techniques to enrich the learning process and educate future DH scholars. It
                    depicts the significant interest among the faculties and scholars towards DH in
                    India. Nonetheless, DH faculties Saleem Mir at the Cluster Innovation Centre,
                    University of Delhi and Sharmistha Chatterjee at the University of Calcutta and
                    Arnapurna Rath at IIT Gandhinagar bring our attention to the different problems
                    such as logistic constraints, no academia training, insufficient course
                    materials, fast changing digital tools, lack of access to digital tools and
                    software, lack of teamwork and more. Mir: It was in 2013
                        that we, here at CIC, realised the importance of the field of DH. So one
                        paper An Introduction to DH was introduced at
                        UG level while a degree course M.A. in Digital
                            Humanities and Culture Studies was proposed. This master's
                        programme is already passed by the University of Delhi but due to logistic
                        and infrastructural constraints this course has not yet
                        materialised...Teaching DH has been a challenge for me as I don't have any
                        formal education/training in it. But students’ response has been very
                        encouraging and they like the practical part of the course where they are
                        exposed to some open source softwares like voyant, QGIS, Gephi, Ngram and
                        some other text analytics tools. The theoretical debates also generate a lot
                        of interest amongst our students. But the problems that students as well as
                        teachers face in the course are mainly related to the availability of course
                        material and fast changing digital tools.
                    Chatterjee: In the absence of a properly planned module, its
                        difficult for the students to grasp the basics of DH and how the study
                        benefits research on Arts, Heritage and Culture. Having no infrastructure it
                        becomes tough to demonstrate the softwares and their specific usages that
                        restrict the study only to the theoretical level rather than practical
                        applications. I believe every University and Department should have an
                        introductory course on DH, if not a specific module...The other constraint
                        is getting trained professionals in the team for planning and
                        execution.
                    Rath: It is difficult for students to orient themselves to
                        the digital studies as a new area of research. The other aspects is that
                        when comes to technological support, for example the data visualization
                        tools on mapping are not always accessible and also people are not
                        completely aware of digital tools. We can guide students to identifying
                        their research data and offer research ideas but when comes to realizing in
                        the form of concrete project of website within the institute there might be
                        a bit of a challenge in terms of handling these tools and data — we do check
                        external support to host our projects.
                What we can observe from their interviews is that the insufficient
                    infrastructure, as mentioned above, precludes the application of digital tools
                    and software for scholarly practice. As Mir mentions, students can learn some
                    open source tools, which do not require much programming skills and apply for
                    their work. But, in some cases such as the critical inquiry of the text through
                    an algorithm or developing digital archive, they seek help from the external
                    support as Rath mentioned above. However, this is not possible for all other
                    state and central university faculties/scholars as they do not have the
                    facilities of funding, services and support for their research from their
                    departments and institutions.
                Another important concern is the lack of technical proficiency of current DH
                    scholars who directly come from the traditional humanities. In the inaugural
                    conference of DHAI, the panels presented diverse DH projects such as digital
                    infrastructure, pedagogy, scholarly publishing, and archive etc. but just very
                    few presentations on the digital tool and text mining. Does this mean that the
                    current Indian DH scholars are disinterested in text mining? Nothing could be
                    further from the truth, this comes not from disinterestedness but the lack of
                    technical proficiency. These scholars come from traditional humanities with
                    little education on computer applications but very much interested in employing
                    digital technologies and heuristics for their innovative digital research. This
                    gives a little confidence or inclination to understand the
                        impact of the digital on the ways in which their projects can be influenced,
                        indeed cannot otherwise be imagined
                    .
                Furthermore, what is frustrating and exhausting for the current DH scholars and
                    faculties are that they can find very rare platforms for learning digital tools
                    and technologies for their research in country like India which supplies millions of software engineers to the world
                    . At the same time, not all humanities scholars
                    and faculties have fund to attend winter and summer schools, workshops on DH
                    which often occur in the west, for instance, DHSI (http://www.dhsi.org/) etc. In India, a
                    few DH avenues conduct various workshops and winter school on digital tools. The
                    DHPSR group at IIT Indore conducted one-week workshop on Digital Humanities: Tools, Texts, Theories in which R and some
                    online tools such as Voyant were taught . Similarly,
                    CDH Pune conducts winter school on DH every year since 2015 and in the recent
                    workshop which provided training in using Omeka tool for content development
                        . These platforms offer some opportunities to DH
                    scholars and faculties to learn tools and methods for their research.
                    Additionally, self-paced learning becomes very common in the digital era due to
                    the open access system — some scholars, who are active on the Internet, learn
                    many open DH resources of tools and techniquesFor instance, some research
                        scholars use YouTube channels for learning programming languages such as R
                        and Python etc. Also, they can access to some blogs of prominent DH scholar
                        like Matthew Jockers who posted tutorials on text mining in R for literature
                        students (http://www.matthewjockers.net/materials/dh-2014-introduction-to-text-analysis-and-topic-modeling-with-r/).
                        DiRT (https://dirtdirectory.org/) provides information about the
                        digital research tools for various DH research practice.. However,
                    the knowledge in data management and data organization is also equally important
                    as one participant wrote in the survey as setting up a
                        research method garnered to mining and categorising digital data has been a
                        challenge. Correspondingly, during our interviews, some scholars
                    expressed the challenge of know-how” of digital tools and
                    software. Few scholars even end up giving their digital research practice after
                    many attempts due to lack technical competency.
                Research scholar Sagorika Singha at Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi:I realised the usefulness of network analysis tools and SM
                        (Social Media) analytics while working on social media participation. While
                        theoretical engagement and close readings were invariably important, dealing
                        with large data-sets, such tools seemed invaluable. But unfortunately,
                        because of the lack of know-how and this realisation coming in slightly late
                        in the duration of the project, I could not do what I wanted to. But I am
                        open to develop this later, whenever I find myself prepared.
                    Research Scholar Mohanapriya at Bhararhiar University, Coimbatore:In my case, I had a bitter experience. I struggled more often
                        to acquire this technical skill. Due to the lack of technical assistance I
                        engaged more on YouTube channels and textbooks to learn text mining in
                        Python. I got very few technical supports and very less contact with people
                        who have some knowledge about this area of research. Lack of infrastructure
                        and proper training in this programming language made me give up after
                        facing many attempts.
                To overcome this issue of data organization, data management and digital
                    literacy, the curriculum of humanities students has to implement the DH pedagogy
                    and training at graduation level which will give the confidence to the scholars
                    to understand the intricacy behind digital technologies and data harvesting and
                    to implement it in their research practices. Dibyadyuti Roy is one of the
                    co-founders of DHARTI who tells us about the DHARTI’s contribution on DH in
                    India: I would personally like to see the DH curriculum
                        permeate not only into universities but schools and vocational institutes as
                        well. Organizing free-to-attend workshops that allow DH to become accessible
                        for all kinds of audiences would be one goal that I would see for
                        DHARTI. As he says, such local initiatives of free-to-attend or
                    nominal fee workshops, summer and winter schools will be helpful for the current
                    research scholars to improve their technical proficiency. Notwithstanding, the
                    inaccessibility and unavailability of digital tools and software are also
                    significant obstacles that remain unaddressed.
            

                Digital tools and software
                DH conceives text as data — although the concept of data comes from scientific fields such as mathematics, economics, biology,
                        physics, and computer science… [, it] gained a central place in the
                        humanities only with the migration of texts to the web
                    . Digital technologies have a crucial
                    role to archive/analyze/map such kind of data/text in DH. However, for Indian DH
                    scholars, many constraints from the local limit the possibilities of the desired
                    outcome to archive or analyze the data. The deficit in digital technologies for
                    Indian languages is one such limiting factor which affects digital research in
                    Indian languages and literatures as Murray and Hand observe, humanities work in Indic languages has been impeded by the
                        lack of optimized [optimal] character recognition software
                    . There are a few government
                    initiatives such as Technology Development in Indian Languages  and Centre for Development of Advanced Computing ; both attempt to facilitate the basic digital
                    technologies such as [w]ord Processing, Presentation
                        preparation, Spread Sheets preparation, Web Page Surfing & Designing,
                        Messaging etc. in few Indian languages for public use and scholarly
                    activity . Nevertheless, these digital
                    technologies are inadequate for the DH scholars whose research focus on the
                    works in Indian languages. Prashant Bhattacharji, in his article Computer Science in India: A restricted student pool?,
                    quotes Microsoft’s CTO, Craig Mundie’s remark on Indian Computer Engineers as
                        [they] are more into theory, [t]here is no local
                        software and no new applications in Indian languages . As he says, the dearth of digital tools and
                    software in Indian languages is a major limitation that is specific issue of the
                    Global South . The main issue stems from the
                    disciplinary divide of humanities and computer science. Even though some
                    traditional humanities scholars use digital archives and databases, they
                    perceive employing computing for humanities research as more critical and pose
                    epistemological skepticism in the concept of technology and text as data.
                    Furthermore, the inadequacy of fund and the lack of institutional service and
                    support thwart humanities scholar to have access to the payable digital
                    technologies, and competence assistance for the existing free digital tools and
                    software.
            

                Institution and Government Support
                Institutional support, such grants, scholarships, services and support for
                    research, is a key factor to drive local DH research and training.
                    Unfortunately, it is difficult and more challenging to obtain fund and support
                    from the institutes for advancing humanities research in India. When the DH
                    scholars require resources for their research which are similar to the science
                    counterpart such a demand or request is viewed with skepticism by both
                    bureaucracy and departmental administration. In traditional humanities, the idea
                    of DH is still perceived with skepticism. Scholars such as Stanley Fish and
                    Timothy Brennan have also argued that DH becomes applied cousin of foundational
                    humanities ; .
                    Administrations in most universities are not able to comprehend the seemingly
                    contradictory term Digital Humanities. It is easier in
                    autonomous institutions such as IITs and elite private universities than in
                    state or central universities that are already constrained in funding resources.
                    In 2009, Shreesh Chaudhary in an article, India: Science
                        and technology vs the humanities points out the huge funding
                    difference between science and technological institutions (STIs) and humanities
                    and social sciences institutions (HSTs). He says that science and technology
                    institutes are funded by ministries of science and technology, defence, IT and
                    industry. They receive some US$20 million a year for routine expenses, plus
                    millions more from foreign agencies, non-government organizations, foreign
                    governments and international bodies, as well as alumni donations for
                    non-routine expenses . He says, the HSIs receive only crumbs. …While finance is not a problem
                        for the STIs, it is a big problem for the others…The HSIs are starved of
                        funds. They cannot provide even a minimal standard working environment for
                        their academics and neither can they for their students.
                    . Similarly, in their article Money for Nothing: The Disconcerting Future of the Humanities in
                        India published in 2018, Ishani Pant and Kirti Dass say, At one end of the academic spectrum, science-related research
                        endeavors are receiving funds galore; the situation is not quite as rosy at
                        the other end. Humanities scholars in India are unable to catch a break.
                        India is undergoing an academic crisis that threatens researchers of the
                        humanities
                    . Though these articles were published at different
                    period of time; they all emphasize the same issues that humanities and social
                    sciences in India are always already in crisis. In
                    a similar vein, the humanities in Anglo-American countries have been
                    encountering crisis since 1980s in many ways such as budgetary cuts, corporation
                    model or profit model of education, falling enrollments, adjunct faculty system
                    and so on 
                    
                    . The disproportionation in the funding between science
                    and humanities seem common in many countries. Frank Donoghue points out the
                    unequal outside funding for American colleges and universities as, almost all of the federal resources [that] is dedicated to
                        research in the sciences and engineering, the humanities has suffered
                        everywhere
                    . In Britain, if the humanists are unable
                    to show their contribution to economic profitability — their fund will drop and
                    the number of faculties and students also will decline . On the other hand, in India, the
                    allocation of fund for humanities especially for research activities is meager
                    when compared to science and technology institutes. Pant and Dass draw the
                    disparity in the fund allocation to Indian Council of Social Science Research
                    (ICSSR) from 2006 to 2010 — the total grant given to ICSSR
                        was only 2.3% of the amount provided to the Council of Scientific and
                        Industrial Research (CSIR), Of the funds given to ICSSR, only 20% could be
                        used for research purposes, while the rest of the amount was utilised for
                        meeting administrative costs, highlighting the lack of seriousness given to
                        these subjects
                    .
                The disparity in fund for humanities suggests that there must be an inherent issue in the Indian educational system. The
                    first universities in colonial India were established to focus on conducting
                    exams and awarding degrees and they were not designed for research practices
                        . Despite the independence brought many changes
                    in setting up various research-focused higher education institutions, the universities have failed to free themselves from their
                        older legacy of having to produce more and more graduates
                    . On the other hand, Gangopadhyay discusses the
                        educational apartheid which he refers to the glorification of science and the devaluation of studies related to humanities as studying
                    science has many benefits such as a slew of scholarships
                        and grants right from high school levels and he also points out the
                    social pressure on good students to study science . Therefore, the increase number of scholarships
                    for studying science and the social pressure to choose science over the
                    humanities thrust the mainstream fund for research into STEM fields.
                Such disproportion fund and educational apartheid affect the institutional
                    service and support in terms of both human and non-human sources for DH
                    scholars. For instance, some institutions do not even have the basic facilities
                    such as Internet as one of the survey participants mentioned as [w]e don’t have access to basic facilities regularly like the
                        Internet and all. Also, the completion of the project is not the end
                    of the project — it is just the beginning for the users. For example, the
                    scholars require institutes’ support to maintain some dynamic projects such as
                    digital databases and archives which require human resources and digital tools
                    to update, disseminate and maintain the longevity of the data. But these
                    projects are neglected and conceived as a digital product which requires only a
                    digital space in the institute’s web portal. Most of these projects have
                    remained unprocessed and stagnant on the institute’s computer. For instance,
                    Bhasa Bibliography the database project of DHPSR group at IIT Indore was
                    completed collaboratively by DH scholars and computer science undergraduate
                    students. This database will offer access to scholarship in
                        these [Indian] languages and literatures other than English
                    . The humanities scholars have
                    collected the first stage data for three Indian languages and the structure of
                    the database was built with help computer science students. This project is
                    going to be a crowdsource for keep updating the data from other Indian
                    languages. We have another in-house collaborative project is Partition Archive —
                    documenting the cultural artifacts and firsthand experience of partition
                    migrants in Rajasthan. These small projects face some challenges in the form of
                    who will maintain the database? How to secure funding for its
                    sustainability?
                At the same time, there are other substantial issues such as the inadequate
                    knowledge in technical proficiency and lack of guidance prevent DH scholars to
                    write project proposals which enable national and international collaboration.
                    Lack of fund to attend international and national conferences and workshops
                    obstruct developing contacts for collaborative projects. This absence of social
                    interaction for DH scholars nationally and internationally precludes the
                    establishment of DH in India. We also asked the survey participants to state the
                    major challenges in collaborative projects, if any, within and outside their
                    university. 47% respondents mentioned that they have collaborative projects. The
                    significant challenges in collaboration are obtaining fund (35%) and bureaucracy
                    concern (29%). Some participants responded that the lack of technical
                    proficiency (18%) and project management (18%) deter the collaboration both
                    inside and outside their campus (see Figure 5).
                
                    The responses to the question of challenges in the collaboration
                    Pie chart depicting challenges in collaboration. 35% of respondants
                        said obtaining funds; 29% responded bureaucracy concerns; 18% said project
                        managements; and 18% of respondants said technical proficiency.
                    
                
                Nevertheless, we can note a few successful collaborative major projects such as
                    the Scottish Cemetery Project (http://scotscemeteryarchivekolkata.com/) at Presidency University in
                    collaboration with University of St. Andrews, Scotland, Two Centuries of Indian
                    Print project (https://www.bl.uk/projects/two-centuries-of-indian-print) by British
                    Library, the School of Cultural Texts and Records (SCTR) of Jadavpur University,
                    Srishti Institute of Art, Design and Technology, and the Library at SOAS
                    University of London, DIG_IN: Digital Humanities Education Initiative
                    Finland-India. Curriculum Development and Designing an e-Learning Module is a
                    collaborative project of University of Helsinki, Aalto University, and Srishti
                    Institute of Art, Design and Technology, and the recent project A Digital
                    Narratology of Technology as Literary Actors and Artefacts of Settings in Indian
                    English Novels at IIT Indore in collaboration with Lancaster University
                        etcSPARC sponserd collaborative projects: https://sparc.iitkgp.ac.in/apProposal_list.php.
                Besides these institutes level projects, the government grants schemes such as
                    IMPRINT, IMPRESS and SPARC called for project proposals in DH. In 2016, IMPRINT
                    identified DH as a domain for preserving heritage in the country such as
                    languages, dialects, art forms, architectural structures, social and ethnic
                    practices ; however, there is no data yet regarding
                    the number of projects sanctioned through this scheme. The aim of the recent
                    organization SPARC is to improve the research ecosystem of Indian higher
                    educational institutions by enabling the collaborations between Indian
                    institutions and the best institutions in the world. In their recent call for
                    project proposals, DH is included under the category of Emergent Areas of Impact
                    . They approved 13 DH projects of the Indian
                    institutes for funding and the projects are in collaboration with international
                    institutes. Recently, the southern state government Kerla announced an upcoming
                    digital university which will include a School of Digital Humanitieshttps://www.iiitmk.ac.in/iiitm-k-upgraded-to-a-digital-university/.
                    These state and central government’s initiatives are important milestones in
                    instituting DH in India.
                Similarly, the private organizations such as Centre for Internet Society  and Sir Ratan Tata TrustCIS is one of the sponsors
                        of DHARTI conference. Similarly, Granth South Asia project [http://granthsouthasia.in/] is
                        supported by Sir Ratan Tata Trust and it is a collaborative project of
                        School of Cultural Texts and Records, Jadavupur University and British
                        Library UK. underpin DH initiatives in India. Sneha, programme
                    manager of the researchers at work programme at the CIS, tells us that their
                    direct engagement with DH in India has largely begun through the report of
                    mapping DH published in 2016 and also their work on policy (accessibility,
                    intellectual property rights, internet governance and so on) has informed the
                    landscape of internet studies in India. As they also have
                    been part of DHARTI, we asked her to share more about the contribution of CIS in
                    the development of DH in India. Sneha: We have had the
                        opportunity to engage with developing conversations and practices around DH,
                        and related areas such as GLAM and digital pedagogies. Some examples include
                        a project with the National Audio-Visual Cultural Archive (IGNCA) on IPR and
                        digitization best practices, contribution to Indian and international
                        publications and conversations with organisations (academic and others) on
                        questions of access, infrastructures, language etc. We have been part of
                        efforts in initiating and formalizing the Digital Humanities Alliance of
                        India and continue to support its work in bringing together researchers and
                        practitioners interested in DH, and in outlining areas for further
                        collaboration.
                All these key events and bodies hopefully demonstrate the optimistic vision of DH
                    in India. Nonetheless, there has been the dearth of investment in humanities
                    department from both government and institutions in terms of advancing local
                    necessities and implementing innovative things such as assemblage of
                    technologies, workspace, DH pedagogy and scholarship, scholarly publishing
                    platform, grant to attend conferences and services and support for DH research.
                    These significant deficiencies impede DH studies/research in Indian academic
                    sphere. However, DH scholars in India typically resolve some of the problems
                    such as DH methods and some technical assistance by seeking help from outside
                    their campus. Also, they are eager to collaborate with other institutions to
                    conduct DH workshop etc. as one of the participants stated below. For these
                    scholars, [n]ot all experiments succeed as originally
                        imagined but they recognize the value of
                        failure in the pursuit of innovation
                    . [W]e have been seeking
                        out people, workshop and conferences to widen our own knowledge base.
                        Besides our faculty is supportive and curious about the research
                        opportunities that DH can bring into our kind of work. We have been thinking
                        about collaborations with outside institutions to organise workshop so that
                        this can work as an introduction of what DH is.
            

                Conclusion
                All of these above including our discussion, interviews and surveys with various
                    stakeholders of DH in India lead us to some of the following conclusions. DH as
                    an interdisciplinary field of research practice is invisible/hidden
                    under the rubric of humanities but it continuous to be visible/site
                    through the research practices and projects of these DH scholars and faculties
                    in many private and public universities. The gradual increase in courses,
                    conferences and workshops gives us a scope of DH in India as an emerging field
                    and we can anticipate many interesting programmes and projects in future. That
                    is good news. The bad news is that our university ecosystem and administrative
                    mechanism are slow to respond to these intellectual and infrastructure
                    challenges. It, therefore, behooves all of us who are invested in pushing the
                    boundaries of research pedagogy and learning in the humanities to emphasize and
                    facilitate the supporting role of DH within the larger rubric of humanities.
                    Those efforts may open avenues for critical inquiry to continue to fulfill our
                    mandate as humanities scholars and researchers in a democratic nation state.
            

                Acknowledgements
                Survey questions:
                
                    Do you have DH lab/DH center/research group at your institute? 1. DH lab
                        2. DH center 3. DH research group 4. Others (please specify)
                    What are some of the challenges of setting up the lab/center/group in your
                        institute? 1. Money and other resources 2. Infrastructure 3. Lack of
                        research scholars 4. Others (please specify)
                    What are the deficiencies of physical and virtual infrastructures at your
                        institute that impede your research practices/projects/teaching?
                    Do you have collaborated projects with your colleagues inside university
                        and/or outside university? 1.Yes 2. No 
                    If yes, what are some of the challenges of collaboration? 1. Bureaucracy
                        concern 2. Project management 3. Funding issues 4. Others (please specify)
                    
                
                The authors would like to thank the interviewees Dibydyuti Roy, P.P Sneha,
                    Arnapurna Rath, Saleem Mir, Sharmistha Chatterjee, Sagorika Singha and
                    Mohanapriya and all the survey participants for their enthusiastic
                    participation, sharing their experiences, inspiring discussions and support for
                    this paper.
            
