Title:  The Stylometry of Film Dialogue: Pros and
               Pitfalls
Volume:  014
Issue:  4
Date:  20 December 2020
Abstract:  
            
            We examine film dialogue with quantitative textual analysis (stylometry, sentiment
               analysis, distant reading). Working with transcribed dialogue in almost 300
               productions, we explore the complex way in which most-frequent-words-based stylometry
               and lexicon-based sentiment analysis produce patterns of similarity and difference
               between screenwriters and/or a priori IMDB-defined genres. In fact, some of our
               results show that counting and comparing very frequent word lists reveals further
               similarities: of theme, implied audience, stylistic patternings. The results are
               encouraging enough to suggest that such quantitative approach to film dialogue may
               become a welcome addition to the arsenal of film studies methodology. 
         
Full Body Text: 

            Film dialogue
            Although dialogue has been integral to film structure since the introduction of sound
               in the 1920s and used in silent film intertitles at least since 1904 
               , it has garnered relatively little attention from film
               scholars. Stylistic immaturity and technical imperfections of the first talkies made
               early theorists, such as Rudolf Arnheim, Sergei Eisenstein or Siegfried Krakauer
               bemoan the loss of artistry inherent to silent films  and encouraged others to describe the compositional complexity of the
               new invention in contrast to its silent, though hardly wordless, predecessor . Still, as Sarah Kozloff argues in her
               ground-breaking monograph Overhearing Film Dialogue
               (2000), Western film scholarship has long been marked by  verbo-immunity or
               even verbophobia in its approach to cinematic art, privileging the visual over
               the auditory and the non-verbal over the verbal: Although
                     what the characters say, how they actually say it, and how the dialogue is
                     integrated with the rest of the cinematic techniques are crucial to our
                     experience and understanding of every film since the coming of sound, for the
                     most part analysts incorporate the information provided by a film’s dialogue
                     and overlook the dialogue as signifier. Canonical textbooks on film aesthetics
                     devote pages and pages to editing and cinematography but rarely mention
                     dialogue. Visual analysis requires mastery of a recondite vocabulary and
                     trained attentiveness; dialogue has been perceived as too transparent, too
                     simple to need study
                  
            This apparent disregard may have stemmed from a number of reasons, one of them being
               a deeply-grounded belief in the autonomy of various art forms. Scholars intent on
               presenting film as primarily a visual medium deemed dialogue negligible, because they
               considered it too closely related to other forms of expression, such as stage drama
               or prose-writing and hence unspecific to cinema .
               Film talk, however, differs considerably from verbal exchanges intended for the page
               or for the stage, as it is always affected by performers’ interpretive choices and
               the simultaneous signification of
                  camerawork/mise-en-scene/editing
               . It is an integral element of fiction film and,
               as Sarah Kozloff argues, it performs unique narrative functions: (1) it anchors the
               diegesis and the characters, (2) it explains causal links between events presented
               onscreen, (3) it enacts narrative events, such as professing feelings, setting up
               deadlines or passing sentences, (4) it reveals the characters’ personalities, (5) it
               controls the viewers’ emotional and axiological reactions and (6) it helps create the
               impression of realism. It also plays an important aesthetic role, exploiting the
               artistic potential of language, conveying ideological messages and giving stars an
               opportunity to show off their skills . Since
               the publication of Kozloff’s book a number of film scholars have pursued her line of
               study, tracing the evolution of screenwriting styles in America, emphasizing the
               requirements of particular genres (e.g. screwball comedy, science fiction, gangster
               film, western), investigating the idiom of selected auteurs (Cassavetes, Hawks,
               Welles, Sturges) and typical verbal representations of different social groups. The
               most important contribution to the field has been arguably the collected volume
                  Film Dialogue edited by Jeff Jaeckle (2013). 
            Telecinematic dialogue has also received in-depth attention from linguists working
               within the fields of stylistics, pragmatics, sociolinguistics and discourse analysis
               (e.g. Bobrowski 2015; Piazza 2011; Piazza 2011a; Richardson 2010), as well as audiovisual
               translation experts interested in different techniques, strategies and modes of
               language transfer. Most research has been driven by qualitative approaches, yet
               quantitative measures have also been adopted by scholars using monolingual, as well
               as multilingual and multimedia corpora to investigate the relationship of scripted
               speech to real-life conversation, to examine the stylistics of television dialogue
               and the consistency of character identity revealed through language (e.g. Bednarek 2010; 2011; 2018; Quaglio 2009; Zago 2016; Zago 2018), to explore verbal discourse in different film
               genres , to analyze the sociolinguistic and
               pragmatic idiosyncrasies of interlingual dubbing (e.g. Freddi 2009; Freddi 2013) and its
               relationship to spontaneous speech (e.g. Heiss 2005;
                  Romero Fresco 2009) or to study interlingual
               translation in the visual context (e.g. Valentini
                  2006; 2008; 2009).For an overview of corpus research into audiovisual
                  translation, see Baños-Piñero 2013. For an
                  overview of research into scripted speech, see Bednarek 2018. 
            
            What many of these approaches demonstrate is that film and television genres are
               characterized by distinctive language patterns; dialogues in screwball comedy,
               melodrama, western, sitcom or police procedural are endowed with genre-specific
               functions and genre-specific stylistic, pragmatic and rhetorical features (such as
               the literary stylization of classic novel adaptations, the use of slang and jargon in
               gangster films or the omnipresence of techno-bubble in science fiction). As Kozloff
               explains: Partially, they [these verbal genre conventions]
                     are motivated by the subject matter. Screenwriters are always concerned that
                     dialogue be appropriate to characters’ social backgrounds, and thus
                        realistic (...). Partially, films are clearly copying preexisting
                     expectations created by other forms of representation (...). And partially, I
                     believe, dialogue patterns are related to the underlying gender dynamics of
                     each genre: whether the genre is primarily addressed to male or female viewers
                     and how each genre treats its male and female characters are crucial factors in
                     its use of language.
                   What some of the qualitative analyses
               (e.g. Jaeckle 2013; Miławska-Ratajczak 2019) also show is famous
               writer-directors' signature verbal style. All these insights have led us to believe
               that these gene- and auteur - specific verbal patterns, described by
               scholars and noticed by average viewers, may be further explored by stylometric
               measures. 
         

            Research objectives
            In our research, we decided to adopt a variety of procedures, using quantitative
               textual analysis tools derived from stylometry (a.k.a. computational stylistics) and
               from automated sentiment analysis, a significant subdiscipline of text mining. As
               these approaches rely on computational work, they allow to analyze large sets of
               texts in ways similar to distant reading Moretti 2007).
               Used on diverse corpora of literary and non-literary texts, they have already proven
               helpful in plagiarism detection, authorship attribution, as well as genre- and
               diachrony research, as will be explained below. Their application to film dialogue,
               however, has so far been limited 
               
               
               
               
               
                and it certainly merits further attention for a nuber of
               reasons. Firstly, stylometric analysis can complement other advancements in the realm
               of cinemetrics 
                by bringing neglected cinematic speech to film scholars’
               attention. Secondly, it provides yet another level of potential comparison between
               film dialogue and other dialogic genres, stage drama in particular. Both theatre and
               screen plays combine literary and performative dimensions. Stage drama has already
               been analyzed in its literary dimension by qualitative and quantitative means, with
               obvious precedence to, often, heated arguments on Shakespearean authorship
               attribution (to name but a few of the latest: Vickers
                  2002; Craig and Kinney 2009; Vickers 2011, Rudman
                  2016). Equally obviously, this leaves the space open for the stylometry of
               filmic speech. Thirdly, stylometry and automated sentiment analysis can open new
               avenues for qualitative research, revealing patterns overlooked
                  in close reading
               . That is why in our research we intended to test
               the usefulness of the mentioned tools in identifying the potential stylometric
               similarities or differences between film fictional dialogues, revealing regularities
               typical of a given genre, theme, historical context, writer, director- and/ or film
               cycle. In our previous studies, we focused exclusively on historical films and
               literary adaptations, combining quantitative stylometric with qualitative stylistic
               and pragmalinguistic analysis of filmic speech (cf. Hołobut 2017b). This time, we collected a multigeneric corpus of
               transcribed dialogue lists to 278 Anglophone productions, spanning over eighty-four
               years of cinematic art (for a complete list of productions included, see Appendix 1), running a pilot quantitative analysis, to
               be potentially elaborated by qualitative means.These were edited intralingual
                  subtitles, randomly checked with the screen version for accuracy. It goes without
                  saying that intralingual subtitles may occasionally involve the simplification of
                  screen exchanges to match an average reading speed. As all forms of transcription
                  of scripted speech back into writing, it also requires the sanitation of
                  overlapping fragments and intrusive repetitions. However, the dialogue lists we
                  randomly compared with complete audiovisual material revealed only minimal traces
                  of condensation, quite insignificant for the procedures we applied and the methods
                  used are insensitive to the edition techniques usually used to condense dialogues
                  in captions (such as grammatical tense revision).  We labelled each
               dialogue list with the name of the screenwriter and the date of release and divided
               them into six rough generic/thematic categories following IMDb listings: chick flick,
               vampire, superhero (as distinguished by the dominant theme); romance, thriller,
               action (as distinguished by the dominant genre). This division is admittedly
               provisory and tentative for several reasons:
            
               film genres are in themselves fuzzy categories, as suggested by film scholars
                  and experts in media semiotics (cf. Chandler
                     1997; Altman 1999; Grant 2003; Bondebjerg
                     2015);
               most productions included in the corpus evade easy categorization, being best
                  ascribed to a number of major film genres simultaneously and fitting better more
                  precise sub-generic distinctions (for example, IMDb classifies many superhero
                  films as action/adventure/fantasy or action/adventure/science-fiction hybrids, yet
                  some productions, such as Deadpool or  Thor: Ragnarok have an additional comedic twist, while
                  others, like Christopher Nolan’s visions of Batman,
                  qualify as thriller/crime);
               thematic groupings obviously intersect with major generic ones; for example,
                  some vampire films reveal horror and some – dominant romance features, as do a
                  number of releases stereotypically categorized by IMDb viewers as “chick flicks”,
                  although many of the latter belong to the sub-genre of romantic comedy; that is
                  why we have decided to keep this dubious appellation;
               some productions included in the corpus conform better to auteur
                  than genre classifications imposed on them, hence their status may be considered
                  dubious.
            
            Still, we did not consider these complexities and inconsistencies in categorization
               as detrimental to our stylometric analysis. On the contrary, we hoped that by
               inspecting in detail the correlations between particular film scripts, we may detect
               certain genre-, theme-, diachrony- or author-related regularities which would allow
               us to revise or reshuffle the adopted categories. We therefore subjected the corpus
               to a number of quantitative procedures, the origin and methodology of which will be
               explained below.
         

            Introducing stylometry and sentiment analysis.
            Quantitative research on literary language has been developing at least since John
               Burrows studied character idiolects in Jane Austen, showing that her major characters
               with similar functions in different novels tend to use the most common words of their
               lexicon in similar ways (Burrows 1989). This was an early application of multivariate
               analysis of word frequencies that had already been around since Mosteller and Wallace
               showed that authors differ in this respect strongly enough to allow attribution
               (1964). We now know that minute differences in individual usage of very frequent and
               seemingly very insignificant words such as the,
               a,
               in,
               and,
               such  and as – when treated with appropriate statistical tools – are
               enough to tell authors apart; or, more precisely, to point out which of several
               candidate writers is the real author of an anonymous text. These authorship
               attribution methods, sometimes still called non-standard authorship attribution
               methods, have in fact become a standard approach whenever the hand that held the pen
               (or that tapped on the keyboard) is obscured for any reason: plagiarism, publishers’
               promotional policy or mere authorial whims. They have been recently used to check
               that Harper Lee did in fact write both To Kill a Mockingbird
               and Go Set a Watchman
               ; that Robert Galbraith and J.K. Rowling are one and the
               same person ; and that Elena Ferrante, the bestselling yet
               non-existent Italian woman, writes suspiciously like the real Italian man, Domenico
               Starnone .
            But many other stylometric experiments in method have also shown that what
               stylometrists call the authorial signal (meaning nothing more, in fact, than the
               authors’ individual idiosyncrasies in word usage that can be made evident through
               statistics) is just one of the classifications that can be made on any sets of texts.
               Not only texts by the same authors are similar in this respect. On another level,
               texts written by authors writing over several literary periods tend to exhibit a
               chronological evolution
               
               , and while this can be easily explained by simple
               evolution of language over centuries, it is also a fact that many writers (including
               Shakespeare, Dickens, James and Conrad) exhibit a chronological progression within
               their own oeuvre
               
               . Works of the same writer in two different genres
               exhibit different stylometric traits; this has already been shown for Shakespeare and
               Molière 
               ; what is more, genre can be a factor in large-scale
               comparisons of authorial word usage . Interestingly,
               there is much less of this stylometric universal in translation: some
               translators seem to exhibit their own and stable stylometry while others have
               a different word usage for each author they translate ,
               and translations in a large set tend to group more often by their original authors
               than by translators ; nevertheless, traces of translators
               can be traced within a collaborative work . 
            That such results are stable, reproducible and robust in terms of statistics is
               obviously due to the fact that the features of text used for counting are very simple
               and, at the same time, very numerous. The first hundred most frequent word-types in
               any collection of texts (which usually account for as much as a half of every text)
               contains little more than various function words; meaningful words – the usual
               stuff of literary study – are still a minority in the first thousand. This could
               suggest that stylometry based on most frequent word counts misses the crucial element
               of literary texts, meaning, or what, and focuses on style, or
                  how; but, on the one hand, word counts alone are hardly style, and,
               on the other, Hough insisted that style is just an aspect of
                  meaning
               . Attempts to bridge the gap between stylistics and
               stylometry continue (c.f. Hermann 2015), but there
               is still much work to do; one explanation of the power of the most frequent words is
               that they do not function as discrete entities. Since they gain
                  their full meaning only through the different sorts of relationship they form with
                  each other, they can be seen as markers of those relationships and, accordingly,
                  of everything that those relationships entail
               . 
            The reason why most-frequent-word stylometry, and not some other types of textual
               analysis, has been such a powerful newcomer into (digital) literary studies is
               perhaps just one of the many examples that computer-based methods – especially
               unsupervised ones – are notoriously fallible when dealing with the semantics of the
               literary text. This is very visible in the tribulations of sentiment analysis, which
               has been a focus of much quantitative textual research at least since Stone et al.
               made it one of the objects of their study . It must be said
               that while sentiment analysis can be of use, and is often used, in large-scale
               browsing of non-literary texts and/or to gauge the overall mood of large sections of
               the Internet, news etc., its application to artistic writing is somewhat more
               problematic due to the features of the literary text that define it as literary.
               Ambiguity, irony, metaphor or even simple negation all cause problems in
               disambiguating the sentiment/emotional value of words and phrases. 
            Despite this problem, the presence of some interest in sentiment in literature can be
               attested to by the numerous software packages that try to make it possible. One of
               the most recent, Jockers’s syuzhet package 
               for R , employs a number of lexicons of sentiment-related
               terms to trace curves of negative and positive emotions in single novels, associating
               lexical items found in individual texts to emotive categories. Among these, the NRC
               Word-Emotion Association Lexicon  has already been used
               to trace the evolution of sentiment across larger literary corpora and follows
               Plutchik’s concept of eight basic emotions (anger,
               disgust, fear, sadness and anticipation, joy, surprise, trust; ; alternatively, it also identifies two sentiments, respectively: negative and positive . A similar approach has been adopted by Acerbi et al. for
               English novels of the 20th century, who observed a general decrease, with time, of
               terms of emotion by tracing the evolution of terms related to some general categories
               such as fear or joy . An even more extensive chronological
               study performed on three hundred years of English and Polish fiction showed a steady
               growth of negative sentiments and negative emotions with
               time . 
            The main drawback sentiment analysis has is that most of the readily-available
               methods use a lexicon approach, where individual words are assigned a
               sentiment/emotion value. The NRC Word-Emotion Association Lexicon, which we used
               here, was a major crowdsourcing venture using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, where
               numerous users contributed to produce a statistics-based system of evaluating and
               quantifying emotion; yet even this tool may cause a variety of problems. Consider the
               following examples from the NRC Lexicon (Table 1):
            
               Example of emotional valence/sentiment values in the NRC Lexicon. Grey
                  background applied for items discussed in the text.
               
                  emotion/sentiment
                  baboon
                  dentistry
                  polish
               
               
                  anger
                  0
                  0
                  0
               
               
                  anticipation
                  0
                  0
                  0
               
               
                  disgust
                  1
                  0
                  0
               
               
                  fear
                  0
                  1
                  0
               
               
                  joy
                  0
                  0
                  0
               
               
                  sadness
                  0
                  0
                  0
               
               
                  surprise
                  0
                  0
                  0
               
               
                  trust
                  0
                  0
                  0
               
               
                  negative
                  1
                  0
                  0
               
               
                  positive
                  0
                  0
                  1
               
            
            The baboon example shows how a lexical item is assigned a value of
                  disgust and negative despite the fact that, in a text about
               theriology or even Africa, these associations should be made perfectly neutral; the
               Lexicon also seems to ignore the fact that presence of baboons may just as plausibly
               trigger fear, or that one may thus address a human being in anger as
               well as in disgust. The example of dentistry seems to take into
               consideration the most stereotypical reaction to that noble profession; more
               importantly, the choice of this very rare word and the absence, in the Lexicon, of
               the much more frequent word dentist is an illustration of the numerous issues
               of representativeness in this approach. The final example, that of polish,
               shows an even more mechanical problem and the extent to which mere linguistic
               ambiguity may be a distorting factor: this word, when capitalized, may well require a
               very different sentiment/emotion value. More generally, distribution of emotions and
               sentiments within the literary text is uneven; smoothing any results may be risky, as
               evidenced by the difficulties with this problem in the syuzhet package
               (cf. Swafford 2015, Jockers 2017).
            Despite these pitfalls, our attempt to measure sentiment and emotion in film dialogue
               seems worthwhile. After all, while the lexicon-based method may be wrong at times, it
               is important that it is wrong in a consistent way. Much as the tool is imprecise,
               there is no reason to suppose different texts will be treated in any different way.
            
         

            Methods
            For most-frequent-word-based stylometric analysis, the texts were treated with the
               well-established Delta procedure  implemented in the
                  stylo package for R , the statistical
               programming environment . The entire ensemble of texts in
               electronic form serves as input for stylo, which then tokenizes the text
               (separates it into words). The word tokens are then counted in the whole set to
               produce a descending frequency list of word-types, so that the 100 or more of these
               may be identified. A given number of those very frequent words (usually, from 100 to
               1000) is used as the features of the analysis: their frequency is now counted in each
               individual text to create a frequency table; its columns are treated as sequences of
               numbers that can be compared using an appropriate distance (dissimilarity) measure.
               Our study uses the so-called Cosine Delta distance, which has been shown to work best
               in authorship attribution . It is based on cosine
               similarity of the angle between two vectors, x = z(T) and y = z(T1), and is
               calculated according to the formula: 
                     
                        
                           cos
                        
                        
                           ∝
                        
                     
                     =
                     
                        
                           
                              ∑
                              
                                 i
                                 =
                                 1
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       n
                                    
                                    
                                       s
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    x
                                 
                                 
                                    i
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 y
                              
                              
                                 i
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 (
                                 
                                    ∑
                                    
                                       i
                                       =
                                       1
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             n
                                          
                                          
                                             s
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          x
                                       
                                       
                                          i
                                       
                                       
                                          2
                                       
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 (
                                 
                                    ∑
                                    
                                       i
                                       =
                                       1
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             n
                                          
                                          
                                             s
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          y
                                       
                                       
                                          i
                                       
                                       
                                          2
                                       
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     
                   where ns is the number of most-frequent word-types used in the
               analysis, while z(T) and z(T1) are z-score values for the frequency of a word in,
               respectively, texts T and T1. Z-scores are calculated with the usual formula:
                  
                     z
                     
                        
                           T
                        
                     
                     =
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 f
                              
                              
                                 s
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 T
                              
                           
                           -
                            
                           
                              
                                 μ
                              
                              
                                 s
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 σ
                              
                              
                                 s
                              
                           
                        
                     
                   where fs(T) denotes relative frequency of word s in text T, µs
               is mean frequency of word s in the entire set of texts, and σs is standard deviation
               of frequency of word s in the same set .
            This produces a distance matrix: a square table of distances, or degrees of
               dissimilarity, between each pair of texts – the smaller the value, the more similar
               the two texts are. Usually, at least in literary texts of some length, the smallest
               values are those between texts written by the same author; our studies have shown
               that this is a much less marked phenomenon in film dialogue, and even less so in TV
               series 
               . While this is already the kind of output that may be
               examined, analyses of larger numbers of texts require visualization of the patterns
               of similarity and difference between the texts, which can be achieved with further
               statistical procedures. We use Ward’s hierarchical cluster analysis to draw tree
               diagrams that bring together the nearest neighbors (texts most similar to each
               other); usually, for greater reliability of the results, this is repeated for
               different numbers of most-frequent word types (in our study, for 100, 200, 300, …
               1000) most frequent words, and the results are further processed in consensus network
               analysis  in Gephi
               .
            While the stylometric part of the analysis was performed on all grammatical word
               forms, sentiment analysis requires that the texts be lemmatized, or converted to
               their basic grammatical forms. This was done with the standard automatic tool,
               Treetagger . Sentiments and emotions (as defined by Mohammad 2011) were counted using the NRC Lexicon within the syuzhet package . Counts of emotions were summed for each text and
               proportions between positive and negative sentiments established for each text.
               Graphs were produced to visualize the results; the Lexicon’s eight emotions were
               treated similarly but relative to individual text lengths.
         

            Results
            Figure 1 presents a network analysis performed with the above-mentioned method on the
               full set of film dialogues. 
            
               Network analysis of the entire set of film dialogues, color-coded by
                  (principal) genre: action/adventure, red; chick flick, yellow; romance, grey;
                  superhero, orange; thriller, blue and vampire, green).
               
            
            As can be seen, clustering by generic-thematic grouping is especially successful for
               thrillers (blue), with particularly strong connections visible among films sharing
               sub-generic properties. For instance, Brian Singer’s crime/drama/thriller The Usual Suspects (1995) written by Christopher McQuarrie
               shows on the one hand strong connections to David Fincher’s crime/mystery drama
                  Seven (1995) and on the other – to Quentin
               Tarantino’s Reservoir Dogs (1993), the Coen brothers’
                  Fargo (2006), and Martin Scorsese’s The Departed  (2006), thus demonstrating close stylometric
               affinities between different productions combining elements of crime, drama and
               thriller and raising interesting questions about the sensitivity of stylometric tools
               to the exponents of low register (possibly reflected in the grammatical simplicity of
               utterances affecting the frequency of function words) and the pragmatics of deduction
               and threat (cf. Kozloff 2000: 220) typical
               of crime films.
            John McTiernan’s Die Hard (1988), classified by IMDb as
               action/thriller, shows strong ties to both genres, being much closer to other action
               productions (such as Steven Spielberg’s Jaws, 1975), but
               at the same time showing surprisingly tight stylometric bonds to Tarantino’s Pulp Fiction (1994), Michael Mann’s Heat (1995) and Luc Besson’s Leon (1994),
               classified as crime/drama/thrillers.
            A separate sub-area on our map is occupied by Alfred Hitchcock’s masterpieces
               intertwined with classic noir productions. Dial M for
                  Murder (crime, thriller 1954), written by a British playwright Frederick
               Knott, links strongly to Hitchcock’s Psycho (an
               adaptation of Robert Bloch’s novel; horror, mystery, 1960) and Rebecca (an adaptation of Daphne du Maurier’s novel; drama, mystery,
               romance,1940), as well as to Carol Reed’s The Third Man,
               written by Graham Greene (film-noir, mystery, thriller, 1949). Rebecca is closely related to his Psycho and
                  Vertigo (an adaptation of Boileau-Narcejac’s novel;
               mystery, romance, thriller, 1958), as well as to Billy Wilder’s film noir Double Indemnity co-authored by the director and Raymond
               Chandler (crime, drama, film noir, 1944). At the same time, it connects strongly to
               David Lean’s romance Brief Encounter  and other
               representatives of the romance genre, such as Sydney Pollack’s Out of Africa (1985) or Edward Zwick’s Legends of
                  the Fall (1994). Hitchcock’s Rear Window
               (mystery, thriller 1954) is bonded with Psycho, as well
               as The Third Man and Double
                  Indemnity. They constitute quite a tight-knit area in the diagram,
               allowing the diachronic, generic and auteur director signals to collude
               and encouraging further qualitative research into how Hitchcock’s belief in the
               subservience of dialogue to pure cinema may have affected his collaborator’s
               screenwriting style and reflected earlier film-making conventions. The only Hitchcock
               production that does not blend in with the other scripts analyzed is North by Northwest (adventure, mystery, thriller, 1959),
               written by Ernest Lehman and apparently intended by the writer as the Hitchcock picture to end all Hitchcock pictures (qtd. in
                  Freedman 2015: 36). The dialogue lines
               demonstrate closer links to Roman Polański’s neo-noir Chinatown
                (1974), and Jacques Tourneur’s noir Out of the
                  Past (1947) than to Hitchcock’s other films. These neighbor with two
               representatives of the gangster genre in our corpus, Francis Ford Coppola’s Godfather  (1972, 1974). An in-depth inspection of this
               grouping suggests that further sub-division into mystery, gangster and film noir
               might reveal additional patterning in dialogue techniques. This supports Sarah
               Kozloff’s close-reading observations on the functional
               and pragma-stylistic distinction to be made between noirs and gangster films, the
               former featuring characters who are middle-class,
               solitary, cynical and deliberately hardboiled and
               the latter featuring self-educated groups of
                  confederates
               . It is interesting, however, that films
               directed by Alfred Hitchcock (and written by different acclaimed authors) display
               stronger stylometric bonds than those both written and directed by other acclaimed
                  auteurs, such as Quentin Tarantino or the Coen brothers. 
            Another grouping that forms a successful cluster is the thematic category “chick
               flick”. As listed by IMDb users, it is dominated by romcoms, but it also contains
               romance drama and family drama, films that demonstrably tap into the realm of human
               emotions and range from humor to pathos. They consistently occupy the right-hand side
               of the map and intermingle with productions categorized as romances, a
               grouping that clearly overlaps with the one discussed. Thus, the grey
                  intrusions into the yellow-dominated area on the diagram are all
                  auteur romances: John Carney’s romantic musical dramas Once (2007) and Sing Street
               (2016), Damien Chazelle’s La La Land (2016) and Bradley
               Cooper’s most recent remake of A Star is Born (2018), as
               well as critically acclaimed verbal masterpieces: Richard Linklater’s romantic drama
               trilogy Before Sunrise  (1995), Before Sunset (2004) and Before Midnight
               (2013) co-created with performers Julie Delpy and Ethan Hawke, Woody Allen’s
                  Manhattan (1979) and Annie Hall
                (1977) and Spike Jonze’s Her (2013), the last
               two presented with the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay and clearly devoid
               of melodramatic traces typical of many representatives of the “romance” category. 
            Another interesting regularity to be observed in this area of the diagram is the
               clustering of films written or co-authored by Richard Curtis: Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994), the two Bridget Jones films (2001,
               2004), Notting Hill (1999), Love,
                  Actually (2003) and About Time (2013). The
               only aberration on the romcom/romance map is James Cameron’s Titanic (1997), hidden in the depths of action/adventure/thriller, in the
               neighborhood of Spielberg’s Jaws (1975) and Inarritu’s
                  Revenant (2015). It seems that James Cameron’s
               unsentimental provenance and interest in non-romantic genres may have left
               stylometric traces in his dialogue technique. 
            Vampire films (green), by contrast, reveal their individual and complex generic
               affinities. The Twilight saga, spread around the central
               part of the diagram, shows marked stylometric affinities across the episodes, yet it
               clearly demonstrates the gradual loss of romantic undertone, with the first two
               episodes: Twilight (2008) and New
                  Moon (2009) classified as fantasy/drama/romance showing bonds with
               romantic comedies and romances and the more recent parts of the series uniting with
               classic thriller productions. Another area is occupied by horror rather than fantasy
               representations of the vampire theme: Coppola’s Dracula
               (1992), Burton’s Dark Shadows (2012), Jordan’s Interview with the Vampire (1994) and dated horrors:
               Sangster’s Lust for a Vampire (1971) and Francis’s
                  Dr Terror’s House of Horrors  (1965). These
               regularities may, indeed, suggest that stylometric measures based on most frequent
               word frequencies are sensitive to the changing functionalities of filmic speech,
               romance depending more on the explicit expression of emotion  and horror – on the implicit build-up of
               suspense. 
            As for other groupings, action/adventure films, including superhero productions, all
               cluster to the left-hand side of the diagram. What merits attention is the
               stylometric consistency of big franchises, with particular episodes clustering
               regardless of their authorial parentage. Some blockbuster series can be attributed to
               the same screenwriter throughout, allowing the authorial and thematic signals to
               coincide: for instance, the Pirates of the Caribbean
               swashbucklers (written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio), the Matrix  trilogy (by Lana and Lilly Wachowski), the Lord of the Rings  and the Hobbit series,
               which intertwine in our analysis (written by Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, Peter
               Jackson). 
            The Batman series is clearly divided into two main areas: a cluster of Christopher
               Nolan’s most recent productions: Batman Begins (2005),
                  The Dark Knight (2008) and The
                  Dark Knight Rises (2012) and another cluster of three older episodes:
                  Batman Returns (1992) directed by Tim Burton as well
               as Batman Forever (1995) and Batman
                  and Robin (1997) directed by Joel Schumacher. Tim Burton’s original Batman (1989), however, occupies a distant location on the
               map, tied closely to thriller films, and showing little stylometric relation to the
               following pictures, possibly inspired more by the gangster/crime genre to which it
               visually alludes. 
            The Star Wars franchise is, unsurprisingly, separated
               into three areas. The two oldest episodes: Star Wars
               (1977) and The Empire Strikes Back (1980) are united
               with a strong stylometric bond. Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas’s Return of the Jedi (1983) connects them to the more recent
               trilogy: The Phantom Menace (1999), Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the
                  Sith (2005), written by George Lucas. They neighbour closely with Lucas’s
               other productions, namely Steven Spielberg’s Indiana Jones and
                  the Raiders of the Lost Ark (written by Kasdan, 1982) and Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (written by Boam, 1989).
               The most recent Star Wars incarnations produced by
               Disney: The Force Awakens (2015), The Last Jedi (2017) and Rogue One (2016)
               form a separate cluster, showing a different dialogue technique. Interestingly,
               Lawrence Kasdan’s most recent addition to the series, Solo: A
                  Star Wars Story (2018) does not reveal any stylometric affinities to the
               remaining pictures; indeed Solo does seem to fly solo. 
            As for other series, Jurassic Park and Jurassic World episodes show stylometric links. Richard
               Donner’s Superman (1978) bonds with its recent remake,
                  Superman Returns (2006) are Richard Lester’s Superman II (1980). Significantly, the comedic third
               episode, Superman III (1983) is separated from the
               remaining ones. Other remakes, such as The Last of the
                  Mohicans (1937, 1992) and two out of the four versions of A Star is Born (1937; 1954) also demonstrate marked
               stylometric similarity. 
            When isolated from other categories, the sub-generic nuances of action/adventure
               productions become somewhat more marked (Figure 2).
               This configuration also exhibits a strong authorial signal and, very
               characteristically for film dialogues, a tendency to cluster by thematic universe
                  
               H. As a result, the mob-ridden environment of Gotham and
               Spiderman’s New York becomes very similar to that of the more direct depictions of
               the mafia by Coppola. 
            
               Network analysis of the action/adventure (red) and superhero (orange)
                  genre.
               
            
            Sentiment analysis can be mostly presented with much less statistical manipulation,
               simply by plotting the various sentiment/emotion scores against time of film release.
               Figure 3 shows the proportion of positive to negative sentiments in our entire set of
               film dialogues (data points) and the linear trend (lines) of this ratio. In the
               figure, balanced positive-to-negative contents would place a given film at 0.5 on the
               vertical scale; anything above that value contains more positive than negative terms;
               anything below 0.5 descends into negativity. As can be seen, values for
               all groupings are highly scattered; nevertheless, some trends in the appearance of
               positive and negative sentiments may be observed. The oldest genres in this set,
               romances and thrillers, exhibit a fairly stable proportion, with, unsurprisingly, a
               much higher participation of the positive despite a slight downwards trend. By
               contrast, the initially much more negative thrillers rise slightly from darker to
               lighter moods. A much more marked fall in positive sentiments can be observed in
               the dialogues of action/adventure films and even more so in the superhero
               subgenre; in the second decade of the 21st century, they are more negative in
               sentiment than even the thrillers. Still, negativity flourishes the most in an
               entirely different class: in the vampire movies; their verbally expressed positive
               sentiments dwindle almost to 0.5 at the end of the timeline, perhaps not unrelatedly
               to a very marked and mirror-image ascent of positive values in chick flicks. 
            
               Positive-to-negative sentiment ratio in the entire set of film dialogues,
                  color-coded by (principal) genre, with linear trendlines.
               
            
            Numeric results for the eight basic Plutchik emotions are consistent with both those
               for positivity/negativity and with each other. Based on the results of the
               Kruskal-Wallis tests obtained for each pair of emotions (well below any values that
               could suggest statistical insignificance), their representation in the boxplots in
               Figure 4 shows a very strong correlation for high levels of anticipation and joy
               between chick flicks and romances. These two categories are also very much alike in
               their equally low values of anger, disgust, and fear. At the same time, in terms of
               these five emotions, both romances and chick flicks differ with very high statistical
               significance from the other genres. Sadness and fear are also statistically higher in
               films about vampires; this grouping is also significantly deficient in trust. It may
               be said more generally that, in terms of sentiment and emotion analysis, three rather
               than six categories are discernible here: 1) chick flicks and romances, 2) vampire
               films, 3) action, superhero and thriller movies.
            
               Relative frequencies of words associated with the eight basic emotions in the
                  entire set of film dialogues. Boxes denote the range of the 25th-75th percentiles;
                  the short horizontal line inside each box is the median; whiskers and circles
                  denote outlying (extreme) values.
               
            
         

            Discussion
            Several interesting observations can be made on the basis of this study. Not the
               least of these is that the tentative theme/genre classifications that we have started
               with have been verified by our quantitative approach in both stylometry and sentiment
               analysis. Our most-frequent-word analysis shows that while some of our initial
               groupings do seem to create discernible communities, individual films do not seem to
               care. These stylometric misclassifications (such as the affinity of Woody
               Allen’s sophisticated comedies to other comedic productions rather than for instance
               period romance dramas) are understandable and attest to the inadequacy of our a priori film classification rather than that of the
               stylometric approach; indeed, these misclassifications often correct the rough
               pigeon-holing that we used, revealing the influence of authorial and sub-generic
               nuance on the measurable features of film dialogue style and mutual relationships
               between dialogue techniques in different groups of films considered.
            Film dialogue seems to successfully reflect the fact that individual films rarely
               conform to the requirements of a single, unadulterated, major-level genre such as
               action films or thrillers. This becomes quite evident when one views in detail the
               network analysis graph in full complexity of its signals. At times, films cluster by
               screenwriter as if in accordance with the Schreiber theory of film
               authorship; at times, the director’s choices seem to bring together different
               screenwriters’ efforts, as if to vindicate the claims of auteur
               theorists who believe in the director’s influence over the collective work of
               different specialists, screenwriters included. Then there are mainstream films that
               do cluster by genre. Elsewhere, the collaborative nature of making movies takes over
               to create a strong franchise signal, which in turn may be overridden by that of the
               studio: after all, in our graphs, Disney Star Wars have
               left the orbit of their predecessors. Diachrony is another significant element which
               deserves more in-depth qualitative analysis, possibly looking at the evolution of
               non-verbal cinematic techniques; the language of film dialogue in the 1940s and the
               1950s stands apart from later productions. What is more, the diachronic element is
               not limited to the date of the films’ release; our stylometric results can also
               reflect their temporal setting, quite plausibly due to archaic stylization of the
               spoken parts. This has already been noted in an earlier study on historical films and
               series .
            It is quite remarkable that, despite all the above caveats against lexicon-based
               sentiment analysis, much of our results of this type of distant reading agrees with
               what we know about the genres from close viewing. The fact that computational
               sentiment analysis agrees so well, indeed so boringly, with human presuppositions
               might be a result of the somewhat crude approach – through decontextualized lexical
               items. At the same time, however, the crude nature of the lexicon approach may be
               reflected in the fact that, contrarily to most-frequent-word stylometry, sentiment
               analysis shows fewer, rather than more, valid divisions: chick flicks merge with
               romances, action/superhero films with thrillers. Meanwhile, vampire movies, an
               internally conflicted category according to Delta, acquires a separate status due to
               higher levels of fear and lower levels of trust. This quantitative
               procedure can act as a starting point for more in-depth qualitative evaluation of
               emotions (both those expressed by characters and those evoked in viewers) and the
               dominance of particular speech acts in the verbal exchanges on screen (such as
               teasing in comedy, threatening in gangster films, commanding in drama or explaining
               in science-fiction, cf. Kozloff 2000). 
            It may seem paradoxical that of the two approaches used in this study, the one that
               seems to have less to do with semantics – the comparison of frequencies of very
               frequent words, grammatical words, function words, synsemantic words – also
               seems to reflect, albeit indirectly, the semantics of the film dialogues – their
               differing functionalities, their stylistic patternings, their themes, their thematic
               subgenres, their implied audience. At the same time, an approach more directly aimed
               at meaning: the search for terms of sentiment, syuzhet, emotion, suffers
               from the computers’ still-underdeveloped ability to understand the meaning of
               literary texts and can only confirm – at best – what we already know about film
               genres. In fact, the little information we obtain from this latter part of the study
               makes our flawed (oversimplified) classification seem almost adequate – which it
               certainly is not. Still, it is enough to teach us never to trust a
               vampire...
            Dialogue is only a small part of film. At first glance – and for quite a long time in
               the history of film studies – it seemed much less important to the overall form and
               meaning of the art than image or non-verbal sound. Film scholars, cognitive
               scientists and digital experts have already undertaken extensive research into film
               narrative structure (e.g. Murtagh 2009; McKie 2014), film digital archiving (e.g. Bateman 2016) and other measurable parameters
               of cinematic art, such as shot lengths, types of shots, motion types and/or visual
               characteristics of the image onscreen such as light intensity (e.g. Salt 2007; Cutting 2011;
                  Suchan 2016; Heftberger 2018). Our study shows that results of these more standard
               digital film studies could be interestingly confronted with quantitative analysis of
               films’ textual layer for better insight into the specificities and the mutual
               influences of film genres, authorial oeuvre or chronology; if only to
               see to what extent the sentiments and the emotions and the style in film dialogue go
               hand in hand – or not – with the visual and the non-verbal auditory components in
               various film genres and periods of film history. 
            Such a multifaceted analysis of film would be a dream interdisciplinary project, and,
               in Shakespearean phrase, devoutly to be wished. The fact that it has not been yet
               done, at least to our knowledge, is a result of obvious difficulties. It is possible
               to produce a large corpus of film dialogue texts, for instance editing the
               screenplays available online (cf. Murtagh 2009:
                  302); distant reading was made for big data (in this case, textual data too
               extensive to be processed by the naked eye); once the texts are acquired, the
               machines do the rest. However, the same can hardly be said of the more
                  technical sides of filmmaking listed in the preceding paragraph: there,
               each item would require much annotation and coding, resulting in a much higher
               complexity of the project. The good news is that now that (we believe) interesting
               textual features of film dialogue have been found, the incentive to combine it with
               other features of film may result in a much larger project than the one that could be
               described within the limited space of this paper.
         

            Appendix 1. 
            
               List of films included in the corpus divided into subcategories (following
                  IMDBs classifications) and ordered chronologically: 
               
                     Action
                     The Godfather, dir. F. F. Coppola, USA (1971) [crime, drama]
                     The Godfather, dir. FF. Copola, USA (1974) F. F. Coppola [crime,
                        drama]
                     Jaws, dir. S. Spielberg, USA (1975) [adventure, drama, thriller]
                     Star Wars, dir. G. Lucas, USA (1977) [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back, dir. I. Kershner, USA
                        (1980) [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     Raiders of the Lost Ark, dir. S. Spielberg, USA (1981) [action,
                        adventure]
                     Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi, dir. R. Marquand, USA (1984)
                        [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, dir. S. Spielberg, USA (1984)
                        [action, adventure]
                     Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, dir. S. Spielberg, USA (1989)
                        [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     Jurassic Park, dir. S. Spielberg, USA (1993) [adventure, sci-fi,
                        thriller]
                     The Lost World: Jurassic Park, dir. S. Spielberg (1997) [action,
                        adventure, sci-fi]
                     The Matrix, dir. L. and L. Wachowski, USA (1999) [action, sci-fi]
                     Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring, dir. P. Jackson, News,
                        Zealand, USA (2001) [adventure, drama, fantasy]
                     Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace, dir. G. Lucas, USA (2001)
                        [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     Jurassic Park III, dir. J. Johnston, USA (2001) [action, adventure,
                        sci-fi]
                     Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers, dir. P. Jackson, New Zealand, USA
                        (2002) [adventure, drama, fantasy]
                     Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones, dir. G. Lucas, USA (2002)
                        [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, dir. P. Jackson, New
                        Zealand, USA (2003) [action, adventure, drama]
                     The Matrix Reloaded, dir. L. and L. Wachowski, USA (2003) [action,
                        sci-fi]
                     The Matrix Revolutions, dir. L. and L. Wachowski, USA (2003) [action,
                        sci-fi]
                     The Pirates of the Caribbean: he Curse of the Black Pearl, dir. G.
                        Verbinski, USA (2003) [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, dir. G. Lucas, USA (2005)
                        [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     The Pirates of the Caribbean: The Dead Man’s Chest, dir. G. Verbinsku,
                        USA (2006) [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     Pirates of the Caribbean: At World’s End, dir. G. Verbinski, USA (2007)
                        [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, dir. S. Spielberg,
                        USA (2008) [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides, dir. R. Marshall, USA (2012)
                        [action, narrative, fantasy]
                     The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey, dir. P. Jackson, USA, New Zealand
                        (2012) [adventure, family, fantasy]
                     The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug, dir. P. Jackson, USA, New Zealand
                        (2013) [adventure, fantasy]
                     Rush, dir. R. Howard, UK, Germany, USA (2013) [action, biography,
                        drama]
                     Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies, dir. P. Jackson, USA, New Zealand
                        (2014) [adventure, fantasy]
                     Jurassic World, dir. C. Trevorrow, USA (2015) [action, adventure,
                        sci-fi]
                     Star Wars Episode VII: The Force Awakens, dir. J. J. Abrams, USA (2015)
                        [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     The Revenant, dir. A. G. Iñárritu, USA, Hong Kong, Taiwan (2015) [action,
                        adventure, biography]
                     Rogue One, dir. G. Edwards, USA (2016) [action, adventure, sci-fi]
                     Star Wars: The Last Jedi, dir. R. Johnson, USA (2017) [action, adventure,
                        fantasy]
                     Jurassic World: The Fallen Kingdom, dir. J. A. Bayona, USA (2018)
                        [action, adventure, sci-fi]
                     Solo: A Star Wars Story, dir. R. Howard, USA (2018) [action, adventure,
                        fantasy]
                  
               
                     Chick flick
                     Ice Castles, dir. D. Wrye, USA (1978) [drama, romance, sport]
                     Terms of Endearment, dir. J.L. Brooks, USA (1983) [comedy, drama]
                     Splash (1984), dir. R. Howard, USA [comedy, fantasy, romance]
                     Pretty in Pink, dir. H. Deutch, USA (1986) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Dirty Dancing, dir. E. Ardolino, USA (1987) [drama, music,
                        romance]
                     Moonstruck, dir N. Jewison, USA (1987) [comedy drama, romance]
                     Beaches, dir. G. Marshall, USA (1988) [comedy, drama, music]
                     Steal Magnolias, dir. H. Ross, USA (1989) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     When Harry Met Sally, dir. R. Reiner, USA (1989) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Ghost, dir. Jerry Zucker, USA (1990) [drama, fantasy, romance]
                     Pretty Woman, dir. G. Marshall, USA (1990) [comedy, romance]
                     Father of the Bride, dir. Ch. Shyer, USA (1991) [comedy, family,
                        romance]
                     Fried Green Tomatoes, dir. J. Avnet, USA (1991) [drama]
                     Thelma and Louise, dir. R. Scott, USA (1991) [adventure, crime,
                        drama]
                     Indecent Proposal, dir. A. Lyne, USA (1993) [drama, romance]
                     Sleepless in Seattle, dir. N. Ephron, USA (1993) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Untamed Heart, dir. T. Bill (1993), USA [comedy, drama, romance]
                     Four Weddings and a Funeral, dir. M. Newell, UK [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Boys on the Side, dir. H. Ross, USA, France (1995) [comedy, drama]
                     Clueless, dir. A. Heckerling, USA (1995) [comedy, romance]
                     A Month by the Lake, dir. J. Irvin, UK, USA (1995) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     While You Were Sleeping, dir. J. Turteltaub, USA (1995) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     The Truth About Cats and Dogs, dir. M. Lehmann, USA (1996) [comedy,
                        romance]
                     Romy and Michele’s High School Reunion, dir. D. Mirkin, USA (1997)
                        [comedy]
                     My Best Friend’s Wedding, dir. P.J. Hogan, USA (1997) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Titanic, dir. J. Cameron, USA (1997) [drama, romance]
                     Home Fires, dir. D. Parisot, USA (1998) [comedy, romance, drama]
                     Hope Floats, dir. F. Whitaker, USA (1998) [drama, romance]
                     Ever After, dir. A. Tennant, USA (1998) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     Stepmom, dir. Ch. Columbus, USA (1998) [comedy, drama]
                     How Stella Got Her Groove Back, dir. K. R. Sullivan, USA (1998) [comedy,
                        drama, romance]
                     Practical Magic, dir. G. Dunne, USA (1998) [comedy, drama,
                        fantasy]
                     The Wedding Singer, dir. F. Coraci, USA (1998) [comedy, music,
                        romance]
                     You’ve Got Mail, dir. N. Ephron, USA (1998) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Notting Hill, dir. R. Curtis, UK, USA (1999) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Forces of Nature, dir. B. Hughes, USA (1999) [comedy, romance]
                     10 Things I Hate About You, dir. G. Junger, USA (1999) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Never Been Kissed, dir. R. Gosnell, USA (1999) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     She’s All That, dir. R. Iscove, USA (1999) [comedy, romance]
                     Runaway Bride, dir. G. Marshall, USA (1999) [comedy, romance]
                     Miss Congeniality, dir. D. Petrie, USA (2000) [action, comedy,
                        crime]
                     Save the Last Dance, dir. T. Carter, USA (2000) [drama, music,
                        romance]
                     The Wedding Planner, dir. A. Shankman, Germany, USA (2001) [comedy,
                        romance]
                     Serendipity, dir. P. Chelsom, USA (2001) [comedy, romance]
                     Bridget Jones’ s Diary, dir. S. Maguire, UK, France, USA (2001) [comedy,
                        drama, romance]
                     The Princess Diaries, dir. G. Marshall, USA (2001) [comedy, family,
                        romance]
                     Legally Blonde, dir. R. Luketic, USA (2001) [ comedy, romance]
                     Maid in Manhattan, dir. W. Wang, USA (2002) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Sweet Home Alabama, dir. A. Tennant, USA (2002) [comedy, romance]
                     My Big Fat Greek Wedding, dir. J. Zwick, Canada, USA (2002) [comedy,
                        drama, romance]
                     Crossroads, dir. T. Davies, USA (2002) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     Divine Secrets of the Ya-Ya Sisterhood, dir. C. Khouri, USA (2002) [
                        drama]
                     A Walk t Remember, dir A. Shankman, USA (2002) [ drama, romance]
                     How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days, dir. D. Petrie, USA (2003) [comedy,
                        romance]
                     Uptown Girls, dir. B. Yakin, USA (2003) [ comedy, drama, romance]
                     Le Divorce, dir. J. Ivory, USA (2003) [ drama, romance, comedy]
                     Love, Actually, dir. R. Curtis, UK, USA, France (2003) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Alex and Emma, dir. R. Reiner, USA (2003) [comedy, romance]
                     Under the Tuscan Sun, dir. A. Wells, USA, Italy (2003) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Legally Blonde 2, dir. Ch. Herman-Wormfeld, USA (2003) [comedy]
                     Love Don’t Cost a Thing, dir. T. Byer, USA (2003) [comedy, romance,
                        drama]
                     Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason, dir. B. Kidron, UK, USA (2004)
                        [comedy, drama, romance]
                     The Notebook, dir. N. Cassavetes, USA (2004) [drama, romance]
                     13 Going on 30, dir. G. Winick, USA (2004) [comedy, fantasy,
                        romance]
                     50 First Dates, dir. P. Segal, USA (2004) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     Raisin Helen, dir. G. Marshall, USA (2004) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     The Little Black Book, dir. N. Hurran, USA (2004) [comedy, romance,
                        drama]
                     Mean Girls, dir. M. Waters, USA (2004) [comedy]
                     Fever Pitch, dir. B and P. Farelly, USA (2005) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Monster-in-Law, dir. R. Luketic, USA, Germany (2005) [comedy,
                        romance]
                     The Wedding Date, dir. C. Kilner, SUA (2005) [comedy, romance]
                     The Perfect Man, dir. M. Rosman, USA (2005) [comedy, family,
                        romance]
                     Hitch, dir. A. Tennant, USA (2005) [comedy, romance]
                     Prime, dir. B. Younger, USA (2005) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     The Sisterhood of the Travelling Pants, dir. K. Kwapis (2005) [comedy,
                        drama, romance]
                     Must Love Dogs, dir. G. D. Goldberg, USA (2005) [comedy, romance]
                     Last Holiday, dir. W. Wang, USA (2006) [comedy]
                     Failure to Launch, dir. T. Dey, USA (2006) [comedy, romance]
                     The Break-Up, dir. P. Reed, USA (2006) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     The Devil Wears Prada, dir. D. Frankel, USA, France (2006) [comedy,
                        drama]
                     P.S. I Love You, dir. R. LaGravenese, USA (2007) [drama, romance]
                     Enchanted, dir. K. Lima, USA (2007) [animation, comedy, family]
                     Music and Lyrics, dir. M. Lawrence, USA (2007) [comedy, music,
                        romance]
                     Mamma Mia!, dir. Ph. Lloyd, USA, UK, Germany (2007) [comedy, musical,
                        romance]
                     Definitely, Maybe, dir. A. Brooks, USA (2008) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Made of Honor, dir. P. Weiland, USA, UK (2008) [comedy, romance]
                     27 Dresses, dir. A. Fletcher, USA (2008) [comedy, romance]
                     Sex and the City, dir. M. P. King, USA (2008) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     The Sisterhood of the Traveling ants 2, dir. S. Hamri, USA (2008)
                        [comedy, drama, romance]
                     The Time Traveler’s Wife, dir. R. Schwentke, USA (2008) [drama, fantasy,
                        romance]
                     Bride Wars, dir. G. Winick, USA (2009) [comedy, romance]
                     He’s Just Not That Into You, dir. K. Kwapis, Germany, USA (2009) [comedy,
                        drama, romance]
                     The Proposal, dir. A. Fletcher, USA (2009) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Couples Retreat, dir. P. Billingsley, USA (2009) [comedy]
                     Julie and Julia, dir. N. Ephron, USA (2009) [biography, drama,
                        romance]
                     The Ugly Truth, dir. R. Luketic, USA (2009) [comedy, romance]
                     Labor Pains, dir. L. Shapiro, USA (2009) [comedy, romance]
                     Valentine’s Day, dir. G. Marshall, USA (2009) [comedy romance]
                     The Switch, dir. J. Gordon, W. Speck, USA (2010) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Letters to Juliet, dir. G. Winnick, USA (2010) [adventure, comedy,
                        drama]
                     Dear John, dir. L. Hallström, USA (2010) [drama, romance, war]
                     The Back-Up Plan, dir. A. Poul, USA (2010) [comedy, romance]
                     Sex in the City, dir. M. P. King, USA (2010) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Easy A, dir. W. Gluck, USA (2010) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     Something Borrowed, dir. L. Greenfield, USA [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Love, Wedding, Marriage, dir. D. Mulroney, USA (2011) [comedy]
                     Bridesmaids, dir. P. Feig, USA (2011) [comedy, romance]
                     Crazy, Stupid Love, dir. G. Ficarra, J. Requa, USA (2011) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     What to Expect When You’re Expecting, dir. K. Jones, USA (2012) [comedy,
                        drama, romance]
                     Pitch Perfect, dir. J. Moore, USA (2012) [comedy, music, romance]
                     Safe Have, dir. L. Hallström, USA (2012) [drama, romance,
                        thriller]
                     About Time, dir. R. Curtis, UK (2013) [comedy, drama, fantasy]
                     The Other Woman, dir. N. Cassavetes, USA (2014) [comedy, romance]
                     The Single Moms Club, dir. T. Perry, USA (2014) [comedy, drama]
                     Lila and Eve, dir. Ch. Stone III, USA (2015) [crime, drama,
                        mystery]
                     How to Be Single, dir. Ch. Ditter, USA (2016) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Home Again, dir. H. Meyers-Shyer, USa (2017) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     Crazy Rich Indians, dir. J. M. Chu, USA (2018) [comedy, romance]
                     Book Club, dir. B. Holderman, USA (2018) [comedy, drama, romance]
                  
               
                     Romance
                     It happened One Night, dir. F. Capra, USA (1934) [comedy, romance]
                     The Last of the Mohicans, dir. G. B. Seitz, USA (1936) [adventure, drama,
                        history]
                     A Star is Born, dir. W. W. Wellman, J. Conway, USA (1937) [drama]
                     Gone with the Wind, dir. V. Flemming, G. Cukor, USA (1939) [drama,
                        history, romance]
                     Rebecca, dir. A. Hitchcock, USA (1940) [drama, mystery, romance]
                     Casablanca, dir. M. Curtiz, USA (1942) [drama, romance, war]
                     Brief Encounter, dir. D. Lean, USA (1945) [drama, romance]
                     The Best Years of Our Lives, dir. W. Wyler, USA (1946) [drama, romance,
                        war]
                     Out of the Past, dir. J. Tourneur, USA (1947) [crime, drama,
                        film-noir]
                     Singin’ in the Rain, dir. S. Donen, G. Kelly, USA (1952) [comedy,
                        musical, romance]
                     Roman Holiday, dir. W. Wyler, USA (1953) [comedy, romance]
                     A Star is Born, dir. G. Cukor, USA (1954) [drama, musical,
                        romance]
                     Vertigo, dir. A. Hitchcock, USA (1958) [mystery, romance,
                        thriller]
                     Some Like It Hot, dir. B. Wilder, USA (1959) [comedy, romance]
                     The Apartment, dir. B. Wilder, USA (1960) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     Charade, dir. S. Donen, USA (1963) [comedy, mystery, romance]
                     Doctor Zhivago, dir. D. Lean, USA, Italy, UK (1965) [drama, romance,
                        war]
                     Sounds of Music, dir. R. Wise, USA (1965) [biography, drama,
                        family]
                     The Gradate, dir. M. Nichols, USA (1967) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     Fiddler on the Roof, dir. N. Jewison, USA (1971) [drama, family,
                        musical]
                     Harold and Maude, dir. H. Ashby, USA (1971) [comedy, drama,
                        romance]
                     A Star is Born, dir. F. Pierson (1976) [drama, music, romance]
                     Annie Hall, dir. W. Allen, USA (1977) [comedy, romance]
                     Manhattan, dir. W. Allen, USA (1979) [comedy, drama, romance]
                     Out of Africa, dir. S. Pollack, USA, UK (1985) [biography, drama,
                        romance]
                     The Princess Bride, dir. R. Reiner, USA (1987) [adventure, family,
                        fantasy]
                     The Last of the Mohicans, dir. M. Mann, USA (1992) [action, adventure,
                        drama]
                     Groundhog Day, dir. H. Ramis, USA (1993) [comedy, fantasy,
                        romance]
                     Forrest Gump, dir. R. Zemeckis, USA (1994) [drama, romance]
                     Legends of the Fall, dir. E. Zwick, USA (1994) [drama, romance,
                        war]
                     Before Sunrise, dir. R. Linklater, USA (1995) [drama, romance]
                     Good Will Hunting, dir. G. Van Sant, USA (1997) [drama, romance]
                     The English Patient, dir. A. Minghella, USA, UK (1997) [drama, romance,
                        war]
                     The Horse Whisperer, dir. R. Redford, USA (1998) [drama, romance,
                        western]
                     Big Fish, dir. T. Burton, USA (2003) [adventure, drama, fantasy]
                     Before Sunset, dir. R. Linklater (2004), USA [drama, romance]
                     Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, dir. M. Gondry, USA (2004) [drama,
                        romance, sci-fi]
                     Once, dir. J. Carney, Ireland (2007) [drama, music, romance]
                     Slumdog Millionaire, dir. D. Boyle, L. Tandan, UK, USA, France, Germany,
                        India (2008) [drama, romance]
                     Mr Nobody, dir. J. Van Dormael, USA (2009) [drama, fantasy,
                        romance]
                     The Perks of Being a Wallflower, dir. S. Chbosky, USA (2012) [drama,
                        romance]
                     Before Midnight, dir. R. Linklater, USA (2013) [drama, romance]
                     Her, dir. S. Jonze, USA (2013) [drama, romance, sci-fi]
                     Sing Street, dir. J. Carney, Ireland, UK, USA (2016) [comedy, drama,
                        music]
                     La La Land, dir. D. Chazelle, USA, Hing Kong (2016) [comedy, drama,
                        music]
                     A Star is Born, dir. B. Cooper, USA (2018) [drama, music, romance]
                  
               
                     Superhero
                     Superman, dir. R. Donner, USA, UK, Switzerland, Canada, Panama (1978)
                        [action, adventure, drama]
                     Superman II, dir. R. Lester, R. Donner, USA, UK, Canada (1980) [action,
                        adventure, sci-fi]
                     Superman III, dir. R. Lester, UK, USA (1983) [action, comedy,
                        sci-fi]
                     Batman, dir. T. Burton, USA (1989) [action, adventure]
                     Batman Returns, dir. T. Burton, USA (1992) [action, crime,
                        fantasy]
                     Batman Forever, dir. J. Schumacher, USA (1995) [action, adventure,
                        fantasy]
                     Batman and Robin, dir. J. Schumacher, USA, UK (1997) [action,
                        sci-fi]
                     Spider-Man, dir. S. Raimi, USA (2002) [action, adventure, sci-fi]
                     Spider-Man 2, dir. S. Raimi, USA (2004) [action, adventure,
                        sci-fi]
                     Batman Begins, dir. Ch. Nolan, USA (2005) [action, adventure,
                        thriller]
                     V for Vendetta, dir. J. McTeigue, USA (2005) [action, drama,
                        sci-fi]
                     Superman Returns, dir. B. Singer, USA (2006) [action, adventure]
                     Spider-Man 3, dir. S. Raimi, USA (2007) [action, adventure,
                        sci-fi]
                     The Dark Knight, dir. Ch. Nolan, USA (2008) action, crime, drama] 
                     Iron Man, dir. J. Favreau, USA (2008) [action, adventure, sci-fi]
                     Thor, dir. K. Branagh, USA (2011) [action, adventure, fantasy]
                     The Amazing Spider-Man, dir. M. Webb, USA (2012) [action, adventure,
                        fantasy]
                     The Avengers, dir. J. Whedon, USA (2012) [action, adventure,
                        sci-fi]
                     The Dark Knight Rises, dir. Ch. Nolan, USA (2012) [action,
                        thriller]
                     Thor: The Dark World, dir. A. Taylor, USA (2013) [action, adventure,
                        fantasy]
                     The Amazing Spider-Man 2, dir. M. Webb, USA (2014) [action, adventure,
                        sci-fi]
                     The Avengers: Age of Ultron, dir. J. Whedon, USA (2015) [action,
                        adventure, sci-fi]
                     Deadpool, dir. T. Miller, USA (2016) [action, adventure, comedy]
                     Doctor Strange, dir. S. Derrickson, USA (2016) [action, adventure,
                        fantasy]
                     Logan: Wolverine, dir. J. Manglod, USA (2017) [action, drama,
                        sci-fi]
                     Thor: Ragnarok, dir. T. Waititi, USA (2017) [action, adventure,
                        comedy]
                     The Avengers: Infinity War, dir. A. Russo, J. Russo, USA (2018) [action,
                        adventure, fantasy]
                  
               
                     Thriller
                     The Third Man, dir. C. Reed, UK (1949) [film-noir, mystery,
                        thriller]
                     Dial M for Murder, dir. A. Hitchcock, USA (1954) [crime, thriller]
                     Double Indemnity, dir. B. Wilder, USA (1954) [crime, drama,
                        film-noir]
                     On the Waterfront, dir. E. Kazan, USA (1954) [crime, drama,
                        thriller]
                     Rear Window, dir. A. Hitchcock, USA (1954) [mystery, thriller]
                     North by Nothwest, dir. A. Hitchcock, USA (1959) [adventure, mystery,
                        thriller]
                     Psycho, dir. A. Hitchcock, USA (1960) [horror, mystery, thriller]
                     What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?, dir. R. Aldrich, USA (1962) [drama,
                        horror, thriller]
                     Chinatown, dir. R. Polanski, USA (1974) [drama, mystery, thriller]
                     Blade Runner, dir. R. Scott, USA, Hong Kong (1982) [sci-fi,
                        thriller]
                     Die Hard, dir. J. McTiernan, USA (1988) [action, thriller]
                     Silence of the Lambs, dir. J. Demme, USA (1991) [crime, drama,
                        thriller]
                     Reservoir Dogs, dir. Q. Tarantino, USA (1992) [crime, drama, thriller] 
                     Léon, dir. L. Besson, France, USA (1994) [crime, drama, thriller]
                     The Heat, dir. M. Mann, USA (1995) [crime, drama, thriller]
                     Pulp Fiction, dir. Q. Tarantino, USA (1994) [crime, drama]
                     The Usual Suspects, dir. B. Singer USA, Germany (1995) [crime, mystery,
                        thriller]
                     Fargo, dir. J. and E. Coen, USA (1996) [crime, drama, thriller]
                     L.A. Confidential, dir. C. Hanson, USA (1997) [crime, drama,
                        mystery]
                     Seven, dir. D. Fincher, USA (1997) [crime, drama, mystery]
                     The Sixth Sense, dir. M. Night Shyamalan, USA (1999) [drama, mystery,
                        thriller]
                     Memento, dir. Ch. Nolan, USA (2000) [mystery, thriller]
                     Donnie Darko, dir. R. Kelly, USA (2001) [drama, sci-fi, thriller]
                     Mulholland Drive, dir. D. Lynch, USA (2001) [drama, mystery,
                        thriller]
                     Kill Bill dir. Q. Tarantino, USA (2003) [action, crime, thriller]
                     The Departed, dir. M. Scorsese, USA (2006) [crime, drama,
                        thriller]
                     The Prestige, dir. Ch. Nolan, USA, Hong Kong (2006) [drama, mystery,
                        sci-fi]
                     No Country for Old Men, dir. A. and J. Coen, USA (2007) [crime, drama,
                        thriller]
                     Shutter Island, dir. M. Scorsese, USA (2010) [mystery, thriller]
                     Prisoners, dir. D. Villeneuve, USA (2013) [crime, drama, mystery]
                     Gone Girl, dir. D. Fincher, USA (2014) [crime, drama, mystery]
                     Room, dir. L. Abrahamson, USA (2015) [drama, thriller]
                     Vampire
                     Dr Terror’s House of Horrors, dir. F. Francis, UK (1965) [horror]
                     Lust for a Vampire, dir. J. Sangster, UK (1971) [horror]
                     Dracula, dir. F. Ford Coppola, USA (1992) [horror]
                     Interview with the Vampire: The Vampire Chronicles, dir. N. Jordan, USA
                        (1994) [drama, horror]
                     From Dusk till Dawn, dir. R. Rodriguez, USA (1996) [action, crime,
                        horror]
                     Blade, dir. S. Norrington, USA (1998) [action, horror, sci-fi]
                     Underworld, dir. L. Wiseman, USA, UK, Germany, Hungary (2003) [action,
                        fantasy, thriller]
                     Van Helsing, dir. S. Sommers, USA, Czech Republic (2004) [action,
                        adventure, fantasy]
                     Twilight, dir. C. Hardwicke, USA (2008) [drama, fantasy, romance]
                     Jennifer’s Body, dir. K. Kusama, USA (2009) [comedy, horror]
                     The Twilight Saga: New Moon, sir. Ch. Weitz, USA (2009) [adventure,
                        drama, fantasy]
                     The Twilight Saga: Eclipse, dir. D. Slade, USA (2010) [adventure, drama,
                        fantasy]
                     The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn Part 1, dir. B. Condon, USA (2011)
                        [adventure, drama, fantasy]
                     The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn Part 2, dir. B. Condon, USA (2012)
                        [adventure, drama, fantasy]
                     Dark Shadows, dir. T. Burton, USA, Australia (2012) [comedy, fantasy,
                        horror]
                     The Mortal Instruments: City of Bones, dir. H. Zwart, USA, Germany,
                        Canada, UK (2013) [action, fantasy, horror]
                     Vampire Academy, dir. M. Waters, USA, UK (2014) [action, comedy,
                        drama]
                     Goosebumps, R. Letterman, USA, Australia (2016) [adventure, comedy,
                        family]
                  
            
         
