Title:  Multimodal Editing and Archival Performance: A Diagrammatic Essay
               on Transcoding Experimental Literature
Volume:  008
Issue:  1
Date:  17 April 2014
Abstract:  
            The aim of PO.EX: A Digital Archive of Portuguese Experimental
                  Literature (http://po-ex.net/) is to
               represent the intermedia and performative textuality of a large corpus of
               experimental works and practices in an electronic database, including some early
               instances of digital literature. This article describes the multimodal editing of
               experimental works in terms of a hypertext rationale, and then demonstrates the
               performative nature of the remediation, emulation, and recreation involved in digital
               transcoding and archiving. Preservation, classification, and networked distribution
               of artifacts are discussed as representational problems within the current
               algorithmic and database aesthetics in knowledge production.
            
         
Full Body Text: 

            1. Digital Editing for Experimental Texts

            The performative dimension of experimental literature challenges our archival
               practices in ways that draw attention to the performative nature of digital archiving
               itself. This article
                  contains a revised and remixed version of three unpublished papers: (a) Digital Editing for Experimental Texts (originally
                  presented at Texts Worth Editing, The Seventh
                  International Conference of the European Society for Textual Scholarship, 25-27
                  November 2010, Pisa and Florence, co-sponsored by Consiglio Nazionale delle
                  Ricerche, Pisa, and Società Dantesca Italiana, Florence); (b) PO.EX 70-80: The Electronic Multimodal Repository (co-written with Rui
                  Torres, and originally presented at E-Poetry 2011:
                     International Emerging Literatures, Media Arts & Digital Culture
                     Festival, State University of New York, Buffalo, 18-21 May 2011); and
                  (c) Performing the Digital Archive: Remediation, Emulation,
                     Recreation (originally presented at the Electronic Literature
                  Organization conference ELO 2012: Electrifying Literature:
                     Affordances and Constraints, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV,
                  20-23 June, 2012). I want to express my gratitude to the organizers of those
                  conferences, particularly to Andrea Bozzi and Peter Robinson, Loss Pequeño
                  Glazier, and Sandy Baldwin. I also want to thank my colleague and friend Rui
                  Torres for a three-year intellectual exchange about the problems of collecting,
                  digitizing, editing, and recreating experimental works of literature. The final
                  version has benefited from insights, comments, and suggestions by the anonymous
                  reviewers of DHQ. This article is part of PO.EX: A Digital Archive of Portuguese Experimental
                     Literature, a research project funded by FCT-Fundação para a Ciência e
                  a Tecnologia and by FEDER and COMPETE of the European Union (Ref.
                  PTDC/CLE-LLI/098270/2008). Decisions about standards for digital encoding, metadata fields, database
               model, and querying methods impose their particular ontologies and structures to
               collections of heterogenous objects derived from historical practices that emphasized
               the eventive nature of signification as an interactive process of production. Instead
               of a transparent remediation of an original autograph object in its digital surrogate
               – a visual effect of the digital facsimile experience that is frequent in scholarly
               archives – multiplicity of media and versions, as well as the programmatic focus on
               live performance as poetic action, call for a self-conscious engagement with the
               differentials of inscription technologies and, ultimately, with the strangeness of
               digital codes as an expression of the performativity of the archive. The PO.EX
               project provided both a context for this heightened awareness of digital archiving as
               an act of transcoding, and an environment for experimenting with forms of archiving
               that attempted to respond to that self-consciousness about archival intervention.
               This article contains an overview of the project and offers an account of how the
               PO.EX Archive has wrestled to address the difficult theoretical questions raised by
               the progress of our research.
            The name PO.EX contains the first syllables of the words
                  POesia EXperimental and it has been used as a general
               acronym for those and subsequent experimental practices since the first retrospective
               exhibition of the movement, which was held at the National Gallery of Art, Lisbon, in
               1980. A second major retrospective was organized by the Serralves Museum of
               Contemporary Art, Porto, in 1999.  For a brief account of the evolution of
                  experimental literary practices in the period 1960-1990 see ; for a detailed bibliography of experimental literary
                  works see .  The PO.EX project
               involved a multidisciplinary team of 13 researchers, with expertise in literary
               studies, communication and information sciences, contemporary art, and computer
               science. At various stages, the project also benefited from the collaboration of 6
               research assistants. A significant part of the work consisted of locating sources,
               digitizing, and classifying them. The PO.EX Digital
                  Archive holds c. 5000 items in multiple formats (text, image, audio, and
               video files) and is scheduled for online publication at the end of 2013. Not
                  all digitized materials will be made available. Most authors (or their executors)
                  granted permission for including reproductions of their works, but we could not
                  clear copyright authorization for all digitized items.  The recently
               finished second stage of the project (PO.EX ’70-80,
               under development 2010-2013) digitized works from the 1970s and 1980s. It was
               preceded by an earlier project (PO.EX ’60, under
               development 2005-2008) that digitized works from the 1960s, namely the magazines and
               exhibition catalogues of the Experimental Poetry movement. The result of the first
               stage was published in 2008 both as a web site and a CD-ROM. In its present
               instantiation PO.EX will be published as an open repository using DSpace.
            Portuguese experimental literature of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s includes visual
               poetry, sound poetry, video-poetry, performance poetry, computer poetry, and several
               other forms of experimental writing. Experimental literary objects, practices, and
               events often consist of an interaction between notational forms on paper (or other
               forms of media inscription) and site-specific live performances. In experimental
               practices, the eventuality of literary meaning is dramatically foregrounded by
               turning the text into a script for an act whose performance co-constitutes the work.
               Such performative practices are poorly documented and yet they may exist in several
               media and in multiple versions. Multiplication of versions across media is another
               aspect of the laboratorial dimension of experimental aesthetics: a visual poem may
               have a version for gallery exhibition, and another for a book collection; its live
               reading may have been sound recorded or it may have become a script for a film or
               computer animation. Fragility and ephemerality of materials also characterize works
               that may have been produced in very small editions or in a single exhibition version.
               The aim of PO.EX: A Digital Archive of Portuguese Experimental
                  Literatutre is to represent this intermedia and procedural textuality in a
               relational database and to explore the research and communicative potential of this
               new archival space.
            The multimedia affordances of hypermedia textuality seem particularly adequate for
               representing those intermedia and performative dimensions of literary practices, and
               also for preserving the ephemeral nature of inscriptional traces that have taken
               multiple forms, including paper and book formats, video and sound recordings, live
               performances and public installations, computer codes and screen displays. The
               aggregation, structuring, and marking up of digital surrogates of this large
               multimodal corpus have interpretative implications that challenge our representations
               of experimental works and practices, and our database imagination for digital
               possibilities. Whether taking the form of facsimiles of books, photographs of
               installations, sound recordings of readings, videos of performances, or emulations of
               early digital poems, digital remediation re-performs the works for the current
               techno-social context. Editing intermedia texts for a digital environment forces us
               to address a number of specific questions related to documents, methods, contexts,
               and uses. 
             The materials included in the PO.EX Digital Archive 
               are, in many ways, similar to those we may find in archives such as UbuWeb, particularly in its early versions, which were
               focused on visual, concrete, and sound poetry.  See, for example, UbuWeb’s FAQ at http://www.ubu.com/resources/faq.html
               
               UbuWeb, however, has grown as an open and decentered
               hypertext without explicit editing principles or scholarly methodology that would
               control the metadata about original sources and their digital remediations. Its
               emphasis falls on collaborative non-institutional construction and on a rationale of
               open access that uses the networked reproduction and distribution of files to provide
               global access to digital versions of rare materials in multiple media (print, sound,
               video, film, radio) that often exist only in limited copies or in inaccessible
               archives. Digital republication, by itself, contributes to a redefinition of the
               cultural and social history of creative practices, since many of these
               experimentations and communities of practice were generally absent from institutional
               print-based narratives of artistic and literary invention. UbuWeb’s inclusive approach has created a vast repository of art
               practices, media, genres, and periods. This approach has produced a new context for
               understanding the nature and history of experimental forms in English (and, to a much
               lesser extent, in a few other languages and cultures) simply as a result of their
               hypertextual contiguity and networked availability. A similar effect may result from
               the PO.EX project: the mere aggregation of dispersed works and textual witnesses in
               various media – some of which were unaware of each other and entirely absent from
               mainstream accounts of contemporary literature and contemporary art – will produce a
               new perception of Portuguese experimental literature both for inside and outside
               observers. The following section briefly sketches some of the questions raised by the
                  PO.EX Digital Archive, and describes its
               infrastructure and content.
         

            2. Material and Textual Dynamics in Multimodal Remediation 

            Given that a significant part of the materials are rare, and in some cases exist only
               in a single instance, one of the declared aims of the PO.EX project is to collect and
               preserve our artistic and cultural heritage through digital remediation. This is
               especially true of (1) visual texts, collages and other ephemeral works of which
               there is only the original object, (2) sound and video recordings that have never
               been published or distributed before, and (3) computer works that cannot be run in
               current digital environments (see Torres 2010). A survey of published and unpublished
               materials housed in public and private collections, and sometimes in the writers’
               archives, revealed the existence of a large body of work in multiple media. One
                  of the major sources for this project has been the Archive
                     Fernando Aguiar. Fernando Aguiar, one of the authors of the group and
                  organizer of several national and international exhibitions and festivals since
                  the mid-1980s, has been collecting works and related documentation for more than
                  three decades. The PO.EX Digital Archive includes
                  works by the following authors: Abílio [Abílio-José Santos] (1926-1992); Alberto
                  Pimenta (1937-); Américo Rodrigues (1961-); Ana Hatherly (1929-); Antero de Alda
                  (1961-); António Aragão (1921-2008); António Barros (1953-); António Dantas
                  (1954-); António Nelos (1949-); Armando Macatrão (1957-); César Figueiredo
                  (1954-); Emerenciano (1946-); E.M. de Melo e Castro (1932-); Fernando Aguiar
                  (1956-); Gabriel Rui Silva (1956-); Jorge dos Reis (1971-); José-Alberto Marques
                  (1939-); Liberto Cruz [Álvaro Neto ] (1935-); Pedro Barbosa (1948-); Salette
                  Tavares (1922-1994); and Silvestre Pestana (1949-).  Three features are
               common to PO.EX authors: openness to experimentation in different technological media
               (such as printing techniques, audiotape, film, video, and computers); willingness to
               participate in the public sphere and engage in social and political debates
               (producing works for television, for instance, or works of public art); and a general
               inter-art sensibility that places verbal language in an intermedia tension with
               visual art, video art, installation, performance, theatre, and music. Representing
               the polymedia and polytextual dynamics of these works – within a network that
               includes, in some cases, preparatory documents and multiple versions, and also
               authorial and non-authorial critical texts – became the main theoretical and
               technical challenge of the project.

            
               
                  Planographic, three-dimensional, phonographic, videographic, digital, and
                     performative materialities. The structuring of works into six material clusters
                     privileged technologies of inscription of the original objects and also the
                     visual, sound, spatial, and participatory modes of experiencing
                  them.
               
               
               
            

            Our analysis and description of the collected materials recognized six types of
               materialities that were to be digitally represented in the archive: planographic,
               three-dimensional, phonographic, videographic, digital, and performative [see Figure 1]. Materiality, a category that subsumes the
               artistic medium and production techniques of the originals, was also conceived in
               terms of a differential relation to the code-based medium of digital reinscription
               with its screen-based interface for perceptual experience. Thus the mode of original
               technical inscription and of its particular perceptual experience, rather than the
               artistic discipline or genre, became the basis for categorizing the work’s
               materiality. For each item a digital surrogate would be generated through specific
               encoding procedures and formats, and its metadata would contain fields describing the
               original objects as well as fields describing the surrogates. The following diagrams
               explain the remediating dynamics for different kinds of objects: printed pages of
               text, including visual poems [see Figure 2], artists’
               books and public art [see Figure 3], audiotaped sound
               poems [see Figure 4], video works [see Figure 5], early computer works [see Figure 6], and performance-based practices [see Figure 7]. Two examples are given for each type of
                  remediation. Most printed texts (including manifestos, critical essays, and
                  reception documents) are remediated as digital facsimiles in image formats. They
                  are not transcribed as alphanumeric text. Although this option is justifiable
                  because of the constellated and visual character of many works, it was also
                  determined by our limited resources in time and money. Works and documents in
                  standard typographic layout should also have been transcribed into digital text
                  formats. This would enable complex queries in the textual body. One of the
                  consequences of this limitation is that most of the critical dimension of the
                  archive depends on the taxonomies used for associating metadata with each
                  particular item. 
            

            
               
                  Planographic materialities. Manual and printed planographic
                  inscriptions are remediated through textual transcription and/or digital
                  images.
               
               
            

            
               
                  Three-dimensional materialities. Three-dimensional works are
                  remediated through image and video files.Additional planographic inscriptions are
                  remediated through textual transcription and/or digital images.
               
               
            
            
               
                  Phonographic materialities. Analog sound recordings are remediated
                  by digital audio formats. Additional planographic documentation is remediated
                  through textual transcription and/or digital images.
               
               
            
            
               
                  Videographic materialities. Analog video works are remediated by
                  digital video formats. Additional planographic documentation is remediated through
                  textual transcription and/or digital images.
               
               
            
            
               
                  Digital materialities. Computer works are remediated through
                  emulations and/or recreations in current scripts and formats. Additional
                  planographic documentation is remediated through textual transcription and/or
                  digital images.
               
               
            
            
               
                  Performative materialities. Depending on the material nature of
                  existing documentation, performance works will be remediated according to one or
                  more of the following material translations: planographic, phonographic or
                  videographic.
               
               
            
            The multiple material and textual mediations in a digital archive of multimodal works
               can be illustrated with Soneto Ecológico [Ecological Sonnet] (1985, 2005), by Fernando Aguiar. This
               work is a public park in which seventy trees of ten different species (autochthonous
               from Western Iberia) have been planted according to line and rhyme patterns of
               Portuguese classical sonnets (14 lines, abab cdcd efe fef). The work was originally
               created as three-dimensional model and blueprint for the park, and was exhibited
               several times in this form. Twenty years after its first presentation, the projected
               park was finally created in the town of Matosinhos [see Figure 8]. Digital representation of this work in the archive is achieved
               by means of a network of files: photographs of the original 3D model, digitized
               images of textual descriptions, plans and diagrams, as well as photographs and videos
               of the actual park. These are further complemented with an interview of the author,
               and several reception documents. The archive will thus generate three contexts for
               reading this work: the context of its own textual and material history; the context
               of parodies of the sonnet form in the PO.EX movement; and the context of ecological
               awareness in national policies for forestation and protection of local tree
               species.

            
                Fernando Aguiar, Soneto Ecológico (1985, 2005). ©
                  Photograph by Fernando Aguiar, 2008.
               
               
            
         

            3. Problems of Remediation and Theoretical Frameworks 


             Remediation of this multimodal corpus raises two clusters of theoretical and
               technical problems. The first cluster of problems originates at the level of the
               source materials for the archive, such as selecting from the source materials those
               documentary evidences (in multiple media) that will come to represent a given body of
               works and, in some cases, live performances of works. Selected works and documents
               can be transcoded according to several technical protocols. Digital representation of
               the source objects generally follows a hypertext rationale, as established and
               formalized by scholarly electronic editions of literary and artistic works published
               since the mid-1990s. This means producing digital facsimiles and transcriptions,
               marking up variations and versions, and creating elaborate metadata both about the
               digital surrogates and their source objects. The second cluster of problems derives
               from issues posed by the new archival medium. We need to work with a model of
               electronic space that takes full advantage of its processing, aggregative, and
               collaborative functionalities as a new space for using the archived materials in new
               contexts, including teaching, research, and other creative practices. In this
               section, I discuss issues of remediation related to print, audio, and born-digital
               artifacts, and I will place the archive within theoretical frameworks useful for
               thinking about editorial questions raised by the multimodal and experimental nature
               of its content. 


            
               3.1. Remediating Print: The Hypertext Rationale as a Model for E-Space

               The first problem concerns the re/presentation of texts and books in ways that
                  embody current principles for electronic textual editing ; ; ; ; ; . Major scholarly
                  electronic textual editing projects of the late 1990s and early 2000s have adopted
                  Jerome McGann’s hypertext rationale (2001[1996]). McGann
                  conceived of hypertext as a metacritical tool that would allow editors to move
                  beyond the codex rationale, liberating texts from their hierarchical confinement
                  in the inscriptional space of the book. Once texts were remediated in digital
                  form, bibliographic codes could be more thoroughly apprehended and investigated,
                  while the genetic and social dynamics of textual production could be marked and
                  digitally represented as a network of historically situated inscriptions:
                The exigencies of the book form forced editorial scholars to
                  develop fixed points of relation – the definitive text,
                     copy text, ideal text, Ur
                     text, standard text, and so forth – in order to
                  conduct a book-bound navigation (by coded forms) through large bodies of
                  documentary materials. Such fixed points no longer have to govern the ordering of
                  the documents. As with the nodes on the Internet, every documentary moment in the
                  hypertext is absolute with respect to the archive as a whole, or with respect to
                  any subarchive that may have been (arbitrarily) defined within the archive. In
                  this sense, computerized environments have established the new Rationale of HyperText. 
               
               Every material instantiation is a new textual instantiation that can be
                  represented as an item in a database of electronic files. Peter L. Shillingsburg
                  sums up this view of the material incommensurability of each textual instantiation
                  through the concept of script acts as networks of genetic and
                  social documents: 
                     By script acts I do not mean just those acts involved in
                        writing or creating scripts; I mean every sort of act conducted in relation
                        to written and printed texts, including every act of reproduction and every
                        act of reading.
                     
                  . Once encoded and marked-up as electronic texts, past textual iterations
                  are reiterated as machine-processable forms. The hypertext
                     rationale implies digitizing and structuring materials in ways that
                  give a meta-representational function to the process of de-centering and
                  re-constellating their textual modularities in digital formats. Texts are not just
                  pluralized in their various authorial and editorial forms but they are also
                  re-networked within large ensembles of production and reception documents.
                  Hypertext became a research tool for understanding the multidimensional dynamics
                  of text, and for testing social editing as theory of textuality. In the electronic
                  medium, the scholarly edition is reconfigured as an archive that attempts to make
                  explicit the editorial frames that have produced each textual instance in its past
                  bibliographic materiality. Self-awareness of textual transmission and intertextual
                  dependence, coupled to a hypertext rationale for electronic editing, resulted in a
                  general movement away from the discrete book-like digital edition to
                  a radial and fragmented all-inclusive archive. 
                This hypertext rationale for electronic editing of print (and manuscript) works
                  has been tested and embodied in several literary archives. That is the case, for
                  example, of text-and-image digital archives such as the 
                     Rossetti Archive
                   (1993-2008), 
                     The William Blake Archive
                   (1996-present), 
                     Radical Scatters: Emily's Dickinson's Late Fragments and
                        Related Texts, 1870-1886
                   (1999), 
                     Artists’ Books Online
                   (2006) and, more recently, the 
                     Samuel Beckett Digital Manuscript Project
                   (2011-present). All of them can be described as experiments in critical
                  editing and metatextual representation that use the aggregative and simulative
                  affordances of the medium for a heightened perception of the materiality of
                  inscriptions, and for an open production of context as a reconfigurable network of
                  textual relations. This networked reframing of textual production and reception
                  through hypertextual remediation is often expressed in terms of documentary
                  inclusiveness and descriptive exhaustiveness:
               The Rossetti Archive aims to include high-quality digital images
                  of every surviving documentary state of DGR's works: all the manuscripts, proofs,
                  and original editions, as well as the drawings, paintings, and designs of various
                  kinds, including his collaborative photographic and craft works. These primary
                  materials are transacted with a substantial body of editorial commentary, notes,
                  and glosses. See home page, 2nd paragraph: http://www.rossettiarchive.org/
                   (Rossetti Archive, 2008)
               The core of ABsOnline is the presentation of artists' books in
                  digital format. Books are represented by descriptive information, or metadata,
                  that follows a three-level structure taken from the field of bibliographical
                  studies: work, edition, and object. An additional level, images, provides for
                  display of the work from cover to cover in a complete series of page images (when
                  available), or representative images. See Site Basics:
                        The Conceptual Framework of Artists’ Books Online, 2nd paragraph, in
                        About the Project
                     http://www.artistsbooksonline.org/mission.html
                   (Artists Books Online, 2006)
               The representation of texts and images as a networked, aggregated and socialized
                  archive is also a way of testing a theoretical approach by exploring specific
                  features of the electronic writing and reading space. Johanna Drucker has
                  eloquently argued for the importance of modeling the functionality of e-space in
                  ways that reflect a thorough understanding of the dynamics of book structures, but
                  also in ways that go beyond the structures of the codex and take full advantage of
                  programmable networked media. She highlights the following affordances of digital
                  materiality: continuous reconfiguration of digital artifacts at the level of code,
                  the capacity to mark those reconfigurations, the aggregation of documents and data
                  in integrated environments, and the creation of spaces for collaboration and
                  intersubjective exchange . Designing a
                  digital archive depends on the best possible articulation between re/presenting
                  and remediating the materials and inscribing that remediated representation in the
                  specifics of the database ontology and algorithmic functionalities of networked
                  digital materiality [see Figure 9]. 

               
                   Screenshot of an alphabetized display of file titles by António Aragão.
                     When placed in alphabetic order new patterns of relations between graphic
                     surfaces emerge. Released from the specific modularity of codex structures,
                     graphic surfaces can be retrieved and navigated according to a hypertext
                     rationale defined by database structure and search algorithms. © PO.EX Archive,
                     2013. 
                  
                  
               
            


            
               3.2. Remediating Audio: Close Listening Texts in E-Space

               A second re/presentation problem in the PO.EX Digital
                     Archive derives from the centrality of multimodal modes of
                  communication for experimental literary practices. Audio, film, video and other
                  media technologies were creatively explored in various institutional and
                  non-institutional settings. Verbal and written experimentation extended to a
                  programmatic exploration of the expressive potential of sound and video recording
                  or computer processing, for example. These multimedia textualities, which
                  challenged the codex- and print-centric hegemony of mainstream literary forms,
                  also raise specific textual problems when it comes to editing. Charles Bernstein’s
                  apologia of poetry’s audiotextuality  – which later
                  became a justification for the 
                     PennSound
                   archive –, is particularly useful in this connection. Bernstein stresses
                  the historical and poetical value of the recorded human voice reading poetry.
                  Sound recordings are seen as evidence of the plural existence of literary works.
                  Each recorded reading is a unique textual instantiation of the work:
               
                  The poem, viewed in terms of its multiple performances, or
                     mutual intertranslatability, has a fundamentally plural existence.  This is
                     most dramatically enunciated when instances of the work are contradictory or
                     incommensurable, but it is also the case when versions are commensurate. To
                     speak of the poem in performance is, then, to overthrow the idea of the poem as
                     a fixed, stable, finite linguistic object; it is to deny the poem its
                     self-presence and its unity.  Thus, while performance emphasizes the material
                     presence of the poem, and of the performer, it at the same time denies the
                     unitary presence of the poem, which is to say its metaphysical unity.
                  
               
               He also highlights the fact that audiotexts are yet another instance of the
                  multiple textuality of the poem: 
                     The audio text may be one more generally discounted
                        destabilizing textual element, an element that undermines our ability to fix
                        and present any single definitive, or even stable, text of the poem.
                        Grammaphony is not an alternative to textuality but rather throws us deeper
                        into its folds.
                     
                  . The availability of sound recording thus creates a historical situation in
                  which the written text can cease to be identified as the primary literary
                  instance: 
                     A widely available digital audio poetry archive will have
                        a pronounced influence on the production of new poetry. In the coming
                        digital present, it becomes possible to imagine poets preparing and
                        releasing poems that exist only as sound files, with no written text, or for
                        which a written text is secondary.
                     
                  
               
                His close listening rationale, as expressed in the PennSound
                     Manifesto (2003), for instance, suggests a combination of bibliographic
                  principles with the modular and social affordances of the new medium. In this
                  sense, it parallels McGann’s hypertext rationale as a programmatic intervention
                  for placing written textual instances in a radiant dynamics that is independent
                  from their bibliographic origins. Bernstein envisions audio textualities as a
                  series of discrete, single, and technically standardized files that can be
                  appropriated and combined by listeners in terms of the modularity of the digital
                  file and not in terms of their pre-digital media source: 
                     It must be free and downloadable.
                     It must be MP3 or better.
                     It must be singles.
                     It must be named.
                     It must embed bibliographic information in the file.
                      It must be indexed. : PennSound Manifesto
                     
                  
               
               A de-centered downloadable audiotext archive would encourage a renewed aural
                  perception of poetry, which could then be released from its grammacentric frame of
                  perception. Bernstein wants the sound archive to foster live encounters with
                  audiotexts perceived as literary experiences and not merely as a collection of
                  historical documents. Networked distribution of artistic and cultural forms has
                  transformative implications for our politics of cultural transmission. 

               
                  Screenshot of the PO.EX interface for a section of the archive containing
                     audio-recordings of visual texts. © PO.EX Archive, 2013. 
                  
                  
               
               The PO.EX Digital Archive includes a series of sound
                  and video recorded readings that highlight the presence of audiotextuality and
                  performativity as an intrinsic layer of textual practices Figure 10. These readings were commissioned specifically for inclusion
                  in the archive, and they are part of a critical intervention in the presentation
                  of the materials that explores remediation as an opportunity for creative
                  appropriations beyond the mere phonographic archaeological reconstitution. This
                  particular mode of presentation follows an audiotext rationale that offers users
                  non-hierarchical access to multiple pairs of visual text and audio clips. In
                  several instances, recordings contain performances of visual texts that have never
                  been read aloud before. Vocalization of their visual patterns opens up their
                  notational strategies to new sound appropriations. The audio is producing the
                  visual anew and cannot be perceived as a mere record from the past. The
                  documentary function of the digital facsimile as a surrogate of a printed visual
                  poem has been displaced by a reading intervention that calls attention to itself
                  and to the archive as a performance space. 
            

            
               3.3. Remediating the Digital: Reconstructing Born-Digital Artifacts 

                A third set of problems originates in the republication of early digital works
                  for which it is no longer possible to reconstitute the original hardware and
                  software environment. Information and library science protocols and standards for
                  the preservation of digital information have been defined, and various
                  institutional initiatives have addressed specific problems posed by digital media
                     artworks. See, for instance, the  Digital
                        Formats Web Site  (2004-2011), which is part of the National Digital
                     Information Infrastructure and Preservation Program of the Library of Congress.
                     In the domain of new media and internet art, see the research project and
                     symposium Archiving the Avant Garde: Documenting and Preserving Digital/Media Art
                     (2007, UC Berkeley). Archiving the Avant
                        Garde is a consortium project of the University of California,
                     Berkeley Art Museum, and Pacific Film Archive (with the Solomon R. Guggenheim
                     Museum, Cleveland Performance Art Festival and Archive, Franklin Furnace
                     Archive, and Rhizome.org).  Matthew G. Kirshenbaum and others 
                   have developed the concept of computers as complete environments in the context of
                  preserving writer’s archives that contain born-digital artifacts.  Their
                     case studies include (1) computers and disks of authors such as Michael Joyce,
                     Norman Mailer, Terrence McNally, and Arnold Wesker, housed at The Harry Ransom
                     Center at The University of Texas at Austin; (2) computers and disks of Salman
                     Rushdie held at The Emory University Libraries; and (3) hardware, software, and
                     other collectible material from Deena Larsen, acquired by the Maryland
                     Institute for Technology in the Humanities .
                   They argue for the evidentiary value of hardware and storage media, the
                  importance of imaging hard drives and other disk media, the use of forensic
                  recovery techniques, and documenting the original physical settings in which the
                  writer’s computers were used .
                The Electronic Literature Organization started a directory and repository of
                  electronic literature in 1999, and its Preservation,
                     Archiving, and Dissemination (PAD) initiative produced two significant
                  reports outlining strategies for preserving present and past forms of electronic
                  literature ; . The 2004
                  report by Montfort and Wardrip-Fruin makes a set of recommendations for keeping
                  electronic literature alive, that is, readable and accessible. The authors
                  describe four strategies for the preservation of digital information:  1) Old Hardware Is Preserved to Run Old Systems; 2) Old Programs
                     Are Emulated or Interpreted on New Hardware; 3) Old Programs and Media Are
                     Migrated to New Systems; 4) Systems Are Documented Along with Instructions for
                     Recreating Them. They further summarize their ideas in 13 principles
                  for long-lasting electronic literature . Early works
                  were often poorly documented and authors were generally not concerned whether
                  their programs and texts survived technological changes, making recovery and
                  reconstruction a difficult task.
               Recognizing that current e-literature communities are already investing in
                  strategies for preserving digital information, Liu et al.
                  emphasize that born-digital artifacts are characterized by having 
                     dynamic, interactive, or networked behaviors and other
                        experimental features — including, but not limited to, works making use of
                        hypertext, reader collaboration, other kinds of interaction, animated text
                        or graphics, generated text, and game structures.
                     
                  
               
               The authors consider preservation as part of a generic migration process and they
                  highlight two major strategies: the first involves interpreting and emulating
                  electronic literature so that works that are now difficult or impossible to read
                  can be tested again 
                     in a form as functionally like the original as
                        possible
                     
                  ; the second migration strategy is to describe or represent work in a format
                  that can later be moved to alternative formats and software: 
                     [t]his representational method may not always be able to
                        maintain all the functions of the original work. But even so, it has the
                        advantage of being standardized (for interoperability); and it can
                        supplement or enhance the workings of the original.
                     
                  
               
               The PO.EX Digital Archive contains examples of
                  computer works by three pioneers of digital literature: Pedro Barbosa, Silvestre
                  Pestana, and E.M. de Melo e Castro. In most cases, the possibility of
                  reconstructing the code for their early works is limited by lack of specific
                  documentation. In the case of Pedro Barbosa our archive includes handwritten notes
                  and diagrams describing iterations and transformations, and also printed outputs
                  of generative texts from mid to late 1970s. Melo e Castro produced a series of
                  animated poems between 1986 and 1989 in collaboration with the Open University in
                  Lisbon, but they were recorded as VHS videos, and little technical information
                  exists about the specifics of software and hardware used for generating and
                  animating those texts. In both cases, any code recovery would have to work back
                  from the effects observed in the printed output, in one case, or in the videos, in
                  the other, and try to infer the codes and processes for the observable visual and
                  textual operations. Recovery would imply some kind of interpretive emulation that
                  translates paper output or video output back into some form of input code
                  compatible with current systems, or perhaps some kind of media archaeology
                  approach capable of identifying their original machines and rewriting their
                  programs. In these two cases, users of the archive will be able to see facsimiles
                  of the original handwritten notes and punched tapes as well as the videopoems, but
                  the texts will not be generated or animated by code.
               The work of artist Silvestre Pestana provides another example of how PO.EX has
                  addressed the problems of migrating born-digital work. Computer poetry is the title of a series of poems he produced in 1981
                  [see Figure 11]. At the time, Pestana purchased a
                  Spectrum personal computer with which he made the first three versions of his
                  monochrome visual computer poetry: the first is dedicated to E. M. de Melo e
                  Castro, the second to Henri Chopin, and the third to Julian Beck. Despite being
                  the only instance of such work in Portugal in 1981 (Pedro Barbosa, active since
                  1975, was working mainly with text generation), this work of dynamic and
                  generative visual poetry still offers important clues for understanding the
                  evolution of computer-animated visual poetry and its relation to the printed
                  visual poetry of the experimental poets. The work was never published. Its code
                  (with some errors recently identified and corrected by the author) was published
                  in the book Poemografias, an anthology of visual
                  poetry co-edited by Pestana . In
                  this case, Pestana’s early Computer Poems can be
                  emulated for the current networked environment, since the community of Spectrum
                  users has made available code forms that run in a Java environment. Although
                  unable to recover the material environment of its original execution, this
                  migration resulted in a version that approximates the functionality of the
                  original. 
               
                  Silvestre Pestana, Computer Poetry (1981;
                     screenshot from the emulated version, 2010). © Silvestre Pestana 1981, and
                     PO.EX Archive, 2013.
                  
                  
               
            
         

            4. Representation, Simulation, Interaction 

            Shillingsburg has formalized a working model for electronic scholarly editions  and . Based on his
               observation of the achievements and shortcomings of editions and archives developed
               during the first two decades of electronic scholarly editing, Shillingsburg proposed
               four sets of questions that must be answered by the infrastructure and
               functionalities of the edition or archive . The first group of questions concerns the relations between
               different documentary states of the text and how these relations are made visible for
               readers. The second set deals with methodological issues about how editorial
               interventions are made clear. The third group addresses the ways in which a context
               for the primary texts is produced in the archive through both autograph and allograph
               materials. Finally, the fourth set of questions details the uses of the edition or
               archive, including interactions such as making personal collections and annotations
               on the materials. 
             Although some of those questions may be more relevant for historical materials for
               which there are multiple print and handwritten witnesses, most of them can be applied
               to a project devoted to contemporary experimental literature. Contemporary practices
               take place in a multimedia environment in which versions are also a function of their
               multiple media inscriptions and not necessarily from later transmission or
               remediation processes. Because of their programmatic emphasis on process and
               performance, experimental practices tend to generate multiple textual instances of
               any given work: a sound poem, for instance, will often have one or several written
               notations (a performance manuscript or typescript, sometimes a published version),
               and one or more sound or video recordings of live performances. This combination of
               ephemerality and multiplicity, of scarcity and abundance, poses challenges for any
               editing and archival project of late 20th-century experimental literature in a
               digital environment that are similar to problems raised by documentary and critical
               editing of historical material of earlier periods. 
            
               Electronic infrastructure for script acts (model adapted from ).
               
               
            
            By means of the concept of electronic edition or archive as knowledge site, Shillingsburg has tried to capture a set of textual,
               contextual, interpretive, and interactive features that any literary edition or
               archive must provide for current and future users. These features imply a synthesis
               between documentary and critical edition that takes advantage of the affordances of
               the medium. We could say that his model, based on electronic editing projects
               developed in the 1990s and early 2000s, is an attempt to invent the digital medium
               for editing purposes. Shillingsburg has structured his electronic infrastrutcture for script acts into four levels: textual
               foundations; contexts and progressions; interpretive interactions; and user
               enhancements [see Figure 12]. Textual foundations refers to basic data, inferred data, internal data
               links, bibliographic analysis, and textual analysis; contexts
                  and progressions includes contextualized data (for each stage of textual
               existence), intertextuality, and linguistic analysis; interpretive interactions refers to reception history and adaptations;
               and user enhancements considers the possibility of users
               adding new markup, creating new variant texts, and writing commentary and explanatory
               and personal notes . 
             Shillingsburg’s model for electronic editing helped us to make explicit our options
               for document selection and for digital representation, including database structure,
               bibliographic and semantic metadata, and interface form. Despite its critical and
               theoretical sophistication, this model is still insufficient for the specific nature
               of this project. On the one hand, textual, methodological, and contextual principles
               need to be adapted to the multimedia textuality of this particular corpus of
               experimental literature; on the other hand, we want to experiment with creative
               possibilities for digital remediation of the collected materials. Theoretical and
               technical issues triggered by ongoing research also impact on the possible uses of
               the archive. Especially important in this regard, are the social and academic uses
               that we want and expect this archive to support and encourage. The gathering of rare,
               disperse, and often inaccessible materials, and the creation of a user-friendly
               interface to a relational multimedia database should be equally productive for
               general online reading/viewing/listening practices (including access through mobile
               devices) and for specialized teaching and research purposes. 
             Although the computational implementation of all aspects identified by Shillingsburg
               is more complex, time consuming, and costly than what we could hope to accomplish in
               a three-year project, we tried to explore them at least in their theoretical
               implications. The aim would be for this archive to fruitfully combine the
               preservation, repositorial, and dissemination functions, with the creation of a
               research resource capable of generating new knowledge in the future. This seems to be
               the best way to maximize the simulation and interactive capabilities of digital
               environments and digital tools as knowledge sites. Even if we had to limit the
               structure and functionality of the archive to what was computationally feasible
               within our resources, we have tried to think through the electronic infrastructure of
                  PO.EX Digital Archive with our best theoretical and
               technical imagination. 
             As a multimodal archive of experimental literature it should be both an aggregate of
               digital surrogates of various media works (and related documentation) and an
               investigation into the possibilities of digital representation and database structure
               that creatively explores the materiality of the medium and of its codes. The
               possibility of creating a fluid environment – open to addition and restructuring as a
               result of ongoing and future critical interactions between users and objects – is one
               example of the kind of remodeling and progressive categorization inherent in the
               flexibility of digital representation as reconfigurable and self-documenting data.
               Reconceived as a remediated critical environment, the digital archive should be able
               to sustain and encourage reflexive feedbacks between textual representation,
               contextual simulation, and interpretative interaction [see Figure 13]. 
            
               Three functions for the digital archive as remediated critical
                     environment: textual representation, contextual simulation, and
                  interpretative interaction. 
               
               
            
         

            5. Performing the Digital Archive 

            Current modes of knowledge production participate in the general database aesthetics
               of digital culture. Situated between information science protocols and digital
               humanities research projects, digital archives have become the
               current historical form of an institutional desire for structured, aggregated,
               displayable, and manipulable representations. If archival meaning is codetermined in
               advance by the structure that archives, the order of the archive – its politics of
               representation – coproduces the writings and readings by means of specific
               preservation and presentation strategies. Inclusion and exclusion, as well as the
               conceptual and interpretative apparatus expressed in structure and interaction
               design, frame the archive also (1) as an archive of its own editorial theory, (2) as
               an instantiation of its technological affordances and institutional settings, and (3)
               as a program for perception and use. The following sections describe the digital
               archive as a performance of its contents. Performative transcodification in the PO.EX
               Archive can be seen in digitization and metadata, on the one hand, and in the
               recreation of works, on the other. 


            
               5.1. Intermediation, Translation, Classification

               We can distinguish three levels of performativity in digital archiving, each of
                  them involving one cluster of problems: (1) the first level relates to problems of
                  digital representation such as selection of objects, digitization protocols, and
                  file formatting – the archive performs the relation of digital surrogates or
                  versions to their originals through the remediation of a plurality of materials;
                  (2) the second level relates to problems of organization and retrieval of digital
                  objects, including database structure, document modeling, and metadata – at this
                  level, the archive performs the relations of digital objects to themselves and to
                  each other, according to category-building processes; (3) the third level relates
                  to problems of functionality and interaction design, such as search algorithms,
                  display, and web interface – the archive performs the relations of digital objects
                  to subjects as users and readers [see Figure 14]. 
               
                  
                     Three layers of relations in digital archiving: (1) materials
                     remediated in the archive refer back to an external order, i.e., digital
                     representations express relations of surrogates to originals; (2) through
                     database structure and metadata, surrogates are placed in relation to each
                     other, i.e., they establish an internal order; (3) functionality and
                     interaction design embodied in the interface establish a program of relations
                     of surrogates to users, i.e., they create an intermediating dynamics between
                     the affordances and constraints of the archive and its actual uses.
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                     Digital archiving as intermediation: the digital archive (2)
                     functions as a programmed intermediation between users (3) and its own digital
                     instantiations (1) of remediated materials.
                  
                  
               
               When these three levels are fully articulated, we can say that the archive
                  functions as an instance of intermediation between prior material and media forms
                  and their digital remediation, on the one hand, and also as an instance of
                  intermediation between those digital representations and certain practices of
                  reading and use, on the other [see Figure 15].
                  Considered in its digitally mediated condition, the archive (a) models
                  handwritten, print, audio, video, and digital documents through specific data
                  formats and markup, (b) makes them searchable and retrievable through algorithmic
                  processes, (c) displays them as a network of navigable related items, and (d)
                  aggregates them in a collaborative space for further analysis and manipulation.
                  Through those functions, the archive expresses the database aesthetics of digital
                  culture, and engages the encyclopedic, procedural, spatial, and participatory
                  affordances of the medium, as described by Janet Murray .
               
                  
                     Digital archiving as representational tension: analysis and
                     description of material and textual features of the originals (A1, A2) will
                     determine choices concerning digital remediation in terms of both format and
                     metadata (B1, B2). The order of the archive is based on this representational
                     tension between some sort of agreed material and textual correspondence to an
                     external order (A) and the reconfigurative difference of its processibility and
                     medium-specific internal order (B).
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                     Digital archiving as translation: material and textual
                     relations in the originals (A1, A2) are translated into material and textual
                     relations in the surrogates (B1, B2). Translation takes place at the material
                     level of transcoding (adoption of specific digital standards and formats for
                     generating text, image, audio, and video files, including transcoding between
                     earlier and current digital formats) and at the metadata level of textual
                     description and classification. The archive order is a multilayered documentary
                     and critical simulation of external relations mediated by its own internal
                     structures and forms.
                  
                  
               
               Another way of understanding the material and textual performativity inherent in
                  digital archiving is to think of the digital archive as a process of translation
                  [See Figures 16 and 17]. The transcoding of objects in digital format is based on
                  an assessment of material and textual features of the source objects and on
                  decisions about the best way to represent those features in digitized form –
                  facsimile images, textual transcriptions, standards for audio and video encoding,
                  transcoding between digital formats. Remediation creates object-to-object
                  correspondences across media, while submitting the surrogates to constraints and
                  affordances of the new medium, such as modularity and processibility. Material and
                  textual relations are reconstituted within the archival order also as a network of
                  interrelations whose internal order is in tension with an external order. 
               This process of media translation can be illustrated with the naming system for
                  files in the archive [see Figure 18]. The creation
                  of a digital archive implies the cumulative production of a large quantity of
                  files that maintain a network of relationships among themselves and between them
                  and their sources. Descriptive metadata (that identify the contents and technical
                  data of the file) and administrative metadata (that identify creators and editors
                  of the file) enable producers and users to assess the authenticity, integrity, and
                  quality of the data. In addition to this self-description associated with each
                  file, it is also important that the overall organization of the archive and of the
                  adopted remediation methodology are reflected in the directory structure and
                  naming conventions of files, which should become clear, in the first place, for
                  all project participants, and also for users. These conventions should allow not
                  only a clear understanding of relations between files that derive from each other,
                  but also their relationship with the objects, collections, and repositories of
                  origin. Naming conventions should also allow the continuous addition of new
                  elements within their scheme of hierarchies and associations (see ). 
               
                  
                     Correspondences between external and internal orders of the archive as
                        reflected in the file-naming system: the first sequence of initial
                     letters preceding the dot serves to identify the archival source of the
                     original document from which digital versions were obtained. The second
                     sequence of letters is used to identify the author of the work (in the case of
                     works with multiple authorship, authors’ identifiers are separated by dots).
                     The third letter sequence contains the initials of the work’s title (followed
                     by a number if there is more than one digital representation of the same work).
                     Sequences of digits that follow the letters identify the relative order of
                     derivation of digital objects when files with variable resolutions are created
                     from the same matrix. The final extension identifies the file type (.tif, .jpg,
                     .pdf, .mpg, .mov, .flv, etc.). Each file name situates the object within the
                     ecology of the archive and traces its origin to a media source outside the
                     digital archive. 
                  
                  
               
               Archival performance takes place also at the level of database organization and
                  search algorithms as expressions of a classification system. Metadata will define
                  the hierarchical and networked relations between items, determining the
                  representation of the collections and the associative retrieval of items.
                  Overlapping hierarchies and cross-relations establish the ontological
                  representation of the archive as an aggregation of explicitly related and
                  searchable items. Machine performance is dependent upon a category-building
                  process that gives form and structure to a collection of items. We have made some
                  effort to keep our system relatively flexible since we recognized the limitations
                  of current taxonomies and systems of classification for forms of literature that
                  are defined essentially by intermediality, and by the combination of literary and
                  artistic genres, conventions, and techniques. As in the case of electronic
                  literature (see ), there is no set of agreed semantic
                  operators for describing many of the works in this archive. 
               Our taxonomy uses three overlapping systems of classification in an attempt to
                  combine our own analysis of the corpus with the historical vocabulary of the
                  practitioners (keywords) and also with standard Dublin Core descriptors. 
                     Cf. Dublin Core Metadata
                     Initiative
                  . I highlight one particular aspect of the proposed
                  taxonomy which is the interaction between the description of material, media, and
                  technique (which we have called materialities) with the description
                  of transtextual relations (which we have called metatextualities and
                     paratextualities) [see Figures 19, 20 and 21]. We tried to strike
                  a balance between two desirable aims: the need of bringing into the database
                  structure some of the vocabulary and categories that reflect the original
                  communities of practice, with their particular intentions and contexts; and the
                  need to provide a critical and classificatory perspective that uses taxonomies
                  validated by scientific and academic communities. Although the taxonomies have
                  been generated through close observation of the specifics of the selected corpus,
                  they were also subject to the requirements of higher-level descriptions that allow
                  them to be interoperable with other databases (.
               
                  
                     Digital archiving as taxonomy: materialities (1) as the
                     combined description of materials, media and techniques (digital, phonographic,
                     performative, planographic, three-dimensional, videographic).
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                     Digital archiving as taxonomy: transtextualities as the
                     combined description of autograph and allograph metatextualities
                     (2) and paratextualities (3)
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                     Digital archiving as taxonomy: keywords (4) as a set of tags
                     based on categories defined by the original communities of practice; Dublin Core fields (5) as a series of standardized
                     metadata descriptors.
                  
                  
               

               Finally the interface itself – including graphical design, navigation structure,
                  and search capabilities – becomes another layer in the performance of the archive,
                  producing certain kinds of display and modes of access to digital surrogates.
                  Functionalities embedded in the interface establish a program of use, influencing
                  users’ perception of the holdings and structure of the archive. Working as a frame
                  of reference for the entire database, the interface co-performs the content for
                  the user. At the same time, through an unanticipated choreography of interactions,
                  which will evolve over time, the archive can re-imagine itself.
            

            
               5.2. Rereading, Rewriting, Recreating

               Remediation is also occasion for re-imagination. An example of this re-imagination
                  of the remediating dynamics is one strategy we have called
                     releitura [rereading]. Here the
                  digital facsimile approach has been substituted by a formal intervention that uses
                  the original work as a program for further textual instantiations that can be
                  developed through the use of code. Remediation becomes a creative translation that
                  rewrites the text with scripts that explore its signifying potential within the
                  new medium. Digital representation has become an occasion for a media translation
                  that plays with the ratios of the various intersemiotic textual levels in the
                  source works. In this anti-archival approach remediation is an open exploration of
                  the signifying potential contained in visual and permutational texts. This form of
                  reading as rewriting has been applied to a selection of paper-based works of the
                  1960s that have been treated as projects for new works (; ).
               One example can be seen in the rereading of the work Poemas Encontrados [Found Poems] (1964) by
                  António Aragão. Two digital recreations of that work adopt different strategies,
                  both of which stress the timed and temporal condition of writing in the periodical
                  press. The randomized combination of printed headlines on the pages of periodicals
                  is performed, in one case, by means of animation (using Actionscript code by Jared
                  Tarbel) on a set of pre-defined words and phrases. Typographical differences in
                  face, size, and style, as well as the progressive overlapping of white letters on
                  black background, across different areas of the screen, emulate the indiscriminate
                  collage of newspaper headlines in the original paper collage. Instead of digitally
                  recreating the original typographic forms and phrases, what is recreated is the
                  compositional and procedural principle of aleatoric combination. Although
                     not made in the context of a digital archive, similar approaches with random
                     permutations can be seen in programmed versions of Samuel Beckett’s Lessness in Possible
                        Lessnesses by Elizabeth Drew and Mads Haahr  and Raymond Queneau’s Cent mille milliards de
                        poèmes by Magnus Bodin .  In the
                  second instance, the Actionscript code by Tarbel works in conjunction with PHP
                  programming by Nuno Ferreira, and with RSS feed in real time from online editions
                  of several newspapers and sites – Público
                     (Portugal),  Jornal Folha
                     de São Paulo (Brazil) ,  Google News
                     Brazil ,  New York Times
                     (U.S.A.), Jornal Folha
                     de São Paulo (Brazil) - v. 2 ,  Jornal
                     Expresso (Portugal) and  Jornal
                     La Vanguardia (Spain). 
                The combinatorial collage of newspapers’ headlines has been applied to the
                  current online press, using RSS tools and the language of web pages to build a
                  mechanism for real-time digital collage – a device that is able to produce
                     found poems through an algorithmic procedure. By
                  displacing the particular historical content and historical reference of the
                  original collage, this digital recoding de-contextualizes and breaks the chains of
                  meaning that bind text and context, a move comparable to what happened in the
                  original. Indeed, this is one of the main effects of the collage by António
                  Aragão: original sentences and references have been abolished, or they remain only
                  as a distant echo, since the poem has broken the markers of discursive cohesion
                  and coherence that ensured their pragmatic function in the newspaper context. Its
                  signifying emptiness, that is, its potential for meaning is embodied in the
                  arbitrary network of relationships between words and sentence fragments, which
                  continuously overlap and repeat in different scales and at various points of the
                  screen, resembling statistical clouds of occurrences. 
            
         

            6. The Archive as Open Experiment

            The fetishist eroticism of detail is common to many digital archives that establish
               their authority on the basis of exhaustiveness in listing, describing, and marking
               details. Scholarly literary archives of autograph materials embody this contradiction
               between the desire for exhaustive markup of a never-ending set of material features
               and the resistance of textual instances to any fixed encoding system. This is one of
               the heuristic consequences of digital archives: our obsessive attempt to represent
               objects confronts us not just with what we don’t know, but also with the limits of
               knowledge as representation. Digital modeling seems to be, in this sense, a new way
               of experiencing the failure of representation. Inclusiveness, detailism, and
               exhaustiveness become ever-present and ever-unresolved issues. 
            The medium’s simulatory affordances raise our awareness about the signifying
               potential of a whole new level of material differences. Once you begin to pay
               attention to all the minutiae of paper and ink, script and layout, cancellations and
               erasure, folds and cut-outs, preliminary and preparatory, software and hardware,
               materiality and textuality expand to all possible inscriptional variations. Writing
               acts assume a gestural and bodily dimension, as if read through an abstract
               expressionist code. Digital tools and environments show themselves as reading and
               interpretative devices rather than mere instrumental techniques for textual
               reproduction and simulation. The interpretative nature of editing and archiving as an
               intervention in the material instantiation of a specific textual field dispels
               empiricist illusions about the possibility of objective and definitive textual
               reconstitutions. Any digital representation will depend on the granularity of its
               description and on the politics of its constraints. The PO.EX Archive showed us the
               limits of our digital models for the artifacts that we were trying to preserve,
               classify, recreate, and network. These multiple transcodings performed the artifacts
               as particular products of the database aesthetics of knowledge production. 
            This may well be one of the theoretical and methodological achievements of the
               current digital archiving obsession: editing and archiving can be critically used for
               acts of reinterpretation that fully engage the complexity of the various textual and
               media materialities of literary practices. Denaturalized and reframed by digital
               codes and forms, the dynamics between bibliographic, linguistic, spatial, visual,
               sonic, cinematic, and performative is rendered more explicit – a dynamics that can be
               programmatically used for reexamining the material production of meaning and for
               reimagining the archive itself as a representational intervention. Ultimately, the
               remediation of manuscripts, books, collages, photographs, audiotapes, videotapes, and
               programming codes as an intermedia network of digital objects gives us the
               opportunity for a reflexive exploration of the performative nature of digital
               simulation itself. Decentred and decontextualized by the technical affordances of the
               medium, digital surrogates enter a new space for material, textual, and conceptual
               experiments. 
         
