Title:  A review of Brett D. Hirsch (Ed.)’s
                  
Volume:  008
Issue:  2
Date:  18 July 2014
Abstract:  
            This is a review of Brett D. Hirsch (Ed.)’s Digital Humanities: Pedagogy: Practices,
               Principles, and Politics.
            
         
Full Body Text: 
A review of Brett D. Hirsch (Ed.)’s Digital Humanities: Pedagogy: Practices,
               Principles, and Politics
         
Brett Hirsch begins his introductory essay to his collection Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles,
               and Politics with something every digital humanist should
            be familiar with: a word frequency table. In it, he compares the
            frequency of some common words (e.g. research) with those pertaining
            to a particular focus (i.e. pedagogy) within the Blackwell Companion to the Digital Humanities
            . Hirsch notes the shocking
            results – research with 504 instances, and pedagogy
            with only 8 – along with other data as testament to an overall lack
            of pedagogical discussion in the digital humanities community.
               Further substantiating evidence here would be most welcome, but
               this reviewer was not able to source this claim through other
               literature – which perhaps drives Hirsh’s point forward that
               pedagogical publications in the digital humanities are severely
               lacking. For example, a quick search of digital humanities
                  pedagogy in Maryland’s library search engine produced one
               additional text besides Hirsh’s: Matthew K. Gold’s edited
               collection, Debates in the Digital
                  Humanities (2012), which features one relevant essay,
               called Where’s the Pedagogy.
            
            While each article within Digital
               Pedagogy examines different areas of the digital
            humanities corpus, the common theme of digital humanities pedagogy,
            techniques of bring[ing] the technological and
               the human together,
            , remains the focus for every
            contributor.
To this end, Hirsch splits the collection into three overlapping
            sections: Practices,
            Principles, and Politics. These, like most areas of digital humanities,
            are neither static nor exclusive to each other. Hirsch admits the
            overlap, and the categories end up serving primarily the convenience
            of the reader, functionally breaking the extensive collection into
            manageable chunks. Since almost all Hirsch’s essays rely on
            author-specific case studies as their primary source of discussion,
            the diverse and unique experiences of any one classroom cannot
            cleanly fit into any one category or other. Rather, Hirsch’s
            categories serve to mark the overall impact of each author’s
            conclusions. The case study model of each essay allows any
            interested reader to track, from beginning to end, the
            decision-making processes, issues, and outcomes of each program
            under analysis. It also shows the emergence of consistently
            successful traits of a digital humanities teaching exercise, to
            which I will return later. With the artificial three-category
            structure, Hirsch can set aside typical divisions of the digital
            humanities (e.g. GIS, textual analysis, modeling) and rein in these
            case studies under a more orderly – though intersectional ­–
            structure.
The publication itself, released through Open Book Publishers,
            merits some evaluation alongside the content of the text. While the
            work is available for purchase in physical copy and PDF format, it
            is available for free on the Open Book website . While this is a welcome attempt at
            open-access information dissemination, the online infrastructure of
            Open Book distorts some aspects of the text that are worth
            mentioning. Since digital humanities publications are likely to cite
            open-access and internet sources, direct links to many citations
            within the text are clickable and will take you directly to the
            source. This is not always the case, however, as some links are
            either not clickable or simply do not work. There is no option to
            view a PDF or cached version of these links, so the reader is forced
            to rely on the site maintenance quality of 100+ websites and
            resources. This collection is also heavy in pictures and graphs and
            while some can be read easily, blurry and altogether illegible
            visuals abound. The poor resolution of these images is such that the
            zoom function on the site – as well as the PDF version – serves to
            make them all the more impossible to read. One recent
               development for this problem is the WebCite system: http://www.webcitation.org. These particular
               eccentricities of the publication medium dilute a fair amount of
               the text’s content, and make for an occasionally frustrating
               reading experience.
         
The linked-citation function, despite some occasional dead links, is
            employed quite early and often in this collection. Were a beginner
            to pick up this text with next-to-no knowledge about the digital
            humanities, she need only go as far as the Notes on Contributors section to gain a firm grip on the
            community. The CVs of the authors in this collection are long and
            diverse enough to capture a large percentage of the current big players in
            DH, with their other articles filling in the
            many remaining gaps. Lisa Spiro’s bibliography alone is enough to
            keep the novice researcher busy comprehending wider digital
            humanities developments. Hirsch’s readers would be well-served
            spending as much time with this section as with any of the other
            three if only to observe a telling snapshot of the state of DH in
            its current incarnation.
As the reader dives into the essays themselves, she will find a
            multiplicity of case studies from many different countries,
            institutions, and classrooms working toward very different goals.
            The scope and summary of these essays are well-covered in Hirsch’s
            introduction, but I think it quite relevant to note here the range
            of topics covered as well as the missing subjects. Included are
            digital humanities doctoral programs, digital archives, digital
            historiography, textual analysis and editing, mapping, and
            discussion about the digital humanities community in general. What
            is missing, as the author himself notes , is a discussion of self-directed learning and
            copyright issues. While Hirsch saw a reason to single out these
            omissions specifically, I do not see them as detrimental to this
            collection. From the standpoint of self-directed learning, the
            overwhelming majority of students in each case study discussed did
            seem to have a basic level of technological proficiency. And, even
            if the technical knowhow of the student body was already high, many
            authors mentioned the importance of constant peer-to-peer and
            peer-to-mentor communication and consultation. No author in the
            collection advocated sending students off to an island to put
            together a digital text on their own, and so self-directed learning
            – while possible to a degree – can rightly be omitted here. As for
            copyright issues, they become, as necessitated by the novice level
            of the student body, the responsibility of the mentor or professor –
            making copyright education part of the process rather than a specific pedagogical topic needing
            to be addressed.
Also not included are some more controversial aspects of the digital
            humanities corpus, such as the viability of some DH practices as
            research tools. For example, the Sinclair and Rockwell essay Teaching Computer-Assisted Text Analysis:
               Approaches to Learning New Methodologies shows little
            faith in students’ ability to learn basic programming. Most of the
            other essayists, however, noted satisfaction in their students’
            ability to grasp programming as part of the curriculum. Sinclair and
            Rockwell also praise the word cloud tool for use in
            philological research, a technique that has been, at the
            professional level, bypassed for much more comprehensive textual
            analysis software. While the essay contains a fair number of
            pedagogical techniques such as project learning, it presents no case
            studies as evidence, an oddity for this particular collection. Thus
            the essay and its suggested methods go untested, making it somewhat
            out of the norm in the text as a whole. Word clouds are sometimes a
            student’s first interaction with the digital humanities, but an
            argument for their place in research and the classroom through
            case-study or some other means is needed as proper evidence in order
            to make their case.
While articles containing more theory than evidence drawn from case
            studies are rare in this collection, there are other notable
            exceptions to this rule that deserve mention. A subject recurring in
            several articles is the perceived fluency of the digital generation,
            or those who grew up around computers. The assumption would be that,
            having grown up in the emergence of the digital age, these students
            should be more adept at basic computer technology such as light
            programming. But, as Don Tapscott has shown, the broader educational
            system’s adaptation to the technology known to the net
               generation (those born between 1977 and 1997) has lagged too
            far behind, not allowing for the kind of basic computer knowledge we
            might expect to prosper . Tapscott’s
            observation is cited at least twice, but for conflicting reasons in
            various essays within this collection. Some cite it as a reason to
            start at the beginning when teaching students in the digital
            humanities. Others use just the first half of Tapscott’s conclusion
            – that net-gens are fluent in computer media – to reason that there
            should be an understood baseline that all students should inherently
            know, even if socioeconomic backgrounds may not have exposed them to
            the same technology. An example of using Tapscott in this way, the
            Saklofske, Clements, and Cunningham essay They
               Have Come, Why Won’t We Build It? On the Digital Future of the
               Humanities, is a non-case study-focused essay that, while
            it makes a valid point about the slow rate at which academia has
            adapted to the net generation, gives untested pedagogical
            suggestions and even some that are proven ineffective or even false
            elsewhere in this same collection, such as Facebook’s utility as a
            teaching tool. The overall conversation on the supposed knowledge of
            the net generation is weakened by untested theory in a text mainly
            consisting of case study material, and Hirsch might have noted this
            discrepancy.
This is not to say that the balance of Digital
               Humanities Pedagogy tilts away from sound and
            well-presented papers. Willard McCarty’s extensive description of
            the implementation and evolution of the digital humanities PhD
            program at King’s College is a thorough treatment of the
            complexities and issues surrounding this doctorate. Particularly
            helpful is the list given of all current projects undertaken by the
            doctoral students. Many authors in this text provide invaluable
            supporting resources, such as their course syllabi, project goals,
            and screen shots of each step of their various projects. In terms of
            theory, Lisa Spiro’s call for a universalized DH program and her
            justifications for it open a welcome and much-needed discussion for
            the community and present big questions that DH must wrestle with
            eventually.
The main strength of this text lies in the unmentioned, overarching
            conclusions that bind virtually all essays together. While the
            authors differ in their topics and in the implementation of their
            programs, they all could be said to arrive at the same three
            conclusions as to what works in the classroom. First, the goal
            should be project-oriented. It is not enough, many have found, to
            simply learn digital humanities. The class must put a text
            online, analyze a handful of documents, or map a single aspect of a
            culture; in short, there must be a tangible end goal. Second, the
            project must be done in a group as opposed to each individual
            completing a big project alone. Third, work in the digital
            humanities should be as interdisciplinary as possible. While some
            found trouble when mixing undergraduate and graduate students on a
            project, none mentioned issues in putting an art historian, a
            classicist, and a computer programmer all in one group. These three
            points are not mentioned directly by Hirsch as prerequisites for any
            digital humanities program; they are simply patterns evidenced by
            each case study of what, out of everything else, seems to work
            best.
In conclusion, permit this reviewer to reflect upon another gap in
            this collection which is also, not coincidentally, a gap in the
            field of digital humanities. The third and final section of this
            text, Politics, is rife with heated
            discussions about the problems and future hurdles that present
            themselves in digital humanities today. Lisa Spiro, Tanya Clement,
            and Melanie Kill interrogate large topics such as, among others: the
            necessity for universal digital humanities programming, the false
            notion that the Internet makes us stupider, and the dissolution of
            prejudices around resources such as Wikipedia. What is generally
            avoided, or otherwise skirted, is the all-elusive definition of the
            digital humanities. While most case studies mention bringing this
            question into the classroom for the first week, it quickly dissolves
            into the we can’t define it discussion familiar in most
            classrooms. It is necessary, however, to wrestle with this idea even
            more than has already been done, especially when the classroom and
            pedagogy, the touchstones of a professor’s performance, is in
            question. While no direct answer is raised by any one author, the
            collection as a whole hints at the beginning of such a conversation.
            The theme of interdisciplinary work, trumpeted by almost all the
            essays, makes marking the digital humanities as its own exclusive
            field a tired and trite gesture. This is especially true when the
            act of making it a unique discipline might, as has happened with
            other academic disciplines, further alienate the digital humanities
            from those who might benefit from its work. Two notable
               examples, from this reviewer’s own discipline, are a Classics
               philologist examining intertextuality without intertextual tools
               like Tesserae [University of Buffalo] or an economy-focused
               ancient historian who is unaware of the ORBIS network project
               [Stanford].
         
In contrast, the essay by Olin Bjork, Digital
               Humanities and the First-Year Writing Course, frees and
            widens the digital humanities from a field to a method-set. Like the
            works in this collection, the digital humanities consists of many
            methods (GIS, text analysis, etc.) that can be added or subtracted
            from a research project as need dictates. Digital humanities, then,
            becomes co-synchronous with any field that requires it, and avoids
            the limiting box of a discipline that other useful methods
            might be placed in. While no one should expect a definition of the
            digital humanities to come out of one book – a point that Hirsch is
            right to avoid – this collection nonetheless lends its own voice to
            that ever-changing discussion.
Overall, this collection is a much-needed resource for the digital
            humanities community. Not only does it introduce the field to many
            professors and students who might not know the digital humanities at
            all, but it also provides real-world, step-by-step accounts of how
            programs using the digital humanities have been put in place and
            implemented across various institutions. Like the study of history,
            this text can exist for others to see past mistakes and not be
            forced to start from square one in the classroom. Finally, this
            collection brings to light the massive gap in existing pedagogical
            study; the radical but essential calls-to-action by all authors,
            Hirsch included, should spur on other academics to publish their
            classroom experiences, theories, and failures in order to bring
            digital humanities further into the digitally-lagging academic
            system.
