Title:  In Praise of Overstating the Case: A review of Franco Moretti,
                        
Volume:  008
Issue:  1
Date:  17 April 2014
Abstract:  
                
                This review of Franco Moretti's Distant Reading
                    summarizes Moretti’s major arguments within the larger context of recent debates
                    in the digital humanities. Particular attention is given to Moretti’s uptake of
                    Immanuel Wallerstein, to his controversial critique of close reading, and to the
                    variety of digital-humanistic methods that comprise Moretti’s quantitative
                    formalism. Most valuable as an artifact of literary-critical history rather than
                    a how-to guide or theoretical treatise, this hodgepodge of essays is at its best
                    as an audacious and defensive academic memoir tracing Moretti’s transformation
                    into a digital humanist. As Moretti champions the broad explanatory power of
                    quantitative literary analysis, he overestimates the scientific objectivity of
                    his analyses while undervaluing the productively suggestive stories of doubt,
                    failure, and compromise that lend nuance and depth to his hypotheses. Combative,
                    absorbing, highly topical, and unevenly persuasive, Distant
                        Reading embodies both the optimism of early digital literary studies
                    and its perils.
            
Full Body Text: 
Buried three-quarters into Franco Moretti’s Distant
                    Reading is a moment of astonishment. Breaking for a moment out of the
                tone of unruffled calmness that sustains most of the collected essays in this new
                release from Verso, Moretti marvels at a cloud of data he produced by comparing no
                fewer than 7,000 titles of British novels from 1740-1950: 
                    all you can see are swarms of hybrids
                        and oddities, for which the categories of literary taxonomy offer very
                        little help. It’s fascinating, to feel so lost in a universe one didn’t even
                        know existed
                    
                . If this passage beautifully conveys that stunning moment in which
                quantitative data and qualitative analysis merge, resolving into a single network,
                it also conveys a sense of loss, of regret. Tellingly, Moretti’s self-imposed
                alienation — he recounts a powerful personal experience in the second person:
                    you, one — betrays an anxiety with his own
                digital-humanistic method of distant reading, so very different, he reflects, 
                    from the reading I used to
                        know
                    
                . This mixed emotion may sound out of key upon taking a step back to consider
                this moment of ascendance for DH (digital humanities), which has recently attracted
                so much recognition from national news outlets, university administrations, and
                scholarly journals and presses, and (if for the moment) an array of job openings and
                funding opportunities. But if we approach Distant
                    Reading through this one conflicted pause, we can use it in turn to
                approach the divisive conceptual apparatuses that structure DH meta-discourse at
                present. It is exactly this conflict rhetoric that we must re-examine if we want to
                avoid becoming the kind of sideshow that can distract institutions as they
                perennially search for the next new thing. 
The digital humanities are at a rhetorical and institutional crossroads, having just
                enough critical mass of public attention to warrant a torrent of speculation. As
                Alan Liu has termed it, DH — at first a
                    loose suspension of topics and approaches — has undergone a period of
                    integration and expansion that leads to the current 
                    tipping point where it has the potential
                        not just to facilitate the work of the humanities but represent the state of
                        the humanities at large in its changing relation to higher education in the
                        postindustrial state
                    
                . This moment of opportunity is equally a moment of danger, Liu cautions, as
                DH must avoid being caught in a web of neo-liberal bureaucratic imperatives — a
                danger highlighted, for example, by Wendy Chun, Richard Grusin, Patrick Jagoda, and
                Rita Raley in their The Dark Side of the Digital
                    Humanities panel at MLA 2013 , and by Matthew
                Gold’s recent collection Debates in the Digital
                    Humanities
                . Such worries have highlighted the conflict rhetoric
                characterizing DH meta-discourse — with its familiar debates about distant versus
                close reading, about tool builders versus tool users, about rejecting versus
                incorporating theory, about using DH skills to be helpful around the office versus
                being more protective of our time. What unites these debates is the common tension
                between, on the one hand, desiring the fertility and excitement created by the
                coexistence of a diversity of approaches and interactions among very
                differently-minded scholars and, on the other, fearing that collaboration-related
                compromises could devalue DH work, subsequently re-marginalizing DH workers. To
                achieve the former and avoid the latter, we must find a way out of this
                (increasingly) stale conflict rhetoric, which tends to reify false binaries, thereby
                creating obstacles out of uncertainties and talking points out of ambiguities. By
                understanding Distant Reading as a miniature archive
                that preserves this process of uncertainty and reification, we can become more aware
                of this process — and can help interrupt it.

                Distant Reading is most usefully understood as a
                document of development and transformation, a journey that tells the story of Franco
                Moretti becoming digital. The chapters have all been presented or published
                elsewhere, but each essay’s fascinating prefatory explanation makes the book an
                artifact of literary-critical history, rescuing the book from charges of being
                little more than a fulfillment of his contractual obligations to Verso. Each preface
                provides a key, a narrative kernel explaining the provenance of the essay — its
                goals, its rhetorical occasion, its relationships with the other chapters — and,
                more interesting still, evaluates its success or failure. He reconstructs his
                journey as a comparatist interested in evolutionary theory (Modern European Literature, 1992) and in mapping (Atlas of the European Novel 1800-1900, 1998), slowly piecing these
                areas into a 
                    quantitative analysis
                    
                . While Graphs, Maps, Trees can serve as a
                methodological primer, it is in Distant Reading that
                Moretti shifts focus from turning literature into datasets to the affordances of
                doing so. Perhaps not coincidentally, it is in this book that he avoids
                acknowledging his debt to narratology — making his methods seem more revolutionary
                than they perhaps are. But he does offer an alternative context: 
                    In the last few years, literary
                        studies have experienced what we could call the rise of quantitative
                        evidence. This had happened before of course, without producing lasting
                        effects, but this time is probably going to be different, because this time
                        we have digital databases and automatic data retrieval
                    
                . Fitting snugly alongside the rise of the quantitative humanities — or at
                least an increased willingness to consider that literature is a kind of data and can
                therefore be translated into other forms of data — Moretti’s career trajectory
                models a kind of alternate academic history in which the digital humanities
                developed organically from within traditional methods of scholarship. Though such a
                simple, uninterrupted development is at best atypical and at worst disingenuous, it
                is compelling as an anti-conflict narrative that emphasizes the shared goals of the
                    traditional academy and DH.
Put simply, Moretti’s distant reading involves sampling from a buffet of visualization tools that
                convert any given slice of literary history into 
                    a set of two-dimensional signs...that
                        can be grasped at a single glance
                    
                . Put more controversially, he claims that eschewing close reading is not only
                a positive change for the humanities, but is actually 
                    
                        a condition of knowledge
                    
                    
                . Moretti then defines knowledge as pinpointing and explaining temporal and
                national variations in 
                    devices, themes, tropes — or genres
                        and systems
                    
                . Curiously, once Moretti does away with close reading, the first thing he
                does, as if scared by the resulting vacuum, is usher in Immanual Wallerstein’s
                world-systems analysis . Moretti’s preoccupation
                with evolution, the 
                    study of formal mutation and cultural
                        selection
                    
                , finds in Wallerstein’s world-systems theory a strong conceptual model even though 
                    no one seemed to use [it]
                        anymore
                    
                . Moretti's first two chapters, Modern European
                    Literature: A Geographical Sketch and Conjectures
                    on World Literature, as well as the related chapters More Conjectures on World Literature and Evolution, World-Systems, Weltliteratur, use Wallerstein as a glue for combining
                evolutionary theory and DH techniques. In these chapters he traces a spatial (rather
                than temporal) evolution of literature as an unfolding constellation of 
                    formal novelties
                    
                 radiating out of many points. This approach has been criticized for
                overstating the influence of market demands on world literature, but, structurally,
                the true weakness of Distant Reading is that five of
                its ten chapters deal heavily with world-systems analysis even though this is,
                putatively, not a book about Wallerstein but about distant reading. This
                inconsistency could have been cleared up with a theoretical introduction that
                explicitly situated (and defended) the relationship between distant reading and
                world-systems analysis, but Moretti provides no such introduction, leaving the
                reader with the choice either to construct an integrated argument from statements
                scattered in various chapters, or to ignore either the Wallersteinian or the
                digital-humanistic chapters.
Of the digital-humanistic chapters, the ambitiously titled The
                    Novel, History and Theory most dramatically suggests quantitative
                formalism’s potential. In it, Moretti uses functional magnetic resonance imagery to
                displace European realism’s literary-critical hegemony, making the literary field 
                    historically longer, geographically
                        larger, and morphologically deeper
                    
                 — an effort admirably connected to recent attempts to destabilize
                nationalistic models of literary periodization by scholars like Susan Stanford
                Friedman, Rebecca L. Walkowitz, and Eric Hayot. The following chapters are also
                impressive in their ambition; The Slaughterhouse of
                    Literature describes how Moretti and his graduate students read
                    all British detective narratives within a certain period to discern
                which stylistic features distinguish the canonical from the non-canonical, while
                    Planet Hollywood claims to prove how 
                    plot and style [are] becoming
                        manifestly de-coupled as a result of their movement (or not) in
                        space
                    
                . And the final chapter, in what is clearly Distant
                    Reading’s signature interpretation, converts Hamlet into a series of character-networks to discover that the hidden
                protagonist of the play is the nascent European international state system. Moretti
                makes no secret of his basic gambit: the reader can easily supply the silent before me in his observation that 
                    we have never really tried to read
                        the entire volume of the literary past
                    
                . Indeed, making the impossible seem possible (and desirable) is what Moretti
                does best. And his tone of relaxed omniscience is at times seductive. But when he
                claims that his grandiose stories are 
                    resting solidly on facts
                    
                 or that distant reading yields 
                    the clarity of the empirical
                        confirmation,
                    
                 the generalization-spouting bravado by which Moretti skates over impossibly
                broad terrain finally comes across as glib, revealing one of the primary dangers of
                digital literary studies to be the adoption of an aggrandized, even hubristic
                attitude toward literature as so much inert stuff being poked at. 
At the same time, this inertness seems to connote a fresh impartiality, a promise of
                neutrality and newness, even as it suggests another, more familiar controversial
                tendency of quantitative analysis: that it can become a patchwork of other people’s research, without a
                        single direct textual reading. For Moretti this is no
                problem, as he argues that the ambition or scope of the literary-critical project is 
                    directly proportional to the
                            distance from the text: the more ambitious the project, the
                        greater must the distance be
                    
                . Haters left unconvinced are dealt with in a clever but catty passage that
                accuses close readers of pro-canon elitism: 
                    The United States is the country of
                        close reading, so I don’t expect this idea to be particularly popular. But
                        the trouble with close reading (in all of its incarnations, from the new
                        criticism to deconstruction) is that it necessarily depends on an extremely
                        small canon. This may have become an unconscious and invisible premise by
                        now, but it is an iron one nonetheless: you invest so much in individual
                        texts only if you think that very few of them really
                        matter.
                    
                 Though Moretti’s all-or-nothing rhetoric is extreme — and his 
                    only
                 far from earned — he is not alone contrasting new DH methods with close
                reading; Lev Manovich has called databases and narratives 
                    natural enemies
                    
                , while Edward Whitley coolly assumes that literary critics 
                    value close reading...over the broad
                        brushstrokes of information visualization
                    
                , and Matthew Wilkens serenely owns that 
                    we’ll almost certainly become worse
                        close readers
                    
                . Yet David Hoover has complained in DHQ of DH’s
                    marginalization of textual analysis
                    and other text-centered approaches despite 
                    the tremendous potential of electronic
                        texts for literary studies
                        
                . And when Stephen Ramsay observes that 
                    [t]he digital revolution, for all its
                        wonders, has not penetrated the core activity of literary studies
                    
                , his real claim is that it has not yet been done, not that it
                    cannot happen. Even distant reading does not work by
                    not reading: more accurately, Moretti means selective reading
                (reading only the titles, only the first paragraphs, or scanning for certain
                patterns), delegated reading (recruiting his graduate students), or mediated reading
                (using search tools to generate statistics and charts). Furthermore, though Moretti
                uses DH to generate grand systems of literature, these methods can also be used to
                return to the text — particularly if we link them to the surface reading of Heather Love, Stephen Best, and
                Sharon Marcus, as seen in the special issue of Representations devoted to it and by Love’s Close
                    but not Deep
                . Best and Marcus’s introduction links new strands in
                literary criticism (including DH, actor-network theory, and new approaches in
                narratology) as evidence of an emerging preference for descriptions of the complexity of literary surfaces
                instead of a psychoanalytically, historically, or politically inflected symptomatic method that 
                    assumes that a text’s truest
                        meaning lies in what it does not say
                    
                . It may be more accurate to say that surface reading, distant reading, and DH
                do not oppose close reading per se, but rather certain
                kinds of interpretation habitually associated with (but not inherent to) close
                reading. Pursuing these new forms of analysis does not automatically exclude close
                attention to the sentence-level details of form and style; indeed, moving back and
                forth between the microscopy of close reading and the wide-angle lens of distant
                reading would enrich both methods, creating a dual perspective that boasts both
                specificity and significance.
If the text of Distant Reading is confidence, its
                subtext is failure. Moretti repeatedly, generously, though fleetingly faces being
                wrong. He admits some of his work 
                    may well have overstated its
                        case
                    
                , muses at another juncture 
                    I may be exaggerating here,
                    
                , and laments that his lack of technical skills drove him to hand-draw his
                visualizations in the early stages of distant reading. This is not a long-term solution, of course, he remarks of
                the hand drawings, but instead a characteristic of 
                    the childhood of network theory for
                        literature; a brief happiness, before the stern adulthood of
                        statistics
                    
                . But such failures are only a
                problem if we deprecate the brief happiness
                and make post-haste for that stern
                    adulthood, if we demand absolute truth and methods sanitized from any
                taint of non-DH methods. Unfairly deprecating to himself and his graduate students
                in this section, Moretti undervalues how his book successfully records select home grown digital literary studies, and as a
                result, Distant Reading builds fences around them. What
                if instead we privilege openness and adopt the ad hoc playfulness of open-source
                programming, recognizing that systems and theories and methods are but temporary
                scaffolding, not the grand erection of something permanent and totalizing? Digital
                projects are often ends in themselves, not means — sometimes forgotten, fragmented,
                bug-ridden, and incomplete — but what is open is less likely to get bogged down in
                the past. To be open does not automatically entail the technological hipsterism that Amanda Gailey and Andrew
                Jewell warn of, that neurotic coolness that regards 
                    the quality of work...not so
                        important as staying at the edge of innovation
                    
                .
Ultimately, Moretti needs to take his own advice: he reasons, 
                    since no one knows what knowledge
                        will mean in literary studies ten years from now, our best chance lies in
                        the radical diversity of intellectual positions
                    
                . As he concludes the book, he ends with a warning that before quantitative
                analysis can begin in earnest, 
                    an enormous amount of empirical data
                        must be first put together. Will we, as a discipline, be capable of sharing
                        raw materials, evidence — facts — with each other? It remains
                        to be seen
                    
                . While the creation of (and access to) complete literary archives and data
                sets will certainly meet with obstacles, Distant
                    Reading conjures a very different specter: overestimating the power of
                data and in doing so losing the texture and feel of the objects we study, setting
                ourselves up as so many Carmen Sandiegos: megalomaniacs hoarding what is impossible
                to hoard. It is better to seek the moments like the one opening this review, in
                which Moretti felt awed, so lost in a
                    universe filled with 
                    swarms of hybrids and
                        oddities
                    
                 — moments of suspension that suggest that it is not the
                    knowledge that results, but rather our wonder
                while encountering a new dataset that makes DH methods so attractive. Similarly, the
                conflict rhetoric of DH meta-discourse tends to suspend, rather than resolve, its
                favorite debates, putting off the agony of saying that DH is one thing rather than
                another, preferring instead to work inside the what if and the
                maybe, the conditional and the subjunctive, rather than inside absolutes and
                interdictions. Perhaps we should also preserve that moment of suspension when we
                manipulate our data.
