Title:  A Design Methodology for Web-based Sound Archives
Volume:  008
Issue:  2
Date:  30 April 2014
Abstract:  
            
            Well-designed digital tools facilitate the creation of new knowledge in the
               humanities. Good design is user-centered, focused, and needs-driven, all of which
               depend on a rich understanding of the target audience or end user. Unsworth’s
               scholarly primitives  and the work of Palmer, Teffeau
               and Pirmann  on scholarly information practices provide a
               framework for understanding how humanities scholars do their work. We propose
               applying this framework to the design of a spoken word archive, with the aim of
               designing a digital tool that is optimized for the documented practices of scholars.
               We propose that listening and annotation are key activities of humanities scholars
               performing literary criticism of audio recordings. Taking the SpokenWeb poetry
               project as an example, we discuss how designing a web-based tool with these key
               activities in mind could facilitate close and critical engagement with recordings of
               spoken poetry. We present a methodology for designing a web-based sound archive for
               literary criticism and we propose features and functionalities that facilitate this
               criticism. 
         
Full Body Text: 
A Design Methodology for Web-based Sound Archives

            [P]roviding the collections and tools needed
               for producing new scholarship is arguably the most important role for
               cyberinfrastructure and will require a digital resource base that is developed for specific scholarly purposes.
            Palmer, Teffeau & Pirmann, Scholarly Information
                  Practices in the Online Environment: Themes from the Literature and Implications
                  for Library Service Development
               
            
         

            Introduction
            As more digital libraries and digital humanities projects are developed, it is
               crucial to ensure that they are designed with the user experience in mind so that
               they are useful, sustainable, and can help generate new methodologies and knowledge
               in the humanities. Academic and memory institutions increasingly recognize the
               importance of acquiring and making available unique or primary source materials that
               will stimulate new scholarship. As rich scholarly resources are increasingly made
               available on the Web, scholars and designers need to create user interfaces that take
               into account how humanities scholars work and behave. Instead of expecting
               researchers to conform to an interface that does little more than present a
               collection, we should design scholarly tools that conform and adapt to the detailed
               and documented practices of scholars. We should create tools to disseminate primary
               source materials, and these tools should be supportive of the formative stages of the
               research and writing practices of humanities scholars.
            The researchers from the SpokenWeb project, based in Montreal, Canada, are designing
               a digital spoken word archive of digitized archival recordings of poetry readings
               given in Montreal from 1966-1974 by major North American poets. In doing so, we hope
               to develop new forms of critical engagement with literary recordings and to develop a
               comprehensive, modular and adaptable template for the handling of spoken word
               archives. Eventually, we hope that other scholars and institutions with analogous
               holdings of literary recordings can adopt and adapt SpokenWeb for their own
               recordings.
            The primary goal of the SpokenWeb project is to create a sound archive that
               encourages scholars to engage with the sound recordings in ways that facilitate their
               research. Whereas for many sound archives the focus is accessibility (i.e. simply
               making a collection of sound recordings web accessible), SpokenWeb’s focus is
               interactivity and productivity. The aim is to include design features grounded in
               empirical research on the needs of humanities scholars, in order to facilitate the
               types of activities and tasks that are the building blocks of their research, and
               also to experiment with innovative features that help scholars engage with the sound
               archive in generative ways that they did not realize were possible.
            UbuWeb is a web-based educational archive of avante-garde audio, visual and textual
               material, where the emphasis is strictly on accessibility: sound recordings on the
               site are accessible via a minimalistic playback interface where the only options are
               the playback and bookmarking of recordings. SpokenWeb, in contrast, aims to include
               features and tools which facilitate scholarship directly into the web interface
               through tools to compare multiple sound recordings or transcripts side-by-side, tools
               for sound visualization and playback manipulation, and the ability to annotate a
               poetic work with scholarly commentary.
            While many scholars use sites like UbuWeb for their scholarly activity, most of that
               scholarly activity likely takes place outside the site. Users can download files from
               UbuWeb, for example, for closer analysis of a given piece. The minimal design of
               UbuWeb does not leave room for an extensive array of tools to help scholars engage
               with the site’s content. SpokenWeb’s aim is to design a sound archive that promotes
               in-site scholarly activity. Thus the goal is to have scholars both access and engage
               with the content on the web.
            On a technical level, SpokenWeb is built using the WordPress content management
               system (CMS) and incorporates SoundCloud’s media player with its application
               programming interface (API). While we are evaluating several CMS systems, WordPress
               is the current front-runner based on its large user community and high degree of
               replicability. This ease of replication is important given our stated goal of
               creating a sound archive recipe that other cultural heritage institutions can
               follow, in order to open their own collections to scholarly activity. SoundCloud’s
               robust media player and API is particularly important, as it allows us to experiment
               with innovative features such as sound visualization, tethering the audio playback to
               a written transcript, and playback manipulation, features that all depend on an API.
               Archival copies of the sound recordings are stored offline in WAV format. Access
               copies are MP3s (encoded at 320 kilobits per second) that are streamed via the
               SoundCloud player. For copyright reasons, the majority of the sound recordings are
               password protected, with access limited to selected users for educational purposes. A
               small number of files are publicly accessible.
            
               Screen capture of audio playback on the SpokenWeb site. Among the site’s
                  features are sound visualization, in the form of a waveform display, and tethered
                  playback, where the transcript is hyperlinked to different time points in the
                  playback.
               
               Screen capture of audio playback on the SpokenWeb site.
            
            Using 89 recordings of poetry readings from a dynamic period in North American
               poetry, the SpokenWeb team of literary scholars, designers, computer scientists and
               librarians is developing a flexible and modular interface that tries to foster a
               critical practice of close listening. Close listening is an approach and practice of
               deep engagement with performed or recorded poems (sometimes referred to as
               audiotexts) that has been developed and encouraged by poet Charles Bernstein in his
               various writings and through his co-founding, with Al Filreis, of the PennSound
               website. Bernstein foregrounds the importance of sounded poetry, arguing that 
                  To be heard, poetry needs to be
                     sounded - whether in a process of active, or interactive, reading of a work or
                     by the poet in performance. Unsounded poetry remains inert marks on a page,
                     waiting to be called into use by saying, or hearing, the words aloud.
                  
               
            
            Bernstein affirms that the sound of poetry contributes to its meaning, and that 
                  poets, especially twentieth-century
                     innovative poets, work with sound as material, where sound is neither arbitrary
                     nor secondary but constitutive
                  
               . He also cites the poetry reading in particular as 
                  ...one of the most important sites for
                     the dissemination of poetic works in North America, yet studies of the
                     distinctive features of the poem-in-performance have been rare (even
                     full-length studies of a poet’s work routinely ignore the audiotext), and
                     readings - no matter how well attended - are rarely reviewed by newspapers or
                     magazines).....A large archive of audio and videos documents, dating back to an
                     early recording of Tennyson’s almost inaudible voice, awaits serious study and
                     interpretation.
                  
               
            
            The purpose of this article is to address a specific format (digital audio) used by
               researchers undertaking a particular humanist activity (literary criticism) when they
               engage with recordings of poetry readings. Drawing upon the literature of scholarly
               information use and behavior, we determined that two key activities in literary
               criticism - reading and notetaking - would likely find their corollary activities of
               listening and notetaking in the online audio environment. Our desire to develop a
               sound archive based on the actual behavior of humanities scholars is challenged by
               limited knowledge of how scholars of any kind conduct research that relies on
               listening instead of reading. Despite our goal to develop tools appropriate to the
               literary enterprise, criticism of sounded poems is new and consequently
               under-documented within the field of information studies. In this absence, we are
               (somewhat) hopefully adapting known behaviors of literary scholars and imagining how
               they might be replicated or adapted in an online audio environment. While we fully
               intend this to be an exercise in evidence-based design, we will rely on an iterative
               design process that includes user testing to elucidate user needs.
            There is a need for research that explores how scholars engage with audio recordings
               in their work. Ideally, observation of researchers using audio formats would be the
               basis for a considered ethnography of scholarly listening practices. Historically,
               audio recordings have presented challenges as a research format. Recordings are often
               stored on fragile and degrading magnetic media, require specific and possibly
               obsolete playback equipment, and are hard to manipulate and annotate. As digital
               objects, sound recordings are still somewhat difficult to navigate, annotate and
               manipulate. Most media players in sound archives tend to offer very limited playback
               functionalities. Digital audio presents interesting options for the navigation and
               annotation of sound; options that are simply not possible in the analogue realm. With
               well-developed digital audio workstations, we may be able to unlock much media
               content from earlier format limitations.
            We explore models of scholarly behavior and investigate the different phases of
               scholarly research in order to reveal what specific scholarly functions we could and
               should facilitate in an online sound archive. Taking into account other models of
               research processes developed by researchers who studied literary critics or music
               scholars, we speculate what system requirements or design features might best suit
               literary criticism of sounded poems. We draw upon cognitive and multimedia studies
               that ground learning in more than one sense modality at a time (summarized in . For the sake of brevity, we focus on two activities that
               are central to literary criticism - reading and note taking - and suggest features to
               facilitate and enhance these core activities in a web-based sound archive. We are
               guided by the following idea expressed in Our Cultural
                  Commonwealth that: providing
                  the collections and tools needed for producing new scholarship is arguably the
                  most important role for cyberinfrastructure and will require a digital resource
                  base that is developed for specific scholarly
                     processes
                (cited in ). In this spirit, we present
               a brief design methodology at the paper’s conclusion, with the goal of responding to
               known scholarly habits and processes.
         

            Scholarly Primitives, Information Activities, and Practices
            John Unsworth proposed the notion of scholarly primitives, which are 
                  basic functions common to scholarly
                     activity across disciplines, over time, and independent of theoretical
                     orientation
                  
               . These intentionally abstract primitives, the atomic elements of scholarly
               activities and processes, include the following:
            
               Discovering
               Annotating
               Comparing
               Referring
               Sampling
               Illustrating
               Representing
            
            Scholarly primitives are basic to scholarship across
                  eras and across media, and arose from the need to build improved networked
               tools for humanities scholars. The goal was to better understand the scholarly
               process and its composite activities in order to develop tools that facilitate them,
               to 
                  imagine some basic functions of
                     scholarship that might be embodied in tools which, given a common architecture,
                     could be combined to accomplish higher-order (axiomatic) functions
                  
               . Unsworth’s list was offered in the spirit of starting a conversation, and was
               not meant to be definitive or exhaustive.
            Palmer and her colleagues refined the scholarly primitives concept by emphasizing 
                  the explicit role of information in the
                     conduct of research and production of scholarship
                  
                and by 
                  emphasizing a sense of the primitive as
                     something at the base or beginning of a larger process
                  
               . Palmer et al. modify Unsworth’s vocabulary and propose a more elaborate
               framework that consists of scholarly information activities which include searching,
               collecting, reading, writing, and collaborating. The activities are then comprised of
               more granular activities, which they label as primitives. Further, they propose the
               idea of cross-cutting primitives which are
               component, granular activities that are not tied to any one particular information
               activity and which are typically applicable to more than one.
            
               The five core scholarly activities and their primitives 
               
               
                  1. Searching
                  
                     1.1 Direct searching
                     1.2 Chaining
                     1.3 Browsing
                     1.4 Probing
                     1.5 Accessing
                  
               
               
                  2. Collecting
                  
                     2.1 Gathering
                     2.2 Organizing
                  
               
               
                  3. Reading
                  
                     3.1 Scanning
                     3.2 Assessing
                     3.3 Rereading
                  
               
               
                  4. Writing
                  
                     4.1 Assembling
                     4.2 Co-authoring
                     4.3 Disseminating
                  
               
               
                  5. Collaborating
                  
                     5.1 Coordinating
                     5.2 Networking
                     5.3 Consulting
                  
               
               
                  6. Cross-cutting Primitives
                  
                     6.1 Monitoring
                     6.2 Notetaking
                     6.3 Translating
                     6.4 Data Practices
                  
               
            
            Whereas Unsworth is deliberately format neutral, Palmer et al. are primarily grounded
               in a text-based world of information. Their framework includes the activity of
               reading - a text-based activity - but excludes listening and viewing, activities that
               are associated with audio, video, or image formats. An audio recording of an
               interview or a video recording of a news broadcast contain information in much the
               same way that a text document does. So for our purposes, we remedy this text-centric
               tendency by supplementing Palmer’s scholarly activity of reading with the additional
               activities of listening and viewing. With audio formats, the primitives tied to
               reading (i.e., scanning, assessing, and re-reading) also roughly translate to
               listening, with a slight adjustment. The activity of listening, for example, would
               include the primitives of scanning, assessing, and re-listening.
            The multi-institutional and interdisciplinary Project Bamboo strikes a balance
               between Unsworth’s minimalist, abstract and format-neutral primitives and Palmer et
               al.’s more detailed but textually-anchored information activities by introducing
                  themes of scholarly practice. These themes originate from a workshop
               that 
                  ...brought together scholars, IT
                     professionals, and librarians from around the world to chart a direction for
                     cyberinfrastructure development in the humanities
                  
               .
            Project Bamboo’s framework proposes additional format-neutral activities such as
               modeling, visualizing, and synthesizing which enrich the contributions of Unsworth
               and Palmer. Table 1 shows the relationship between the Bamboo scholarly themes, the
               Unsworth primitives, and Palmer et al.’s scholarly information activities .
            
               The relationship between the Project Bamboo scholarly themes, Unsworth’s
                  primitives, and Palmer et al.’s scholarly information activities (, reproduced with permission)
               
                   Bamboo theme of scholarly practice 
                  Unsworth primitive
                   OCLC scholarly information activity 
               
               
                  Gathering / Foraging
                  Discovery
                   Searching (direct searching, chaining, browsing, probing, accessing)
                  
               
               
                  Synthesizing / Filtering
                   Comparing Sampling 
                   Collecting (gathering, organizing) 
               
               
                  Contextualizing
                  Referring
                   Searching (chaining, browsing, probing) Collecting (organizing)
                     Cross-cutting (monitoring) 
               
               
                   Conceptualizing, Refining and Critiquing 
                   Illustrating Representing Comparing 
                   Reading (scanning, assessing, rereading) Cross-cutting (notetaking,
                     translating) Writing (assembling) Collaborating (consulting) 
               
               
                  Documenting methods
                  Representing
                   Writing (disseminating) Cross-cutting (translating) 
               
               
                  Managing data
                   Discovering Referring Representing 
                   Searching (accessing) Collecting (organizing) Collaborating
                     (coordinating, consulting) 
               
               
                   Annotating / documenting 
                  Annotating
                   Writing (assembling) Cross-cutting (notetaking) 
               
               
                  Modeling / visualizing
                   Illustrating Representing 
                   Cross-cutting (translating) Writing (assembling) 
               
               
                   Overlapping teaching and research 
                  Representing
                   Collaborating (coordinating) Cross-cutting (translating) 
               
               
                   Sharing / dissemination / publishing 
                  Representing
                  Writing (disseminating)
               
               
                  Funding
                  Suggested parenthetically
                  No analogue
               
               
                  Collaborating
                   Common thread throughout scholarly primitives, not listed separately 
                   Writing (co-authoring) Collaborating (coordinating, networking,
                     consulting) 
               
               
                  Citation, credit, peer-review
                  Referring
                   Reading (assessing) Writing (dissemination) Collaborating
                     (consulting) 
               
            
            For us, the conceptual framework of the scholarly primitives functions as a type of
               abstract checklist for building new digital tools. The primitives call attention to
               the types of activities that scholars need to do. Accordingly, we need to plan and
               design environments with functionalities that will facilitate the primitives.
            To take Unsworth’s primitive of discovery as an example, we will ensure that
               the SpokenWeb sound archive facilitates scholars’ discovery of the content within our
               archive, and that it promotes discovery of connections and relationships between
               individual items such as poems, particular recordings, transcriptions, and so forth.
               This could take the form of search functionality, perhaps in the form of a simple
               search box, but could also include more sophisticated browsing tools which allow a
               scholar to explore the recordings without having a fixed starting point (i.e. a
               particular author, topic, or terminology) in mind. For instance, our browsing tools
               should facilitate serendipity.
            Unsworth’s primitives are a good starting point for this type of checklist, but by
               their very nature they are abstract and general. To improve our design checklist, we
               look at Palmer et al.’s scholarly information activities and the Bamboo project’s
               themes of scholarly practice. Both of these frameworks are more specific than
               Unsworth’s list, and are grounded in empirical research that shows, among other
               things, that the types of activities that scholars engage in will vary as a result of
               their disciplinary approach. From a design perspective, then, questions about the
               intended audience begin to emerge. The SpokenWeb project has to take into account the
               discipline-specific behavior of literary scholars.
            Palmer et al.’s Scholarly Information Practices in the Online
                  Environment summarizes scholarly information activities across
               disciplines. Figure 2 provides a summary of the scholarly primitives associated with
               the humanities and sciences, as well as those involved in interdisciplinary
               ventures.
            
               Scholarly primitives associated with disciplinary approach (, reproduced with permission
               
               Venn diagram showing three intersecting domains: Humanities, Sciences, and
                  Interdisciplinary. 
            
            Not surprisingly, scholars from different disciplines tend to engage in certain
               activities more than others. For example, browsing and rereading are important for
               humanities scholars, as we see in Figure 2, whereas direct searching and data sharing
               are more important for scientists. Our project pays close attention to Palmer et
               al.’s conclusion that 
                  ...humanities scholars and other
                     researchers deeply engaged in interpreting source material rely heavily on
                     browsing, collecting, re-reading and notetaking
                  
               . Accordingly, we are designing the SpokenWeb with features that facilitate
               these core activities.
            In addition to questions of audience we want to pay close attention to the related
               and important question of format. As previously discussed, Palmer et al. are somewhat
               biased towards text-based information. Palmer et al. do list the specific formats
               that are typically used by a given discipline (e.g. in the Source materials by discipline reported in the RLG reports
               table on page 5), but they do not talk about the relationship between scholarly
               activities and non-text formats. Non-textual formats are increasingly used in
               scholarship, and they deserve careful attention from designers of tools. Scholarly
               activities change depending on the information format being used. In our view,
               activities that need to be supported for the use of audio formats are listening,
               re-listening, and manipulating the playback of recordings.
            As noted, we have by necessity extended the scholarly information activity of
                  reading as a placeholder for a slightly broader spectrum of intake or
                  consumptive activities extending beyond the world of text into audio and
               visual realms. Our project supplements the list of core humanities primitives that we
               will prioritize in the site’s design (i.e., browsing, collecting, re-reading and
               notetaking) with the additional scholarly activities of listening and viewing, and
               their corresponding primitives (e.g., re-listening, re-viewing, et cetera).
            Unsworth’s primitives thus serve as a useful starting point or checklist for those
               who are designing digital tools. Palmer et al.’s scholarly information activities and
               Project Bamboo’s themes of scholarly practice provide empirically-grounded
               considerations for that checklist and raise important questions of audience and
               format.
         

            Reading Audio and Annotating Sound
            We were unable to find empirical research that provided a detailed account of how
               scholars work with audio recordings.
            Clara Chu’s descriptive model of the research process of literary critics shows the
               role of information sources at each stage, though audio recordings are not
               specifically addressed. As she notes, 
                  the body of literature dealing with the
                     information needs and uses of literary scholars is small
                  
               . Her study identifies the following phases of literary critical work:
            
               Idea Generation
               Preparation
               Elaboration
               Analysis and Writing
               Dissemination 
               Further Writing and Dissemination
            
            Chu notes that literary criticism is not a clearly
                  defined step-by-step sequential process. In this model, information use,
               and the reading and re-reading of the text being studied occurs extensively in both
               the Preparation and Analysis and Writing stages. Naturally, we then ask how literary
               criticism might occur in a digital audio environment. Does the use of sounded poems
               yield any variation to the model of literary criticism suggested by Chu? Indeed, she
               recommends that a study is needed of the 
                  way information technologies and the
                     availability of electronic texts may be affecting literary critics’ work,
                     communication, and information seeking
                  
               .
            
               Reading Audio
               We wonder the extent to which the practice of careful reading and re-reading of
                  text is replicated when a literary recording, as opposed to a printed text, is the
                  object of study. To facilitate the practice Charles Bernstein has termed close
                     listening, we are building SpokenWeb to explore how scholarly
                     reading practices might inform scholarly listening
                  practices. We assume that critics will need to listen repeatedly to particular
                  passages in a web-based audio environment. Thus the chosen media player should
                  facilitate the user’s ability to listen, slow down, pause, loop and repeat
                  particular passages of the recording. Further, there may be a feedback loop
                  between the listening tools or playback device and the process of close listening.
                  Close listening could be a much richer experience in a well-designed web-based
                  sound archive, with features that facilitate sophisticated manipulation of
                  playback, than might be possible with playback on an analog reel-to-reel machine,
                  for example. New tools, with the right features, could facilitate new ways of
                  close listening.
               Given the absence of a body of literature which explains how scholars approach a
                  sounded as opposed to a printed poem, we provisionally suggest that the
                  attentiveness to the text, signaled by careful and repeated reading of a poem,
                  will have strong carryover to the way a scholar would listen critically to a
                  performed poem. To facilitate the reading of poems with both the eyes and the
                  ears, the SpokenWeb has integrated transcripts of the audio recordings into the
                  web interface. It is possible for scholars to listen to and/or read the content of
                  the poetry readings. Since much learning we do is multimodal in nature, we
                  recognize that other modalities inform listening . We
                  believe having the option to read words as one listens to poems could benefit the
                  researcher by enhancing comprehension and analysis of the recording.
               The ways in which scholars read is varied. In her work interviewing humanities
                  scholars about their practices, Oya Rieger noted: 
                     Reading, which is a critical process
                        in research, is a multiply nuanced concept, with each type serving a unique
                        purpose. The scholars I interviewed referred to multiple types of reading
                        such as deep reading, close reading, skimming, or eyeballing. They
                        emphasized that re-reading was a significant part of interpretive work and
                        involved periodic interactions with selected texts.
                     
                  
               
               Chu suggests that reading is a process that occurs repeatedly throughout the
                  different phases of a literary critic’s work . Humanities
                  scholars in particular tend to read and re-read texts, and as Palmer, Teffau and
                  Pirmann suggest, 
                     Re-reading is one of the primary
                        reasons that scholars build personal collections. For humanities scholars,
                        rereading a work is a significant part of interpretation and
                        analysis
                     
                  . Basic audio players featured in most web-based collections of literary
                  recordings are not conducive to repeated listening of poems, as they do not allow
                  the listener certain basic controls over the recording. In the SpokenWeb
                  interface, we strive to allow the listener more control over the recording so that
                  the reading/listening process can be conducted as much as possible on the
                  scholar’s terms. For this reason, we have adopted Soundcloud’s media player,
                  designed for electronic musicians and DJs, because it allows for more user control
                  of the recording. Many libraries and archives are limited in digitization
                  resources and could become focused on the digitization process itself and the
                  attendant storage or metadata creation costs to the extent that the usability of
                  the digitized content understandably becomes a low priority. For this reason, we
                  hope to contribute an adaptable and user-friendly platform for providing access to
                  digitized or born-digital audio recordings.
               Perhaps the work habits of music scholars can shed light on how a group of
                  researchers works with recordings and textual sources simultaneously, since a
                  composer or music historian might be listening to a performance and studying a
                  score at the same time in the way a literary critic might sit and listen to a
                  recording and consult a print book or a transcription at the same time.
               According to Brown, the most commonly used information resources in music research
                  are print, audio, and video sources. She notes that 
                     [t]he relatively high ranking of
                        recordings shows the great importance of listening in the research
                        process
                     
                  . While the study did not provide details about the scholarly listening
                  process, one participant in the study remarked that 
                     one of the things that is so basic to
                        this kind of work is that you are constantly working back and forth from the
                        example [a music recording] to the text [the criticism being written], back
                        to the example, back to the text
                     
                  . She also notes 
                     this constant going back and forth is
                        a real feature of writing about music
                     
                  . We suspect that this is how criticism of sounded poems might be performed
                  as well: the critic is constantly listening and re-playing parts of the recording
                  as she writes. Therefore, it is essential to make this kind of switching between
                  activities (listening, reading, and writing) as natural and seamless as possible
                  in a web-based environment.
               It is often noted how Web browsers and online research materials tend to lead to a
                  more shallow kind of reading, or at least change the nature of the reading
                  experience 
                  
                  . These cultural critics tend to mourn the gradual
                  reduction of sustained reading practices that largely characterized reading in the
                  print world. We thus wonder how the practice of literary criticism will evolve
                  with audiotexts and the increasing use of online resources in general. Not only
                  are scholars engaging with an audio performance of a poem, but they are also doing
                  so through a web-based tool. What does this mean for the critical practice of a
                  literary scholar? This type of literary study will bring with it the need to
                  explore how listening online compares to reading in print; the new habits that
                  would emerge from such a practice; and a consideration of what it means to work
                  with poetry in auditory instead of visual and typographic terms. Finally, what are
                  the implications of our interactions with sound being mediated through a visual
                  interface on a computer screen?
            
            
               Annotating Sound
               Having established the primacy of reading for humanities scholars, and the
                  emerging importance of reading and listening for scholars of sounded poetry, we
                  can now address a related scholarly primitive, annotation, and the related
                  information practice of notetaking. Brockman et al. (as cited in  and Palmer & Neumann 
                  establish reading and writing as fundamental activities for humanities scholars.
                  Scholarly notetaking is an activity that enhances reading and forms a bridge
                  towards a later finished work of written criticism. As a scholarly practice,
                  notetaking is critical to both the reading and writing phases of literary
                  work.
               Hillesund’s  study of a group of humanities and
                  social science researchers sheds lights on scholarly work processes in its efforts
                  to describe reading behavior all the while acknowledging that reading is a most familiar activity, solidly packed
                     and sedimented. It is one of those deep and complex phenomena that are so close
                     to the mundane that their basic traits are hard to discover and talk
                     about. What becomes clear is how physical and material the act of
                  reading is, how tied to the body, space and objects. According to Hillesund,
                  annotation improves comprehension of text, slows the pace of reading, and helps
                  scholars to record and remember points. The annotation habit is probably a way of processing
                     information, giving it time to fit into schemas in long-term memory and provide
                     time and space for reflection and discovery of inferences. Given the
                     kinaesthesia, and motor control
                     (dexterity) as well as tactile and visual perception that characterize
                  scholarly reading and writing, we can see how important and challenging it is to
                  develop ways of delivering digital content that work in keeping with deeply
                  embedded physical and mental processes associated with reading and writing. Thus,
                  reading and writing are deeply intertwined in the scholarly process, and
                  notetaking is a central behavior to both. Most digital tools have a long way to go
                  in facilitating this most critical activity in scholarship. Again, we note that
                  tools for text annotation and manipulation have received much more development and
                  critical attention in the Digital Humanities, while tools for annotation of audio
                  formats instead take their cues from web-based entertainment sites, e-learning
                  environments and online music delivery and discovery tools.
               The sheer volume of valuable but fragile analogue audio material in libraries and
                  archives suggests that many institutions will face the challenge of not only
                  offering digitized recordings, but delivering them in such a way as to make them
                  useful to scholars.
               Annotating a digital source such as a recording may come less naturally to a
                  researcher, however. Bradley and Vetch  and Hillesund
                      have observed that digital tools are not as
                  likely to support annotation. This is something to strive for in interface design
                  since notes represent the beginnings of written criticism. As Audenaert and Furuta
                  suggest, having note taking capabilities in digital tools would greatly support
                  scholarship: 
                     Notetaking, however, is not merely
                        the semi-formal representation of facts. Instead it is an integrated part of
                        the iterative writing process. Scholars think of their notes specifically in
                        terms of how that information will be represented in the published form of
                        their work and organize them accordingly. To be successful, support for
                        notetaking should be designed with this in mind and should provide a clear
                        path to transition from information notes to a final publishable
                        manuscript.
                     
                  
               
               They also suggest the importance of being able to export notes from a given system
                  into a writing software such as Microsoft Word . Therefore, if skillfully deployed, annotation features in a
                  digital environment would support both scholarly reading and writing, offering a
                  more natural and seamless feel to a possibly unfamiliar digital workspace.
                  Moreover, there is no need to assume that annotations will take the form of
                  written or typed comments. In a web-based sound archive, the researchers may wish
                  to record a spoken comment or annotation that responds to a particular passage.
                  Similarly, an annotation might take the form of an image or a video. Our early
                  steps in providing an opportunity for users to annotate recordings in SpokenWeb is
                  through the adoption of SoundCloud’s commenting feature which allows users to make
                  comments at any point in a recording. A future phase in development would
                  establish a means for exporting the time-stamped comments into the scholar’s
                  preferred writing environment.
            
         

            Design
            In recent years, considerable work has addressed how a humanities scholar’s
                  workbench or digital research environment might look and
               function 
               
               
               
               
               . Similarly, work has been undertaken to determine user
               requirements for the humanities .
            We wish to direct attention specifically to how digitized or born digital audio
               recordings might best be optimized in an online work environment. Despite a lack of
               research on the information behavior of scholars who work with audio formats, we
               establish a checklist of features and system requirements for a web-based tool for
               analyzing literary recordings. Drawing upon an analysis of humanities scholarship, we
               suggest that the following features (see Figure 3) would serve the various
               activities, primitives and overall scholarly behavior central to the humanities
               scholar’s work.

            
               From Primitives to Design Features. This table maps some of Unsworth’s
                  scholarly primitives to Palmer at al.’s scholarly information activities, then
                  proposes equivalent activities specific to a sound archive. We suggest features
                  that could enhance and support these audio-based activities and provide examples
                  when possible.
               
            

            Below is a list of web sites and audio tools listed in Figure 3: 
                  Facebook https://www.facebook.com/
                  
                  Indaba http://www.indabamusic.com/
                  
                  RadioLab Demo http://hyper-audio.org/r/
                  
                  Smithsonian Folkways http://www.folkways.si.edu/tools_for_teaching/interactive-features.aspx
                  
                  SoundCloud http://soundcloud.com
                  
                  TED http://www.ted.com/
                  
                  Variations Audio Timeliner http://variations.sourceforge.net/vat/
                  
                  You Tube http://www.youtube.com/
                  
               
            
            As Palmer and Neumann have noted, 
                  interface design and human-computer
                     interaction has, for the most part, ignored the needs of the humanities
                     scholar. When the interface is considered, it is limited to discussions of
                     items such as the Boolean logic problem and the vocabulary mismatch between
                     system provision and user understanding ... Despite the profound impact of
                     technology on this scholarly community, little is known about how computers
                     have affected humanities scholars’ work flow, unless it is to say that scholars
                     adopt technologies when they augment established research practices
                  
               . By exploring how researchers use a particular type of primary source, we hope
               to contribute to this format-based gap in user behavior information.
            Palmer et al.’s study suggests that 
                  collecting, reading, writing and
                     collaborating, and especially the cross-cutting primitives, are much more
                     sparsely supported online and often only as a byproduct of existing systems
                     rather than as a deliberately designed feature
                  
               . Deliberately designed features are precisely what we want to bring to
               web-based audio interfaces.
            Part of the design phase of the project will examine which activities scholars carry
               over into the digital realm. We are intrigued by the possibility of developing a tool
               that can offer features to support existing habits, but also possibly enable new
               activities to help scholars. As Rimmer et al. note, 
                  the media used (paper, books, shelves,
                     etc. or screens, keyboards, mice) afford different kinds of
                     interactions
                  
               . Since humanities scholars often function with habits based in both the print
               and electronic world, we hope to facilitate a smooth overlap between these worlds,
               and develop an interface that allows for seamless integration with normal scholarly
               activities.
            Our evidence-based design methodology is the means by which we can build a tool
               humanities scholars will use and exploit as readily as their traditional textual
               sources. Rieger notes that 
                  multimodal environments require distinct
                     modes of engagement from writers and readers
                  
               . While there is a long history of literary critics working with printed texts,
               the history and methods of scholars working with audio recordings remain
               underdocumented or unknown. As such, it is much more difficult to anticipate user
               behavior within such environments. We do not yet know how scholars use web-based
               sound recordings in their work. We do not know what interesting habits could emerge.
               Thus we have begun the design of SpokenWeb with the goal of delivering a flexible and
               modular user experience. The use of web-based audio files for literary research will
               be inherently multimodal since the recordings will be embedded in a graphical user
               interface and the listener will have the option of consulting transcripts of the
               recording or focusing solely on listening.
            The LAIRAH project analyzed 21 digital humanities projects in order to elucidate the
               factors that led to their use and uptake in scholarly communities. Noting that only
               two projects carried out formal user testing in the early stages of project design,
               the researchers observe: 
                  User consultation was relatively rarely
                     undertaken, despite the fact that it helps projects to design effective
                     resources, and to avoid developing in ways that users may find over complicated
                     or confusing. However, user testing, like disseminating information, is a skill
                     that most humanities scholars have not acquired. It is therefore important that
                     digital projects should be willing to work with those who already have
                     expertise in this area, for example, researchers from Human Computer
                     Interaction, Library and Information Studies, or practitioner
                     librarians.
                  
               
            
            Indeed, user awareness, engagement and testing was one of the LAIRAH’s six concluding
               recommendations for good practice in the construction of digital humanities projects
                  . We hope that in both observation and user
               testing we can glean information that could be useful to other digital projects
               intended for scholars who make extensive use of audio recordings. As Palmer and
               Cragin note 
                  directly engaging domain scholars as
                     collaborators or partners in research design and interpretation of results is
                     important for reducing the chain of inference required to determine
                     implications for the design and development of technologies for specific
                     research communities
                  
               .
            As much as we believe digital humanities projects should be more oriented around user
               experience and informed by well-conceived user testing, we simultaneously see the
               merit of the viewpoint offered by Gay and Hembrooke in their book Activity-Centered Design: An Ecological Approach to Designing Smart
                  Tools and Usable Systems: 
                  User-centered methods also fail to identify
                     future uses, needs, and problems that users and developers might not
                     independently envision. This is especially important for nascent technologies,
                     which people will inevitably view in the relatively constrictive terms of old
                     technologies (such as using a digital hand-held machine to replace the old
                     portable audiotape guide system in a museum).
                  
               
            
            We want to ensure that our sound archive performs in a way that reflects scholarly
               practice, but since web-based audio is relatively new, we look forward to
               anticipating and designing around new or unexpected behaviors. To this end, we
               believe that the Unsworth primitives, Palmer et al.’s scholarly activities, and the
               Bamboo themes can function as a checklist of the types of scholarly activities that
               we need to design for; they are empirically based and remind us to design for known
               needs and requirements. But the primitives and themes can also be helpful in
               generating new features that take advantage of the opportunities afforded by new
               technologies. As stated above, user centered methods can be limiting in that they are
               inherently conservative, backwards-looking design methods. The Unsworth primitives
               can be especially helpful in this regard. They are abstract in nature and are not
               tied to any particular discipline or format and can therefore help us to think
               creatively to envision new features that take full advantage of the potential
               afforded by new technologies while minimizing the impact of the 
                  constrictive terms of old
                     technologies
                  
               . The Unsworth primitives can, in a sense, function as a type of thought recipe
               whereby a designer is reminded of a general scholarly activity (e.g. discovery) that
               will need to be designed for, but with nothing further: the designer is forced to
               improvise and experiment with different ways of how to realize this primitive in a
               new digital substratum.
            Ideally, then, the interface design will provide the more familiar and comfortable
               features that facilitate the types of activities that scholars know that they need to
               do, but will also be generative and experimental in taking advantage of the
               opportunities provided by new technology and will develop new features that scholars
               will find advantageous, and will come to need, but of which they are currently
               unaware.
         

            An Evidence-based Design Methodology
            
               Become familiar with Unsworth primitives, Palmer et al’s scholarly information
                  activities, and the Bamboo themes of scholarly practice. 
               Consult available research (e.g. ) to help identify
                  all of the primitives and practices that are the most relevant to the project’s
                  target user community. (For example, our project involves literary scholars, so we
                  have chosen reading and annotation as key activities to support.)
               Identify the information sources and format types specific to your
                  project.
               Using information gleaned from steps 1-3, adopt, adapt, or create features that
                  would facilitate relevant primitives and practices. The mapping from
                     primitives and practices to interface feature may be relatively
                     straightforward. For example, in our project designed for humanities scholars,
                     the scholarly practice of notetaking maps directly into a feature that
                     facilitates audio annotation. Alternatively, the primitives and practices can
                     function more abstractly, generating thinking and questions that could lead to
                     experimental features. For example, Unsworth’s discovery primitive challenges
                     designers to create new features that facilitate such a rich primitive in the
                     unique context of their project.
               
               Conduct user testing to evaluate the proposed features. Redesign or modify as
                  needed.
            
         

            Conclusion
            We have explored the applicability of various models and conceptions of scholarly
               behavior, particularly of humanities scholars, to interface design for a digital
               spoken word archive. Scholarly primitives , scholarly
               information practices  and the Bamboo themes of scholarly
               practice (n.d.) have all informed our sense of which scholarly behaviors need to be
               supported and facilitated in a sound archive.
            The question of format looms large in our project, since audio formats present basic
               challenges of accessibility, usability and annotatability. Since our design project
               involves delivering and providing a workspace for analyzing a challenging format, we
               have chosen to focus attention on two scholarly habits - note taking and deep/close
               reading - that are especially relevant for literary critics. We have suggested ways
               in which a web-based tool can better facilitate these core activities so intrinsic to
               the research and writing process of the literary critic.
            Surprisingly little information is available that reports on how scholars use audio
               recordings. This is striking given the historical and current importance of audio
               recordings in fields such as music, law, anthropology, oral history and communication
               studies, not to mention the ubiquity of sound recordings on the web today. Most
               studies of scholarly behavior analyze how scholars use texts, and thus the models and
               frameworks to describe scholarly activities are biased towards text and print-based
               information resources. We have tried to imagine how scholars use audio recordings
               based on well-established, even empirical, observations of scholarly behaviors. But
               since not much is known specifically about how researchers use web-based audio
               recordings, it has been necessary to draw upon evidence-based design principles
               developed by scholars of e-learning and multimedia learning. Thus, in order to begin
               to articulate design principles for web-based spoken word archives, our project is
               assembling evidence and principles from cognitive studies and web design and is
               investigating how they could apply to a humanities research tool.
            The potential of deeper scholarly engagement with born digital or digitized sound
               recordings is promising. We see a fortuitous convergence of scholarly and technical
               factors, all of which suggest that web-based research using audio recordings will be
               made easier. We can benefit from useful models of scholarly behavior, the growing
               availability of archival media on the web, the deepening understanding of multimodal
               learning, the growth of performance studies, the ever-expanding array of
               functionalities in web-based applications and the potential for a new mode of
               literary analysis. It is our hope that we will contribute to an emerging and
               evidence-based list of design criteria that is based on scholarly behavior. Ideally,
               we can contribute to the formulation of functional requirements for scholarly
               software for humanities scholars who use audio recordings. Web-based tools need to
               fit in with established behaviors and practices in literary criticism, but we should
               also actively facilitate the emergence of sophisticated and responsive tools which
               can contribute to new or enhanced practices in literary scholarship. The creation of
               new knowledge in the humanities depends not only on better understanding the role of
               sound in the work of humanities scholars, but also incorporating this knowledge into
               the design of sound archives.
         
