Title:  Agent-Based Modeling and Historical
                    Simulation
Volume:  008
Issue:  4
Date:  20 December 2014
Abstract:  
                This essay discusses agent-based modeling (ABM) and its
                    potential as a technique for studying history, including
                    literary history. How can a computer simulation tell us
                    anything about the past? This essay has three distinct
                    goals. The first is simply to introduce agent-based modeling
                    as a computational practice to an audience of digital
                    humanists, for whom it remains largely unfamiliar despite
                    signs of increasing interest. Second, to introduce one
                    possible application for social simulation by comparing it
                    to conventional, print-based models of the history of book
                    publishing. Third, and most importantly, I’ll sketch out a
                    theory and preliminary method for incorporating social
                    simulation into an on-going program of humanities
                    research.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                 This essay will discuss agent-based modeling (ABM) and its
                    potential as a technique for studying history, including
                    literary history. When confronted by historical simulations,
                    scholars first notice their unusual ontological commitments:
                    a computer model of social life creates a simulated world
                    and then subjects that world to analysis. On the surface,
                    computational modeling has many of the trappings of science,
                    but at their core simulations seem like elaborate fictions:
                    the epistemological opposite of science or history.
                    Historical simulation thus straddles two very different
                    scholarly practices. On the one hand are the generally
                    accepted practices of empirical research, which look to the
                    archive for evidence and then generalize based on that
                    evidence. On the other hand is the new and in many ways
                    idiosyncratic practice of simulation, which thinks in the
                    opposite direction. ABM begins with a theory about a real
                    system and then creates a functional replica of that system.
                    When confronted with agent-based models, historians often
                    respond with a knee-jerk (and in many ways, justified)
                    skepticism about the applicability and usefulness of
                    artificial worlds. How can a computer simulation tell us
                    anything about the past? The difficulty of this question
                    should not be understated. Nonetheless, I will propose that
                    these forms of intellectual inquiry can productively
                    coincide, and I’ll map out a research program for historians
                    curious about the possibilities opened by this new
                    technique.
                 This essay has three distinct goals. The first is simply to
                    introduce agent-based modeling as a computational practice
                    to an audience of digital humanists, for whom it remains
                    largely unfamiliar despite signs of increasing interest. The
                    second goal is to introduce one possible application for
                    social simulation by comparing it to conventional,
                    print-based models of the history of book publishing. Third,
                    and most importantly, I’ll sketch out a theory and
                    preliminary method for incorporating social simulation into
                    an on-going program of humanities research.
            

                I: Playing with complexity
                 Agent-based modeling, sometimes called individual-based
                    modeling, is a comparatively new method of computational
                        analysis. In the past thirty years, a number of
                        academic journals devoted to modeling and complex
                        systems have appeared. These include The Journal of Complexity
                        (1985), Complex Systems
                        (1987), Complexity (1995),
                            Advances in Complex Systems
                        (1997), and The Journal of
                            Artificial Societies and Social Simulation
                        (1998). Unlike equilibrium-based
                    modeling, which uses differential equations to track
                    relationships among statistically generated aggregate
                    phenomena — like the effect of interest rates on GDP, for
                    example — ABM simulates a field of interacting entities
                    (agents) whose simple individual behaviors collectively
                    cause larger emergent phenomena. In the same regard, ABM
                    differs significantly from other kinds of computational
                    analysis prevalent in the digital humanities. Unlike text
                    mining, topic modeling, and social-network analysis, which
                    apply quantitative analysis to already existing text corpora
                    or databases, ABM creates a simulated environment and
                    measures the interactions of individual agents within that
                    environment. According to Steven F. Railsback and Volker
                    Grimm, ABMs are models where
                        individuals or agents are described as unique and
                        autonomous entities that usually interact with each
                        other and their environment locally
                    . These local
                    interactions generate collective patterns, and the
                    intellectual work of ABM centers on identifying the
                    relationships among individual rules of behavior and the
                    larger cultural trends they might cause.
                 In this way, agent-based modeling is closely associated with
                    complex-systems theory, and models are designed to simulate
                    adaptation and emergence. In the fields of ecology,
                    economics, and political science, ABM has been used to show
                    how the behaviors of individual entities — microbes,
                    consumers, and voters — emerge into new collective
                        wholes.For an overview of the intellectual scope
                        of agent-based modeling, the best source is the Journal of Artificial Societies and
                            Social Simulation. http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/index_by_issue.html.
                    John Miller and Scott Page describe complex systems: 
                        The remarkable thing about social
                            worlds is how quickly [individual] connections and
                            change can lead to complexity. Social agents must
                            predict and react to the actions and predictions of
                            other agents. The various connections inherent in
                            social systems exacerbate these actions as agents
                            become closely coupled to one another. The result of
                            such a system is that agent interactions become
                            highly nonlinear, the system becomes difficult to
                            decompose, and complexity ensues
                        
                    . At the center of complexity thus rests an underlying
                    simplicity: the great heterogeneous mass of culture in which
                    we live becomes reconfigured as an emergent effect of the
                    smaller, describable choices individuals tend to make. The
                    intellectual pay-off of social simulation comes when
                    scholars identify and replicate this surprising disjunction.
                    As Joshua Epstein and Robert Axtell argue, 
                        it is not the emergent macroscopic
                            object per se that is surprising, but the generative
                            sufficiency of the simple local rules
                        
                    . In this formulation, to study complex systems is to
                    wield the procedural operation of computers like Occam’s
                    Razor — by showing that simple procedures are sufficient to
                    cause complex phenomena within artificial societies, one
                    raises at least the possibility that such procedures are
                        all that is really
                        happening in actual systems .
                 Humanists will be hesitant to accept the value of this (and
                    should be, I think), and I will return to the notion of
                        generative sufficiency
                    later. For now I mean only to point out the way
                    complex-systems theory elevates the local and the simple at
                    the level of interpretation: to know about the world under
                    this paradigm is to generate computer simulations that look
                    in their larger patterns more or less like reality but which
                    at the level of code are dictated by artificially simple
                    underlying processes.
                 The basic work of agent-based modeling involves writing the
                    algorithms that dictate these processes. Agent-oriented
                    programs can be written and executed from scratch in any
                    object-oriented programming language, including Python and
                    R. However, scholars looking to incorporate agent-based
                    simulations into their research often rely on out-of-the-box
                    software packages. Some, like AnyLogic, are proprietary
                    toolkits designed for commercial applications, but many are
                    open source. In their comprehensive survey of available
                    packages, Cynthia Nikolai and Gregory Madey point out that
                        different groups of users prefer
                        different and sometimes conflicting aspects of a
                        toolkit
                    . Social scientists
                    and humanities-based researchers, they argue, tend to favor
                    easy-to-learn interfaces that require fewer programming
                    skills, while computer scientists prefer packages that can
                    be modified and repurposed. Two oft-compared platforms
                        are NetLogo and RePast, now RePast Simphony. Of the two,
                        NetLogo is more frequently recommended for new users
                        because its programming language is very high-level and
                        comparatively easy to learn ;. NetLogo also has
                        thorough documentation and benefits from being featured
                        in Railsback’s and Grimm’s accessible textbook, Agent- and Individual-based Modeling:
                            A Practical Introduction (2012). However,
                        some users argue that NetLogo’s interface and high-level
                        programming language hamper its versatility. Scholars
                        comfortable programming with Java might prefer RePast or
                        other less structured packages, especially for models
                        that incorporate complex geospatial implementation .
                 Without presuming to recommend (even implicitly) one toolkit
                    over another, and in the hope that my discussion will be
                    applicable across platforms, I will focus on examples drawn
                    from NetLogo. NetLogo is a descendent of the Logo
                    programming language, which was first designed in the 1960s
                    and became popular in primary and secondary education . Like its ancestor, NetLogo
                    creates sprites called turtles and moves them
                    according to unit operations called procedures. The
                    turtles circulate in an open field of patches, small
                    squares which can be assigned variables that change over
                    time. Like Logo, NetLogo can generate beautiful and
                    intricate visual displays from comparatively simple
                    commands. (See Figure 1.) 
                        Diffusion Graphics.
                            Model created by Uri Wilensky. Screen capture by
                            Michael Gavin, 2013.
                        
                    
                
                 This ability to visualize the behaviors of many turtles as
                    they execute their individually determined procedures is
                    what makes the Logo family of programming languages
                    particularly suited for agent-based simulations. (RePast
                    Simphony has adopted a similar vocabulary, called ReLogo,
                    for novice users.) Researchers Juan-Luis Suárez and Fernando
                    Sancho, inspired by their primary research on the Spanish
                    baroque as a transatlantic intellectual phenomenon, created
                    the Virtual Culture Laboratory
                    (VCL) to model international cultural transmission.
                    The VCL (Figure 2) creates a
                    field of individual agents that circulate among each other
                    as they cross artificially abstract cultural boundaries. The
                    world Suárez and Sancho envision is divided geographically
                    and demographically: a green nation is separated from a blue
                    nation, and both are home to agents with a mix of dominant
                    (red) and creative or passive (yellow) personalities. As the
                    agents circulate in these regions, they trade messages and
                    learn from each other. Measuring the agents’ performance
                    under different conditions allows the researchers to test
                    theories of intercultural exchange. Suárez and Sancho write,
                        Taking the baroque as a cultural
                        system enables us to observe individual works and their
                        interactions with the human beings who create,
                        contemplate and use them, to examine the emergence of
                            cultural patterns from these interactions,
                        and to determine the diverse states of the resulting
                        culture
                    . In this way,
                    graphically simple programming environments like NetLogo
                    allow researchers to create analytically rigorous
                    representations of complex social systems. It is
                        particularly useful in fields like biology and
                        economics, which emphasize the effects of individual
                        behaviors on collective patterns. For example, Craig
                        Reynold’s classic boids simulation, developed in
                        the 1980s at the Santa Fe Institute, replicates complex
                        flocking behavior in birds and fish with a very short
                        code that executes only three simple procedures. Such
                        simulations were an important part of the artificial
                            life movement among computer scientists in the
                        1980s and 1990s, spear-headed by computer scientists
                        Chris Langton, who believed that programs like these
                        (or, like computer viruses) actually constituted a new
                        kingdom of life certain to evolve and develop over the
                        course of the 21st century. In Reynold’s simulation, the
                            boids are really simple, but they don’t have
                        to get too much more complicated before they meet all
                        the criteria of a living organism, at least, according
                        to the more theological and millennial strands of
                        thinking within computer science .
                    
                        Screen capture from Suárez and Sancho, 2011
                        
                    
                
                 Of all the genres of computational expression across the
                    digital humanities, agent-based models might share most in
                    common with games, in particular what are called
                        serious games. Like games, models
                    simulate rule-bound behaviors and generate outcomes based on
                    those rules. Ian Bogost has described games’ intellectual
                    function: Games represent how real and
                        imagined systems work, and they invite players to
                        interact with those systems and form judgments about
                        them
                    . In this sense, games
                    involve what Noah Wardrip-Fruin has called
                        expressive processing. He explains:
                        When I play a simulation game,
                        author-crafted processes determine the operations of the
                        virtual economy. There is authorial expression in what
                        these rules make possible
                    . Like designing
                    serious games, modeling is a form of authorial expression
                    that uses procedural code to confront complex social and
                    intellectual problems.
                 ABM differs from gaming in three key respects, however.
                    First, it does not usually depend on direct human
                    interaction, at least not in the same sense of games in
                    which players move through a navigable space toward a
                    definite goal . There is no
                    boss to fight at the end of a social simulation. You do not
                        play an agent-based model. Instead, you
                        play with a model, tinkering with its
                    procedures and changing its variables to test how the code
                    influences agent behavior. My phrasing here is meant
                        to suggest the definition of games offered by Jesse
                        Schell: A game is something you
                            play. ... A toy is something you play
                                with
                        . I sometimes
                    describe social simulation this way: Imagine a Sims game in which the player
                    writes all the behaviors, controls all the variables, and
                    then sets the system to run on autopilot thousands of times,
                    keeping statistics of everything it does. This suggests the
                    second key difference between ABMs and games. With
                    researcher-generated simulations, the researcher is in
                    control of the processes and can adjust their constraints
                    according to her or his interests. Williard McCarty
                        has made a similar point about computer simulations:
                            Like game-playing, simulation
                            tends to forgetfulness of the mechanism by which it
                            is created so long as its terms of engagement
                            (expressed in parameters and algorithms) are fixed.
                            Unfix them ... and the simulation becomes a modeling
                            exercise directed to exploring the question of that
                            attitude. Thus simulation crosses over into
                            modelling when the constants of the system become
                            variables. Modelling, one might say, is a
                                self-conscious simulation
                        . A
                    fundamental characteristic of social simulations is that
                    designers can alter the parameters of the model’s function
                    and thereby generate different, often unexpected patterns of
                    emergence. The affect of surprise is important
                        for a variety of computational methods. As Alan Liu has
                        recently argued, one of topic modeling’s most important
                        intellectual ambitions is 
                            to banish, or at least
                                crucially delay, human ideation at the formative
                                onset of interpretation
                            
                        . However, as he suggests, and as we’ll see is the
                        case with individual-based simulation, the relationship
                        between human and technological ideation is not simply
                        suppression or delay, but also a give-and-take that
                        vacillates between the expectations and desires of the
                        researcher and the affordances of the simulation
                        software.
                    While, of course, a model can never go
                        beyond the bounds of its initial framework,
                    Miller and Page write, 
                        this does not imply that it cannot
                            go beyond the bounds of our initial
                            understanding
                        . By pushing against their designers’ expectations,
                    simulated environments are analogous to experimental
                    laboratories where hypotheses are tested, confirmed, and
                    rejected. They join an ongoing process of intellectual
                    inquiry. Simulation practices have
                        their own lives, philosopher Eric Winsberg
                    explains. 
                        They evolve and mature over the
                            course of a long period of use, and they are
                                retooled as new applications demand more
                            and more reliable and precise techniques and
                            algorithms
                        
                    . Here, then, is the third and most important
                    difference that separates simulations from games: they
                    participate in disciplined traditions of scholarly inquiry,
                    and their results are meant to contribute to research
                    agendas that exist outside themselves.
            

                 II: Models: epistemology and ontology
                 However, if we are to simulate responsibly, the above
                    discussion raises a number of epistemological and
                    ontological issues that must be acknowledged and dealt with.
                    These issues can be stated as a pair of questions: What is a
                    model? How can models be used as instruments of learning? In
                    the field of humanities computing, Willard McCarty has been
                    a leading voice. Alan Liu summarizes McCarty’s
                        contribution to an account of modeling within humanities
                        computing: Models reveal meaning
                            (recognized in patterns, trends, forms) only by
                            reducing the dimensions and features of meaning.
                            Diagrammatic models, especially the visualizations
                            proliferating in the digital humanities...are
                            comprehensible when their scope or detail is kept
                            low but otherwise grow into beautifully mystifying
                            galaxies of nodes and links. (Meaning in the Digital
                            Humanities, 412). McCarty’s essays on
                        modeling, cited throughout this essay, include chapter 1
                        of Humanities Computing
                        (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005), Knowing...: Modelling in Literary
                            Studies, in The
                            Blackwell Companion to Literary Studies and
                            Beyond the Word: Modelling
                            Literary Context.
                        
                            http://www.mccarty.org.uk/essays/McCarty,%20Beyond%20the%20word.pdf.
                    Historians have debated the relationship between implicit
                    models of general human behavior and their larger narratives
                    that describe the causes of particular historical events.For a theory of history broadly consummate with
                        the view of modeling advanced here, see . Contra antirealist critiques
                        of history writing that emphasize the inaccessibility of
                        the past, Bunzl argues that causal arguments in history
                        depend (in practice, if not in theory) on the
                        historian’s ability to identify and describe implicit
                        models of causal forces that subtend historical
                        explanation. Outside the humanities, especially
                    in economics and physics, modeling has a long tradition of
                    contested commentary . Against
                    this large and still-growing body of scholarship, it may
                    seem presumptuous or tedious to offer yet another discussion
                    of the philosophy of modeling, but I’ve found that a very
                    particular understanding of the term is useful when thinking
                    about how computational models can be incorporated into
                    historical research. The thesis I’ll argue for, in a
                    nutshell, is that models don’t represent the world —
                        they represent ideas. The corollary to this
                    claim, as it pertains to history, is that models don’t
                        represent the past — they represent our ideas about the
                        past. 
                To begin to show what I mean here and why it might matter for
                    the practice of historical simulation, allow me to back up
                    and survey some of the more common uses of the word. In
                        Language of Art (1976),
                    Nelson Goodman describes models in a usefully comprehensive
                    way: Few terms are used in popular and
                        scientific discourse more promiscuously than
                            model. A model is something to be admired or
                        emulated, a pattern, a case in point, a type, a
                        prototype, a specimen, a mock-up, a mathematical
                        description — almost anything from a naked blonde to a
                        quadratic equation — and may bear to what it models
                        almost any relation of symbolization.
                        Cited in . In
                        this essay, Griesemer argues, Although recent philosophical literature on models
                            as mediators of world-world or theory-phenomenon
                            relationships has usefully complicated naive
                            correspondence views of scientific knowledge...it
                            has not really come to grips with the dual origins
                            of philosophical talk about models, arising on the
                            one hand from philosophies of language, truth, and
                            logic (particularly model theory), and on the other
                            from scientist’s shop talk and use of models as
                            guides for action (435). One of my ambitions
                        is to bridge this gap between epistemology and
                            shop talk as agent-based models
                        are deployed in the digital humanities. Goodman
                    is skeptical that a general theory of modeling is possible,
                    but if we work through these examples, some general patterns
                    emerge.
                Consider fashion models. It doesn’t seem right to say they
                    represent people. Models don’t seem to represent actual
                    human bodies. They represent instead normative ideas about
                    how the human body should look, as well as, perhaps, ideas
                    about sexuality and capitalism. Compare fashion models with
                    model organisms, like fruit flies and lab rats, used by
                    geneticists and biologists to study living systems. Mice
                    don’t represent human bodies any more than fashion models
                    do, but in the field of medical research they serve as
                    analogues, representatives of mammalian systems in general,
                    including humans. Like beauty, mammalianism is a concept we
                    use to categorize bodies. Theoretical models of the kind
                    used in microphysics represent particles, true, but those
                    particles are usually not directly observable, and in some
                    cases they might not even exist .Morgan and Morrison describe models as
                        mediating entities that both separate scientific
                        theories from real phenomena while also providing a tool
                        for understanding those theories in application. In this
                        way, Morrison argues, models are epistemologically
                            autonomous. Describing the use of abstract
                        models to represent the swinging of a pendulum, Morrison
                        finds that models become objects of inquiry largely
                        divorced from their real basis, but nonetheless valuable
                        to real physical study: We start
                            with a background theory from which we can derive an
                            idealised model that can then be corrected to
                            provide an increasingly realistic representation
                            (model) of a concrete physical phenomenon or system.
                            The idealised structure/model (this may also occur
                            with certain kinds of laws) can be corrected in a
                            variety of ways depending on the level of accuracy
                            we want. We know the ways the model departs from the
                            real pendulum, hence we know the ways in which the
                            model needs to be corrected; but the
                                ability to make those corrections
                            results from the richness of the background
                            theoretical structure
                        . 
                    Mathematical models common in economics are meant to
                    represent real economic activity, but, as Kevin Brine and
                    Mary Poovey have recently argued, economic models remain at
                    several ontological removes from the world they purport to
                    describe . Poovey and Brine
                        write, [T]he economist's data
                            always exists at several degrees of remove from the
                            world of actual market transactions. The numbers
                            that prove useful for the economist's calculations,
                            in other words, already embed a set of conventional
                            assumptions, which are simultaneously reinforced and
                            effaced in technologies like present-value
                            calculations and compound interest tables. When the
                            economist scrubs such data to make it more amenable
                            to the calculations he wants to make, he repeats a
                            process of elaboration and obfuscation that is
                            already implicit in them
                        . Even
                    mimetic objects like physical scale models, such as the
                    papier-mâché volcano, serve to illustrate and visualize
                    ideas about causal forces in geological systems .
                 These different forms of symbolization may have more in
                    common than Goodman acknowledged. They all share a condition
                    of exemplarity. None stand in for reality, exactly. None
                    refer in a straightforward way to the phenomena they purport
                    to describe; rather, they exemplify the formal
                    characteristics of those phenomena. If models represent
                    anything, they describe generic types, categories, theories,
                    and other structures of relation. This is what I mean when I
                    say that models represent ideas rather than things.
                        One might ask if any form of representation could escape
                        this condition, and indeed I mean for my discussion of
                        modeling to be commensurate with John Locke’s insight in
                        his Essay Concerning Human
                            Understanding (1690) that words represent
                        ideas, not things. Models describe the world
                    analogically by representing their underlying theory
                    mimetically. In Science Without Laws:
                        Model Systems, Cases, and Exemplary Narratives
                    (2007), editors Angela Creager, Elizabeth Lunbeck,
                    and M. Norton Wise argue that model
                        systems do not directly represent [phenomena] as models
                        of them. Rather, they serve as exemplars or analogues
                        that are probed and manipulated in the search for
                        generic (and genetic) relationships
                    . As the editors make
                    clear, those generic and genetic relationships — those kinds
                    and causes — are not really intrinsic to anything; rather,
                    they are the concepts and theories that researchers bring to
                    bear, subject to inquiry, and portray as their
                        conclusions.
                 In the cases of a 3D mechanical replicas or computer
                    simulations, this process of abstraction isolates key
                    characteristics and behaviors — simple things — that can be
                    shown to generate more complex, dynamic structures. For
                    example, the economist and inventor Irving Fisher
                    popularized the use of mathematical equilibrium-based models
                    in economics ; ; . He
                    began in the late nineteenth-century by building an actual
                    physical machine designed to represent currency flow. Small
                    hydraulic presses drove water in and out of the machine
                    through different tubes — rising and falling water levels
                    represented the influx or drain of valuable metals in an
                    economic territory whose currency was still tied to the gold
                    standard. Fisher had composed a handful of equations that,
                    he believed, described the flow of currency through an
                    economy, and he built the hydraulic machine to represent
                    that theory. Morgan describes the intellectual payoff
                        of Fisher’s models: In using the
                            model, Fisher was able to (i) explore theoretical
                            frameworks, demonstrate the workings of the theory,
                            and conditions under which it holds, and create and
                            explore new theoretical claims as an extension to
                            the older ones; (ii) provide various conceptual
                            indications for measurement purposes and add
                            measurements to map the model onto the world; and
                            (iii) use these measurements to learn something
                            about how the quantitative theory applied to the
                            world and how the world had been during the
                            historical period. (Learning from Models, 368-69.) Half
                    a century later, another economist, A. W. (Bill) Phillips,
                    built a similar machine called the MONIAC which he
                    understood as a pedagogical tool . By visualizing accepted economic theories of currency
                    flow, the operation of the machine had an analogical
                    relationship to actual economic activity. In Mary Poovey’s
                    and Kevin Brine’s words, 
                        The analog-machine method could
                            only represent economic processes analogically —
                            only, that is, by producing a simulation that
                            reproduced the theoretical assumptions formulated as
                            equilibrium theory
                        
                    . 
                 Despite their critical and skeptical tone, Poovey and Brine
                    point directly to the value of replicas, whether mechanical
                    or digital. In Science without
                        Laws, the editors compare generative models to
                    lab rats and fruit flies. Unlike putatively simple, naive
                    observation, in which the observer passively receives
                    information about the external world, the process of
                    selecting or building models involves replicating one’s own
                        a priori ideas about how
                    the world does or might work and then subjecting a
                    functional representation of those ideas to close
                    scrutiny.
                Building from these general observations, I use the word
                        model in two closely related ways to describe
                    both the replica or example and the theoretical assumptions
                    that motivate its creation or selection. At the abstract
                    level, a model is any framework of interpretation used
                        to categorize real phenomena. It might be
                    specified to the point of being a theory, but it might refer
                    more generally to the categories, structures, and processes
                    thought to drive historical change. McCarty uses
                            model in this sense when he refers to the
                            fundamental dependence of any
                            computing system on an explicit, delimited
                            conception of the world or ‘model’ of it
                        . See also Ronald
                        N. Griere’s Science Without
                            Laws: 
                            The fundamental concept in my
                                particular understanding of scientific practice
                                is that of a model. Models, for me,
                                are the primary representational entities in
                                science. Scientists, I claim, typically use
                                models to represent aspects of the world. The
                                class of scientific models includes physical
                                scale models and diagrammatic representations,
                                but the models of most interest are
                                    theoretical models. These are
                                abstract objects, imaginary entities whose
                                structure might or might not be similar
                                    to aspects of objects and processes
                                in the real world
                            
                        .  In literary theory, model in this sense
                    relates most closely to ideas of form and genre. At the more
                    particular level, a model is any object used to
                        represent that framework. Such objects might
                    include a representation, a simulation, a replica, a
                    case-study, or simply an example. 
                 The advantage of this definition is that it frees models
                    from the never-realizable expectation that they ought to
                    represent the world empirically. To return to the example of
                    laboratory mice, we can see that they represent human bodies
                    only provisionally and analogically. For geneticists,
                        laboratory mice are sometimes not sufficiently abstract.
                        According to E. Jane Albert Hubbard, 
                            Often studies can be more
                                easily extended in mammalian systems once a
                                genetic, molecular, or biochemical foothold has
                                been gained using simpler model organisms.
                                Therefore a model organism can be used to probe
                                deeply into the function of genes, proteins, and
                                complexes even though the model organism itself
                                does not manifest any of the symptoms similar to
                                human disease
                            
                        . Their purpose is to represent an
                    interpretive framework — a conceptual model of mammalianism
                    — which is impossible to observe except through particular
                    cases. Like novels, models are fact-generating machines.
                        A full discussion of the relationship between
                        model theory and literary theory is beyond the scope of
                        this essay, but it’s worth pointing out that Catherine
                        Gallagher has advanced a theory of fictionality that
                        parallels closely much current thinking about generative
                        models in the sciences. She writes, 
                            Certainly the novel provided
                                imaginary instances, but it renounced reference
                                to individual examples in the world. The
                                fictionality defining the novel inhered in the
                                    creation of instances, rather
                                than their mere selection, to illustrate a class
                                of persons. Because a general referent was
                                indicated through a particular, but explicitly
                                nonreferential, fictional individual, the novel
                                could be judged generally true even though all
                                of its particulars are merely imaginary
                            
                        . In Bill Phillips’s MONIAC, the waters
                    rise and fall to measurable levels, and those changes are
                    real facts, in much the same way that it’s a fact that
                    Elizabeth Bennet married Mr. Darcy. However, artificial data
                    like these are true or false only with respect to their
                    procedural contexts. Out here in the real world, there never
                    was a real Elizabeth Bennet or Mr. Darcy, and if the blue
                    water rises in Bill Phillips’s machine, we haven’t
                    experienced inflation out here in the real world. Nothing
                    that happens in a simulation ever happens outside the
                    simulation. What happens in a model stays in a model, so to
                    speak. Artificial societies exist on their own terms while
                    providing analogues to the world beyond.Arguably, one
                        advantage of building simulations is that doing so
                        highlights the artificiality of the simulation’s
                        underlying theory and may thus circumvent a lazy
                        essentialism about models. As McCarty has argued, 
                            Theoretical modeling,
                                constrained only by language, is apt to slip
                                from a consciously makeshift, heuristic
                                approximation to a hypothesized reality
                            
                        .
                So what does this have to do with history? Generative
                    modeling strips away the empirical apparatus of
                    document-based research and creates new facts. It flips and
                    mirrors the hermeneutic circle such that the whole thing
                    looks like a figure-8. (See Figure
                        3). In the traditional hermeneutic circle the
                    researcher starts with a theory or model, sometimes
                    specified to the point of being a hypothesis, and from there
                    makes observations and experiments out in the real world.
                    The model is then revised to account for those new
                    observations. A researcher who builds simulations begins in
                    more or less the same place, but instead of digging into the
                    archives or querying Google n-grams, builds a simulated
                    world that works or doesn’t work according to expectations.
                    The patterns of behavior within the simulation either match
                    or fail to match what the designer predicts, and the model
                    is adjusted accordingly. As a guide to intellectual labor,
                    the hermeneutic figure-8 presupposes a researcher willing to
                    traverse all the contours of this line. 
                        The Hermeneutic
                                Figure-8.
                        
                    
                
            

                III: Models in Literary History
                 Literary historians use many kinds of models to support many
                    different kinds of claims. The simplest are classification
                    concepts like genre, nation, and period, which provide an
                    interpretive framework against which individual cases are
                    tested. Other models in literary history are more
                    complicated. Biographical contextualization creates a model
                    of some past context, usually in the form of
                    narrative description. Contexts are executed when scholars
                    use them to speculate about how people in the past might
                    have interpreted some text or event. Much like an
                        agent-based simulation generates output that verifies
                        the interpretive value of its underlying model,
                        historical contextualization is tested by whether it
                        generates original and credible claims about how actual
                        people – that is to say, simulated people–
                        might have interpreted a play like Othello. These complex models often
                    deploy simpler submodels. For example, Michel Foucault
                    pointed out long ago that the author functions as an
                    interpretive model, and much the same could be said about
                        the reader as imagined in reader-response theory
                    and book history. The literary canon is itself a great,
                    capacious representative model. Though often compared to the
                    canons of scripture, in practice canonical literature has
                    more in common with the canonical organisms of biomedical
                    research. Rarely is the literary canon read with
                    prescriptive veneration, and never with the authority of
                    law. Instead of great works we have a
                    testing ground where new theories are subject to
                    examination. Though journalists and graduate students often
                    wonder what more there is to say about William Shakespeare,
                    that’s like asking what more there is to know about mice or
                    fruit flies. Robinson Crusoe is
                    canonical in the same way that slime mold is canonical.
                 Some of these humanistic models are more amenable to
                    agent-based computation than others. Perhaps most promising
                    are those used to describe patterns of social formation,
                    processes of change, and systems of causation. Such models
                    usually appear as two-dimensional diagrams. Pierre
                    Bourdieu’s idea of the field of
                        cultural production advanced a highly abstract,
                    schematic picture of art, commerce, and politics. (See Figure 4.)
                    
                       The Field of Cultural
                                Production
                            .
                        
                     Agents within these overlapping and competing
                    fields jostled for prestige, creating a dynamic and adaptive
                    system highly responsive to the choices made by individual
                    participants. Similarly, Robert Darnton’s model of the
                    communications circuit identified structural relationships
                    within the book trade. Ideas and books move throughout nodes
                    in an always-changing network. (See Figure 5). 
                        The Communications
                                Circuit.
                        
                     Such diagrams identify kinds of people and a
                    framework that binds them together. These frameworks — the
                    field, the circuit — visualize a web of forces that
                    motivated individual behaviors and caused systems to change
                    over time.
                 Book historians have also collected a large amount of data
                    in the form of statistics, although that data tends to be
                    disconnected and resistant to comparative analysis. It’s
                    difficult to aggregate much of the historical records
                    because of inconsistencies and gaps, but some system-level
                    statistics are available. For example, scholars have
                    tabulated the number of new books produced in England
                    annually from the earliest years of the hand-press era. (See
                        Figure 6.) 
                        Annual Totals
                                1475-1700.
                            The Cambridge History of the
                                Book in Britain: vol. 4.
                        
                     For the first 150 years, book production followed
                    a fairly stable arc of growth. However, this equilibrium was
                    shattered during the civil wars of the 1640s, when the print
                    marketplace exploded with political and religious debates.
                    Historian Nigel Smith has described the event as a media revolution, and scholars
                    often point to the English Civil War as a key early moment
                    in the development of the free, democratic press . On the one hand, the
                    scandal of war and regicide led to a heightened interest
                    among readers and seems to have increased demand for printed
                    books. On the other hand, political instability loosened the
                    stranglehold that state and commercial monopolies had long
                    exerted over the book trade.
                What relation is there between diagrammatic models like
                    Bourdieu’s and Darnton’s and aggregate statistics like
                    these? It turns out, very little. Although economic and
                    political factors appear as forces in both diagrams, the
                    models don’t attempt to specify them. Darnton is a prominent
                    practitioner of microhistory, a technique of
                    historical explanation that performs close analysis of
                    individuals and everyday life; in Darnton’s case,
                    this means close study of individual members of the book
                    trade ; . In microhistory, these often
                    overlooked figures are chosen to exemplify how the print
                    marketplace worked at the local level. Darnton’s model is
                    thus designed, not to explain large macrolevel patterns, but
                    instead to provide a heuristic tool for interpreting
                    particular historical events and persons, who then stand in
                    as model exemplars for those larger patterns. The
                    diagrammatic model operates in the service of a bias toward
                    the individual, particular, and contingent event. A model
                    like Darnton’s is validated — if validated is even
                    the right word — insofar as it helps scholars describe
                    particular pieces of evidence found in the archive.
                 In this respect, the diagrammatic models often drawn by
                    historians are validated very differently than simulations
                    like those popular among complex-systems theorists. Within
                    the field of complexity science, explanation is
                        validated by the model’s ability to replicate
                    large system-level patterns within simulated worlds. I
                        do not mean to suggest here that validation of
                        agent-based models is taken to be a straightforward
                        process in the sciences. Indeed, as Kevin Korb, Nicholas
                        Geard, and Alan Dorin have recently commented, 
                            the theory of how to validate
                                ABMs is vastly underdeveloped compared to its
                                practice
                            
                        . Their Bayesian approach is very similar to the
                            hermeneutic figure-8 I
                        describe. They write: The Bayesian
                            approach to philosophy of science explicitly
                            recognizes the distinction between the current
                            understanding of the behavior of a system (prior
                            belief) and the data (likelihood), which provides us
                            with a framework for integrating both qualitative
                            and quantitative approaches to validation. In
                            essence, our prior belief about the model is updated
                            in light of experimental data gathered from our
                            simulations (256). Whether such an approach
                        could ever achieve validation in
                        the colloquial sense of confirm to be true
                        remains unlikely. In fact, Joshua Epstein has exhibited
                        considerable defensiveness on this point: 
                            I am always amused when …
                                people challenge me with the question, Can
                                    you validate your model? The appropriate
                                retort, of course, is, Can you validate
                                    yours?
                            
                        . As one of the authors of the Artificial Anasazi project,
                        which was built on decades of careful archeological and
                        environmental research, his frustration is
                        understandable. Their simulation of an early American
                        Indian civilization showed how its population might rise
                        and fall in relation to the area’s changing water
                        levels, and they were able to show that their artificial
                        society closely replicated the archeological evidence
                            . However, the problem they
                        run into is that no amount of data-based confirmation
                        can prove that the procedures written into the model
                        accurately represent what actually happened at the local
                        level. Agent-based simulations represent our ideas about
                        causation, and, as we have known since David Hume,
                        causation cannot be observed. Nothing about agent-based
                        modeling will solve this dilemma. Nor should it be
                        expected to, and this, perhaps, is Epstein’s point.
                        Critics of modeling betray considerable naiveté when
                        they brandish the incommensurability of ideation and
                        mind-independent reality as a criticism of any
                        particular genre. I share Epstein’s frustration insofar
                        as this naiveté manifests as a double standard: when
                        written out in sequential prose or drawn in diagrams,
                        models generally do not face the same kind of skepticism
                        similar models receive when executed computationally,
                        and there is no philosophical justification for this
                        difference. In any case, like Epstein, I am wary of the
                        term validation and prefer not to use it.
                    If the model can produce visual patterns similar to patterns
                    produced by the observed record, the possibility is raised
                    that the moving parts of the model bear some meaningful
                    analogical relationship to the moving parts of real
                    processes. Epstein and Axtell argue that the ability to grow [artificial societies]
                        — greatly facilitated by modern object-oriented
                        programming … holds out the prospect of a new,
                        generative, kind of social science
                    . This newness takes
                    form, not merely as a novel genre of cultural
                    representation, but as a mode of inquiry that fundamentally
                    transforms what we think of as historical explanation.
                    Epstein and Axtell ask, What
                        constitutes an explanation of an observed social
                        phenomenon? Perhaps one day people will interpret the
                        question, Can you explain it? as asking Can
                            you grow it?
                 I will qualify Epstein’s and Axtell’s dictum below, and I
                    find the notion that agent-based models can be
                        validated to be highly dubious, but it’s worth
                    pausing over the radicalism of their anti-historical vision.
                    The intellectual mandate to grow artificial societies
                    places a wildly different set of demands on models like
                    Bourdieu’s and Darnton’s. Whereas static models are used as
                    heuristics for interpreting historical records, simulations
                    are designed to mimic macroscopic patterns. A generative
                    model becomes explanatory, they argue, when the simple,
                    local rules that dictate agent behavior can be shown to
                    result in complex patterns: to know something as a
                    complex-systems theorist is to identify this meaningful
                    disjunction. However, such simple rules can never mimic real
                    behavior at the microlevel. Converting static models to
                    dynamic simulations seems to shift the target of explanation
                    away from particular examples and towards system-level
                    statistics. Models are useful, according to complexity
                    theory, not for interpreting particular events but for
                    generating patterns that look like aggregations of things
                    that really happened; modeling complexity thus obviates the
                    need for attention to particulars. Simulations allow us to
                    see through the mystifying complications of historical
                    evidence and see in their place the simple processes that
                    underpin complex systems. Simplicity and complexity are
                    real, and simulations allow us to see them clearly by
                    stripping away the illusory contingencies of actuality. Such
                    is, at least, how I interpret the challenge complex-systems
                    theory poses to historical explanation.
                 In order for generative models to contribute to a larger
                    practice of historical explanation, scholars will need to
                    reject this theory, I think. The value of modeling will need
                    to be placed elsewhere. As a group, historians will never
                    concede that simplicity and complexity are more interesting
                    than nuance, complication, and ambiguity. Nor should they.
                    I’ll conclude this essay by arguing that dynamic simulations
                    work much like heuristic models at the level of historical
                    interpretation (but better). We can use agent-based models
                    without taking on board all of complexity theory’s
                    ontological commitments. For now though, I want to leave
                    Epstein’s and Axtell’s challenge suspended in the air, like
                    an unexpected admonition, or like an interdisciplinary dare:
                    Can we take our ideas, written out in regular academic prose
                    or drawn as diagrams, and paraphrase them into functional
                    computer code? Can we generate simulations that behave how
                    the historical record we created predicts? If
                    not, maybe we don’t know what we think we know. This
                        dare is stated even more provocatively in Fred Dretske’s
                        essay, If You Can’t Make One, You
                            Don’t Know How It Works (1994).
            

                IV: Growing the communications circuit in a digital petri
                    dish
                 Following through on this dare requires a new historical
                    practice. Generative modeling is very different from
                    archival work (that’s obvious enough), but it’s also very
                    different from topic modeling and other statistical
                    techniques. Historical simulation completely sets aside the
                    basic empirical project of gathering and analyzing documents
                    from the past. Instead, simulation points back to the
                    theoretical model itself.
                 The task of converting Darnton’s model into a functioning
                    agent-based simulation has already been started by literary
                    scholar Jeremy Throne, who breaks the model down to six
                    turtle-types (called breeds in NetLogo parlance):
                    authors, publishers, printers, shippers, sellers, and
                    readers. Throne created variables to control how many of
                    each breed are included, and at initialization these turtles
                    are distributed randomly across a standard-sized field of
                    patches. At each tick, the turtles move about randomly, and
                    whenever they bump into each other they perform
                    transactions: authors present publishers with manuscripts,
                    who give them to printers as jobs, from whom they’re
                    picked up by shippers and deposited to sellers. Readers
                    purchase the books and complete the circuit by giving
                    authors encouragement to create more manuscripts. Like
                    clockwork automata, the now-moving parts of Darnton’s model
                    create a uniformly bustling field of exchange. (See Figure 7.) 
                        
                            ThroneCommCircuit.netlogo.Model created
                            by Jeremy Throne. Screen capture by Michael Gavin,
                            February 2014. 
                        
                    
                
                 Throne concedes that the homogeneous
                        nature of these businesses is admittedly
                        unrealistic, and indeed the immediate reaction
                    that historians often have when first exposed to agent-based
                    models is to be taken aback by their obvious, even comical
                    artificiality . In part this is
                    simply because of the crudity of NetLogo’s animations: the
                    figures bounce around the field like chunks of exploded
                    asteroids in Asteroids. More
                    deeply, though, the artificiality of the simulation can be
                    traced in the code itself; the procedures that dictate
                    turtle behaviors are radically simplified. For example, here
                    is Throne’s code that simulates the activity of book-buying:
               to buy-book
                     if any? sellers-here with [ inventory > 0 ] ;; if the reader meets a seller with books to sell 
                     [ ask one-of sellers-here with [ inventory > 0 ] 
                       [ set inventory inventory - 1             ;; take a book from the seller
                           if inventory <= 0                 ;; if the seller is out of books
                           [ set color white ]                 ;; show that the inventory is gone
                          ]
                          ask one-of readers-here
                            [ set books books + 1               ;; increase the books a reader has read by one
                              set color blue ]
                            ]
                          end
                    
                

                These twelve lines of code reduce an enormously complicated
                    cluster of practices surrounding reading to a single
                    procedure. As readers move around the patches
                    randomly, they’re constantly called upon to
                        buy-books. Book buying in this context means
                    checking to see if a seller turtle happens to sit on
                    the same patch, verifying that the seller has inventory, and
                    then taking that inventory. This description is
                        slightly inaccurate. The reader does not necessarily
                        take the book from the seller, nor does it necessarily
                        give the book to itself. The NetLogo command
                            one-of, which appears in the third and eighth
                        line of the code snippet cited above, means that the
                        reader looks at the entire field of readers and sellers
                        that happen to sit on the same patch. If more than one
                        seller or reader exists in the same place, this
                        procedure dictates that one of each will perform a
                        transaction without specifying which turtles will do so.
                        This ambiguity could be understood to mimic a social
                        process like gift-giving or recommendation-making. It
                        has the added advantage of making the code run more
                        efficiently. Already my prose description is more
                    complicated than the procedure itself. In fact, books as
                    such don’t exist in the simulation at all. Rather, they
                    appear only as numerical variables owned by turtles. In the
                    above code books exist as inventory (for sellers) and
                        books (for readers). Interestingly, one of
                        the criticism’s famously leveled at Darnton’s model is
                        that its focus on human agents weirdly effaces the
                        actual existence of books. Thomas R. Adams and Nicholas
                        Barker argue that the weakness of
                            Darnton’s scheme is that it deals with people,
                            rather than the book. It is concerned with the
                            history of communication. Nowhere do books as
                        such appear in Darnton’s model, an effect, it seems,
                        inadvertently replicated in Throne’s simulation.
                    When a reader bumps into a seller, a seller’s
                        inventory score is reduced by one and a reader’s
                        books score is increased by one. That’s all that
                    happens.
                 Given its level of abstraction, what relation does this
                    procedure have to actual book buying or real reading? Throne
                    describes the procedure as an activity that may be thought of as reading, purchasing, or
                        borrowing — a telling phrase that captures well
                    his model’s breadth of imaginative application . I say imaginative because
                    there isn’t anything that existed in history that his
                    readers do, really. They don’t read or purchase or borrow:
                    their activities may be thought of as those
                    things because they are analogues for those things. Throne’s
                    model is less interested in accounting for the
                    particularities of the behaviors imagined here than in
                    demonstrating their function within a larger system of
                    exchange and circulation. That function can be summed up
                    like this: Purchasing, sharing, and reading happen when
                    people encounter media providers, and those activities move
                    content from providers to the reading populace, and these
                    transfers, broadly and abstractly construed, bind consumers
                    to producers in a chain of cultural production.In
                        Darnton’s words, So the circuit
                            runs full cycle. It transmits messages, transforming
                            them en route, as they pass from thought to writing
                            to printed characters and back to thought
                            again
                        .  Such
                    abstract ideas require a comparably abstract form of
                    representation. While Darnton’s diagram simplifies this
                    process down to an arrow, the NetLogo model represents it as
                    an algorithmic procedure. So, while both models seem
                    unrealistic and over-simplified when compared to actual
                    behavior, if we take the idea to be the models’ real
                    subject, rather than the past per se, then
                    neither is reductive at all. The code and the diagram are
                    neither less realistic nor less valid than generalizations
                    in prose. Agent-based models don’t reduce life to
                    abstractions; they bring abstractions to life.
                 The most salient difference between agent-based simulations
                    and more traditional forms of historical modeling is not,
                    then, that simulations are peculiarly abstract, artificial,
                    or otherwise disconnected from the past. Rather,
                    conventional forms of historical explanation depend on the
                    spatialized logic of print, whether in the form of diagrams,
                    graphs, charts, or simply sequential prose. In such models,
                    sequence and spatial juxtaposition carry much of the
                    explanatory load. Agent-based models use algorithmic
                    processes instead. Alexander Galloway’s comment about video
                    games applies to ABM as well: like games, simulations are an
                        action-based medium
                    . This means that simulations
                    like Throne’s are able to point in both directions of what
                    I’ve called the hermeneutic figure-8. They retain the
                    capacity to facilitate historical research and explanation,
                    like any static model, but they also can be activated to
                    generate behaviors in simulated worlds — behaviors that may
                    or may not replicate patterns observed in the historical
                    record or predicted by the underlying assumptions. As
                    Willard McCarty has argued, models comprise a practical means of playing out the
                        consequences of an idea
                    . In his initial experiments
                    Throne found, for example, that printers and shippers were
                    the surprising bottleneck and that the function of his world
                    is more sensitive to disruptions in production and shipment
                    than he’d anticipated. Throne concludes, My exploration suggests that for the
                            given population of authors and readers, movement of
                            texts through the circuit appears to be more closely
                            connected to the presence of printers and shippers
                            than it is to the number of publishers or sellers in
                            the environment.
                The challenge then becomes one of reconciling these
                    disruptions with observed patterns in the historical record,
                    and it is at this point in the explanatory process that
                    statistics begin to play a valuable role. Statistics do not
                        validate the model, if by validate one means
                    prove, but they facilitate interpretation by identifying
                    where the model does and does not replicate observed
                    macroscopic patterns . Dixon
                        argues that patterns can be
                            justified as part of the process of inquiry in any
                            type of research, but not by themselves as an ends;
                            they are process not product. In the field
                        of complex-systems theory, repeated, physically-observable features are
                            recognised as emergent and convergent principles
                            that reveal underlying forces and
                        processes. To return to Throne’s
                    original, what’s striking is the lack of change over time:
                    once the turtles are apportioned at initialization, the
                    system runs without constraint or growth. Without feedback
                    loops that alter agent behavior, the communications circuit
                    operates here like a complex system, but not like a complex
                        adaptive system, and thus its production,
                    once set, operates at an unrealistically consistent
                    equilibrium.
                 Happily, agent-based models are easy to modify and extend
                    (surprisingly easy, in fact, to any digital humanist
                    comfortable with basic coding), and gaps in a model can be
                    addressed to facilitate new experiments that ask new
                    questions. In my revision of Throne’s original, I wondered
                    how economic growth, state suppression, and the exertion of
                    commercial monopolies might impact book production. My
                    version argues that growth in demand instigates pressure
                    from the state and from commercial interests to restrict
                    production, but that if such restrictions result in too much
                    pent-up demand, constraints break down in moments of crises.
                    The result is a pattern of book production that largely
                    follows economic growth but much more closely matches the
                    punctuated equilibrium observed across the hand-press era.
                    Compare, for example, the pattern of book production
                    observed over a 225-year period in my version (See Figure 8.) with annual book
                    production in England from 1475 to 1700. (See Figure 6.) “Playing with the
                    model” is another term for “sensitivity analysis,” and it
                    means adjusting the settings to find out which replicate
                    observed cultural patterns, which cause the system
                    effectively to crash, and to try to figure out why. However,
                    the output of a model never will match the historical data
                    exactly, nor should it. The purpose of historical simulation
                    is not to recreate the past but to subject our general ideas
                    about historical causation to scrutiny and
                        experimentation. Dan Dixon calls this intellectual
                        procedure of deciding among potential prior causes
                            abduction: seeing patterns where there are
                            patterns and creating the correct
                            interpretation.
                        Analysis Tool or Research
                            Methodology? by John Bonnett has similarly
                        identified abduction as the core explanatory mechanism
                        of counterfactual history and agent-based simulation
                            . See also Weingart and
                        Düring. At this early stage in thinking about humanistic
                        applications of ABM, I am less interested in pointing
                        out differences than identifying areas of common
                        ambition, but it’s worth mentioning that I find the idea
                        of “counterfactual history” to be a bit of a red
                        herring. All history writing deploys models, and all
                        causal explanations imply counterfactuals. The
                        particular value of ABM is in the execution.
                
                    Print Marketplace. Model created and
                        screen capture by Michael Gavin, March 2014.
                    
                
                 Readers curious about the model itself are encouraged to
                    download the file and play with its variables to see how its
                    constraints and feedback loops modify agent behavior (http://modelingcommons.org/browse/one_model/4004).
                    As with any new genre of writing, the best way to learn
                    about it is to compare and contrast texts that tackle
                    similar questions and problems. Readers are also encouraged
                    to examine two other models of the historical book trade
                    that I’ve created. Bookshops focuses closely on the
                    finance of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century book-selling
                    businesses to explore how changes in demand and costs might
                    have affected publishers’ decisions about price,
                    republication, and edition size (http://modelingcommons.org/browse/one_model/4002).
                        The Paranoid Imaginarium of Roger
                        L’Estrange is more subjective and speculative:
                    it attempts to create a working model of how
                    seventeenth-century state censors imagined a print
                    marketplace of scurrilous and seditious publication, where
                    voraciously scandal-mongering readers threaten to disrupt
                    the populace and therefore require strict policing to
                    prevent social breakdown (http://modelingcommons.org/browse/one_model/4003).
                    NetLogo models can also be used to address questions of
                    literary form. For example, Graham Sack has created two
                    models of interest: one that simulates the fictional social
                    networks of nineteenth-century novels and another that
                    adapts models of biological evolution to simulate the
                    evolution of literary genres ; . Surveying these examples, as well
                    as models publicly available at http://modelingcommons.org or the sample library
                    included with NetLogo, may provide scholars a glimpse of
                    this nascent genre’s potential as a tool of historical
                    explanation.
                 Humanistic problems that could be tackled with agent-based
                    modeling include (but are not limited to):
                
                    History of commerce. As the examples of book
                    history above suggest, agent-based computation is
                    well-suited to model production and distribution networks.
                    Indeed, the most important commercial applications of ABM
                    look at systems dynamics and logistics, and there’s no
                    reason why ABM couldn’t be used to study historical systems.
                    How did communication and transportation networks evolve?
                    How did new technologies (telegraph, railroad) affect
                    commerce, and at what points were those networks most
                    vulnerable? What factors were most important to their
                    development?
                
                    Political and military history. In the social
                    sciences, ABM is often used to examine phenomena like voter
                    affiliation. Applied to historical cases, it could be used
                    to answer a wide range of questions. What caused the
                    emergence of partisan politics in the eighteenth century?
                    How did the consolidation of nation-states in the nineteenth
                    century lay the conditions for the global wars of the
                    twentieth? How did social movements form and deform? What
                    conditions were needed for twentieth-century political
                    advocacy to manifest as social change?
                
                    History of literature and philosophy. The
                    material concerns of politics and commerce matter for
                    literature as well. How did competition between publishers,
                    theaters, film companies, authors, editors, unions,
                    typesetters, and other stakeholders affect the production of
                    books, plays, and movies? More abstractly, scholars might
                    use ABM to model interpretive difficulties. Through what
                    process do genres devolve into parody? What is
                        originality, when is it recognized,
                    and under what conditions is it valued? What factors are the
                    most important drivers of “paradigm shift”? How do ideas
                    change over time?
                 In all of these cases, agent-based models will never be able
                    to establish definitively what happened in the past.
                    However, they could be used in each case to specify
                    scholars’ ideas about historical processes while subjecting
                    those ideas to a challenging form of scrutiny.
                 In conclusion, three points are worth emphasizing. First,
                    simulation does not and will never replace document-based
                    research as the historian’s primary activity. As hermeneutic
                    tools, agent-based models work much like traditional
                    diagrams: they articulate a cluster of general assumptions
                    and make those assumptions available as a guide to
                        interpretation. Ted Underwood has recently made a
                        similar argument: 
                            The point of model-building is
                                actually to address the reservations and nuances
                                that humanists correctly want to interject
                                whenever the concept of measurement comes
                                up. Many concepts can’t be directly measured. In
                                fact, many of our critical concepts are only
                                provisional hypotheses about unseen categories
                                that might (or might not) structure literary
                                discourse. Before we can attempt to
                                operationalize those categories, we need to make
                                underlying assumptions explicit. That’s
                                precisely what a model allows us to do
                            
                        . Underwood here echoes the argument made by
                        Epstein toward the scientific community: Anyone who ventures a projection, or
                            imagines how a social dynamic — an epidemic, war, or
                            migration — would unfold is running some model. But
                            typically, it is an implicit model in which the
                            assumptions are hidden, their internal consistency
                            is untested, their logical consequences are unknown,
                            and their relation to data is unknown
                        . However, second,
                    simulation is an action-based medium that makes those
                    assumptions more explicit and enables experiments to test
                    their internal consistency. When agents don’t behave how the
                    designer expects them to, debugging, expanding, or otherwise
                    modifying the model becomes a process of intellectual
                    inquiry that subjects the designer’s ideas to a frustrating
                    but invigorating process of reformulation. Third,
                    statistical comparison is an important tool for testing that
                    consistency, but such comparisons don’t suggest (pace
                    complex-system theory) that simple processes are all that is really happening.
                    Instead, statistical confirmation and its breakdown identify
                    moments of analogy between the model and the past, as well
                    as (just as usefully) moments of dissimilarity between
                    them.
                This last point suggests that any historical simulation’s
                    success will not be determined by its verisimilitude. Any
                    model that was sophisticated and complicated enough to
                    represent faithfully the multitudinous totality of the past
                    would be every bit as inscrutable as that past. Rather,
                    models should be judged by their capacity to facilitate
                    interpretation and explanation. In practical terms, this
                    means that ABMs targeted toward an audience of historians
                    will need to be thesis-driven and richly documented with
                    primary and secondary sources, demonstrating both the
                    model’s macrolevel similarity with historical patterns and
                    its value as a heuristic device for explaining particular
                    events or interpreting historical texts. Ultimately,
                    agent-based models don’t need to tell us something new, but
                    they should help us say something new.
            
