Title:  Computers, Comics and Cult Status: A Forensics of Digital
                    Graphic Novels
Volume:  008
Issue:  3
Date:  9 October 2014
Abstract:  
                The digital era has become inundated with the idea of anonymity as on the
                    Internet where users create avatars in forums and write without obvious material
                    constraint; however when considering documents such as graphic novels and print
                    fiction, the figure of the author remains a nostalgic figure which grants
                    validity to the document. In classic comic book collections such as Watchmen and
                    Batman: Year One by Alan Moore and Frank Miller, the original scripts by the
                    authors are included in special editions in both print and Kindle format. But
                    these original script pages are shrouded in forms of
                    anonymity as they illustrate signs of digitization, either through scanning or
                    during production and thus display various visual clues, such as errors, which
                    relay levels of realness. Furthermore online versions of these script pages,
                    found on fan website databases and authors’ blogs, are complicated by the
                    anonymity the Internet and digital editions produce. Therefore a digital
                    forensics methodology is used to interrogate these script pages in both print
                    and digital format to create an ordering system for digitally manipulated text.
                    It also endeavours to illustrate the possibilities for a forming digital
                    forensics field by using various technical calculations and recreations of text
                    with original software and hardware.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Section 1: Introduction
                Online versions of text, whether accessed through Kindle files, downloadable pdfs
                    or blog postings, illustrate the changing modality of humanities research that
                    enables new parameters for examination and discussion of non-traditional
                    material. Scholars have begun to study digitized classical texts and images,
                    such as scans of William Blake’s artwork and Shakespeare’s folios; however,
                    there exists a gap in discourse: comic books/graphic novels. Though
                    Internet-moderated collections of digital comics have existed for years, the
                    availability of and discussions about the value and production process of
                    digital comics are substantially more accessible with the recent growth of the
                    Internet . Digitally produced and circulated
                    graphic novels and their accompanying secondary texts present new challenges for
                    analysis, particularly regarding the formation of approaches to digital media
                    and its popularization in mainstream culture and academia. Digital forensics is
                    an approach that investigates the ways in which digital data is stored and
                    transmitted on devices and traditionally utilized by 
                        business, industry, government and
                            military
                        
                    , yet is also emerging within the arts as a productive means of inquiry.
                    Associated actions include retracing keyboard strokes, recovering data and
                    passwords through decryption, and creating and comparing files in order to
                    understand how data and its encasing were constructed . Matthew Kirschenbaum (2008) considers this in Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination, stating that
                    digital forensics is commemorative as well as judicial, and fundamental to the arts as well as
                        the sciences . Employing the
                    digital forensics methodology to the arts requires a flexible subject; various
                    versions of graphic novels that have either been digitally reproduced or
                    formatted within a digital file provide an example of such crystallizing at the nexus of storage,
                        inscription and instrumentation. In this study,  uses the example of floppy disks that contain
                    video games, and the magnetic engraving upon them, to practice a type of digital
                    forensics, allocating attention to the physical qualities of the magnetic ribbon
                    and retrieving electronic data from discontinuities on the ribbon’s surface.
                This article illustrates a modified digital forensics methodology, utilizing both
                    original print and digital graphic novel texts as case studies to analyse
                    digital/print authorship and the associated Internet network through the
                    appendices, with primary focus on digitally reprinted typewritten scripts by
                    graphic novel authors Frank Miller (Batman Year
                    One; Daredevil) and Alan Moore (Watchmen; The Killing
                        Joke; From Hell), as well as unofficial
                    digital versions disseminated on the Internet. The digital forensics methodology
                    employed includes reproducing texts manually, statistically calculating
                    characteristics and using scholarship from multiple fields to understand the
                    ways in which digital texts imitate original sources. While section two
                    contextualizes the connections between print and capitalism, section three
                    examines the probability of scanning marks and page alignment in Miller’s Batman: Year One by comparing similar documents and
                    calculating letters’ pixel ratios. The fourth section offers a contrasting view
                    of digital comic scripts that derive from word processing programs and, as such,
                    requires different parameters such as encryption and stylistic blocking for
                    validation. Fake comic books scripts are introduced in section five, examining
                    their presence in Moore’s Watchmen where conscious
                    choices to include misalignment and typing errors illustrate the ordering
                    systems used by authors and publishers to recreate authenticity. In this
                    section, the digital forensic method includes recreating the actual script on a
                    typewriter and calculating probability of errors. Section six uses the
                    methodology to interrogate blog postings of Moore’s scripts and questions the
                    blocking as well as capitalization of words. It also considers the user comments
                    and whether the Internet breeds or credits authenticity.
                Conflicts surrounding legitimacy and anonymity of digitally manipulated scripts
                    propagate through these texts by levels of realness presented to the reader by
                    ordering systems, such as errors. The term realness
                    represents the perceived value of authenticity by the user, i.e. whether
                    something is believable as existing in present reality according to the reader.
                    This evaluation of competency and credibility is one of the requirements of a
                    digital forensics analysis . This article attempts to
                    articulate modern conceptions of digital reading as well as digital writing
                    through the interrogation of the ordering system regulations that appear and
                    their associated credibility. The discourse network which is produced and
                    substantiated by these digitized graphic novels involves complex connections
                    between capitalism, visualizations, technology, anonymity, authorship and
                    nostalgia; I believe that what an analysis of this network or archive reveals is
                    how the conditions surrounding a digital text, not the text itself, produce our
                    ability to access and frame such a discourse network, as well as the figure of
                    the author in the digital era. 
            

                Section 2: Scripts and Selling Points
                Within the past few decades various comic book authors have achieved celebrity
                    status and characters have been integrated into North American mythology,
                    witnessed by the popularity of movies such as The Dark
                        Knight and The Avengers as well as
                    events such as Comic Con. Converted consumers who were not previously exposed to
                    comics as well as lifelong avid fans are expressing interest in the creative
                    process and the figure of the author, driving multitudes of publishers to
                    include original scripts, drawings, and notes within digitally reproduced
                    reissues and collective volumes. These additional scripts and notes constitute
                    the paratext, e.g. that which surrounds the main body of text; traditional
                    examples of the paratext include appendices, publishing marks, covers, and
                    footnotes. Within academics and publishing, Joseph Bensman (1988) argues that
                        footnotes have important
                        institutional, political, and aesthetic functions
                    . Appendices and paratextual elements, specifically
                    typewritten comic book scripts, also occupy this space within the graphic
                    novel’s statements. The aesthetic and institutional effect of the graphic
                    novel’s paratext has been used as a source of profit by companies who increase
                    the price of special reissued editions because of it.
                The celebrity status of authors and inclusion of the new paratext reflects the
                    fetishization of these scripts and the increasing aesthetics currency value.
                    Typewriters are similarly fetishized , connoting
                    nostalgic images of previous eras and linking text with monetary value.
                    Nostalgia, which is the rubbing of past and present , lies in the discourse network around the typewriter that recalls specific
                    political, cultural and domestic memories. Famous author’s typewriters and the
                    associated works have been sold for higher market price as collector’s items as
                    seen on websites such as Etsy and Ebay. Further typewriter models and authors
                    are fetishized by the innumerable copies of images on websites and secondary
                    publishing, becoming almost pornographic as they are worshipped by fans and
                    objectified . Secondary objects emerge, such
                    as typewriter bedspreads and fridge magnets which are sold by in vogue companies
                    such as Urban Outfitters, but the images are all licenced through the original
                    publishers and estates. Thus a large commercial network is formed around the
                    print text and is paralleled by the economy of comic books. Alteration and
                    commercialism both contribute to the objectification of the comic book authors
                    and their associated texts; therefore, this article focuses on providing both a
                    contextual and mechanical reading of the digitized scripts.
                Beyond social implications, the creation process of modern comics allows a
                    secondary layer of analysis, as comic books are now produced on digital
                    interfaces. Digital production of comic books with current text and image
                    processing software programs, such as Photoshop, Adobe Illustrator and InDesign,
                    alters the discursive statements of a text, evidenced through the shifts of the
                    paratextual digitized additions like script pages. Digital editions of comic
                    books, such as Kindle versions, include hyperlink connections to publisher’s
                    websites connecting readers to the origin and to the Internet where they can
                    interact with other users through the comments section. These new paratextual
                    features are presented as novel entities that increase the entertainment value
                    of comic books and alter the discourse network. Further, the paratext is what
                    enables the companies to market nostalgia as the modern world (i.e. the Internet
                    forums) is contrasted against the old world represented by the typewritten
                    scripts.
            

                Section 3: Scanning and Batman: Year One
                When DC Comics decided to revitalize its superheroes in the mid 1980s, writer
                    Frank Miller and illustrator David Mazzucchelli created Batman: Year One, a graphic novel retelling Batman’s origins . Because of its impact and popularity, a reissue
                    released in 2005 included additional paratext in the form of a new foreword,
                    afterword and never-before-seen original script pages, which the jacket cover
                    describes as providing a glimpse
                        into the making of this contemporary classic
                    . These additional paratexts are marketed as a
                    selling feature on DC’s website where the graphic novel is listed as one of the
                    best sellers under the fan favourites section heading (Fan Favourites DC). In
                    Gerard Genette’s (1997) definition of the paratext, it serves to reveal or
                    provide information for the reader, both through immediate text such as jacket
                    covers and through text later formulated, such as a critical reading. The
                    graphic novels’ paratext sets not only the context for the content in the
                    foreword, but produces narratives that function externally to the main text, a
                    modern parallel to hypertextuality seen in the afterword and typewritten
                    scripts. Furthermore these scripts convey the relationship between romantic
                    authority of the pre-contemporary typewriter, essential in the modern creative
                    process, and Internet-associated anonymity. Although the realness of the scripts
                    is contestable, they highlight the fundamental modality of acceptance that
                    society employs toward printed text as opposed to digital text seen extending
                    from the historical introduction of the printed bank notes, creating a currency of trust
                    .
                In the new, digitally reproduced afterword, four smaller script pages are printed
                    and are seen in Figure 1. 
                        Frank Miller, Batman: Year One. Marked
                            script pages and matching illustrations
                        
                     These scripts are not clean copies; the pages are covered in
                    scribbles, markings, coffee stains, pencil and pen. Red ink underlines the
                    caption titles, drawing attention away from the main body of text on the page
                    and placing it on the coloured lines. The captions correspond to a numbering
                    system written in pencil, which correlates with panels displayed directly on the
                    opposite page. Seminal comic book houses DC and Marvel use InDesign as the
                    software program for page layout and publishing ,
                    indicating the editorial gesture to display matching script and image; this
                    highlights the imposition of the digital on the technical reproduction. The
                    software and print machines designate the connection between page and image as
                    well as the sizing and quality of the two visualizations as InDesign allows the
                    user to set the pixel density and colouring settings .
                    The tension between the print and digital implicates different levels of the
                    discursive network due to the temporal differences, e.g. the Xs occurred during
                    typing, whereas the scribbles were marked after the script had been passed
                    between collaborators and scanning occurred later. The digital reproduction
                    conflates these experiences or, rather, does not leave obvious traces of
                    multiple collaborations. Furthermore, in comparing digital text to
                    1980s-reproduced texts, Frances Robertson notes that these typed-up looking pages act to
                        denote the sincerity and honest labour of the writer.
                
                Craig Dworkin comments on the use of symbols such as dashes and
                    ellipses, where the symbols must be viewed;
                        they cannot be spoken without some contrived act of translation.
                    Here the scribbles, underlines, and X’d out letters similarly cannot be spoken
                    without the reader consciously integrating their own proclivities into
                    translations, and thus reiterations for different readers are found in the
                    prosody of the text. The ephemeral quality of the script then is configured into
                    this construction and furthered as not every panel matches the caption
                    perfectly. These interventions associated with InDesign contribute to anonymity
                    of authorship and act as a product of the collaborative nature of comic books,
                    eroding the notion of the singular author figure and contributing to the
                    multiplicity of the network that is emblematic of contemporary Internet user
                    interactions. 
                This dialectic between author as romantic notion and author as
                    multiple/anonymous, which is a product of the digital experience, continues
                    throughout the examples, illustrating tensions underneath consumption and
                    creation of digital textual products. An opposing example is witnessed in Frank
                    Miller’s Daredevil: Volume 1 which portrays a
                    realistic typewritten script that is entirely digitally created. Seen in Figure
                    2, graphic artists have used programs such as Photoshop to create residue scan
                    marks in the corners and mimicked typewriter typeface. 
                        Frank Miller Batman: Year One, Daredevil.Scan residue. Batman: Year One on the right, Daredevil on the left side
                        
                    
                
                 However, several indicators such as sizing, borders and text uniformity
                    ultimately reveal the text to originate from a digital source. Several of these
                    issues are displayed in the text of Miller’s Batman: Year
                        One scripts. Figure 3 illustrates an example of where errors and
                    text uniformity reveal the realness of a text and the extent to which it has
                    been digitally manipulated. 
                         Frank Miller  Batman: Year One Xs and
                            ink marks convey realistic authority
                        
                    
                
                In choosing to display marked-up text, the pages subsequently conceal as much as
                    they reveal. Typewritten overlays exert authority of authorship while also
                    succumbing to it. The gesture of the typewriter is that it forces the writer to
                    think before typing in order to avoid errors . The
                    Xs and ink scratches in Figure 3 are effects of the gesture of typewriting, and
                    thus produce the ephemerality of these drafts presented to the consumer.
                    Conversely, word processors allow the user to edit as they write, conflating the
                    experience between writing and editing, erasing the totality of the author. The
                    typewriter’s editing process is complicated by the fact that these pages are
                    digitally reproduced. The implication of the text’s digital and physical
                    qualities is exemplary of the tensions between consumption and creation,
                    illustrated by the scanning/photocopying process. Evidence of scanning is
                    exhibited in the black borders on the top and bottom of the four quadrants of
                    script grids in Figure 1, which are consistently parallel with the borders of
                    the novel, yet the borders of the actual scanned pages overlap at inconsistent
                    angles. Questioning the mistakes, such as border alignment and errors, produces
                    ambiguity surrounding the validity of these digitally recreated documents and
                    the author. If these documents were key to the novel’s commercial success,
                    normal assumptions would be that DC Comics would have ensured these documents
                    were scanned properly or at least Photoshopped straight. The misalignment is a
                    reflection of how typewritten documents assert authority and authorship in a
                    digital era; it becomes important that these pages are misaligned to show the
                    traces of the digital process in order for the readers to ascribe these pages
                    with a value of realness and relinquish the anonymity of the collaborative
                    author. 
                Within the alternate script pages, closer scrutiny reveals a difference of
                    typeface between individual pages, characterized by the consistency of the
                    letterings’ width as well as the shade of the page seen in Figure 4. 
                        Frank Miller Batman: Year One Typeface 1
                            (typewriter) on the left, typeface 2 (electronic) on the right
                            side
                        
                    
                
                Typeface one uses heavy ink and follows the shape of stereotypical typewriter
                    script while the second category of typeface has less consistency of boldness
                    and elongated letters more similar to electronic typewriters or word processing
                    output; however the scripts appear together as if they were composed at the same
                    time in random order. Technical instructions with words medium and
                        close are examples of phrases that appear within the two types of
                    scripts and illustrate key differences between them. The ratio of height to
                    width for the word medium in the former typeface is 6.57±.001: 1 pixels,
                    while for the secondary typeface is 7.83±.001: 1 pixels. Therefore by analysing
                    the specific heights and boldness, there is a definitive difference between the
                    script pages that results in part from digital manipulation. In the case of
                    questioned typewritten documents, professional forensics experts used ink bleeds
                    and letter boldness to determine the veracity of a text . In this instance examining the scanning process as well as the writing
                    process illustrates the digital forensics methodology, whereby questioning the
                    composition and reception paratextuality reveals how digital modification alters
                    textuality through nostalgia and commercialism regarding modern typewritten
                    scripts. 
            

                Section 4: Microsoft Word Documents and The Killing
                        Joke
                The paradox involving nostalgia, authorship and commercialization is challenged
                    by online script leaks where whole communities of fans have, through various
                    means, obtained versions of the scripts and posted them to websites. One of
                    these websites, The Comic Book Script Archive, has
                    a copy of the first twelve pages of Alan Moore’s The
                        Killing Jokeas a 2007 Microsoft Word document, seen in Figure 5. 
                        Alan Moore/Tim Simmons, The Killing Joke.
                            Word Document Version of Script.
                        
                    
                
                The lengthy descriptions, direction of panel size and placement and overall style
                    is reflective of a real Alan Moore script . But it is
                    contained as a Microsoft Word document that anyone could have created, and thus
                    anonymity abounds. 
                The conflict between anonymity and authorship provides a complex relationship to
                    capitalism and ownership. On websites such as DC’s Kindle site, the main source
                    of sales is the special edition text, while on sites such as The Comic Book Script Archive, ad space and donations
                    constitute the site’s income. In this case the script is perhaps more authentic
                    since it is not objectified for monetary value; however, it embodies another
                    type of value, ownership. The procurer retains so-called bragging rights and is
                    able to claim ownership over the document. Therefore this network belongs to a
                    different set of motivations and statements that centre on currency involving
                    ingenuity, ownership and resourcefulness as well as publishing and authenticity.
                    Other forms of scripts include faxed documents, blog postings on author websites
                    and actual documents emailed by the authors themselves. The community around the
                    scripts acts as a secondary paratext to the documents, which in turn are also
                    paratextual. The Internet versions from the archive are removed from the primary
                    discourse network as they have endured other forms of translation and
                    modification as well as existing without the same value expectations. 
                These expectations alter the approach of a digital forensics methodology,
                    shifting focus on ownership rather than commercial value. In the Microsoft Word
                    document of The Killing Joke, Moore’s name appears
                    within the first line, but when examining the document’s properties the owner is
                    Tim Simmons who is the website moderator (2012). This immediately alerts the
                    reader that this document has either been modified on Simmons’ computer or it
                    has been entirely created by him and the romantic notion of authorship is
                    disrupted by the digital precepts. Furthermore the document is not locked and
                    therefore it is possible for any user to modify the document.
                Within this document are grammatical and structural errors, which Microsoft Word
                    highlights, but the reason why the author did not fix these mistakes appears as
                    two choices: that the original script contained these errors, or that the
                    transcribing author made these errors. Errors enter the discourse surrounding
                    authorship, but unlike the scan marks they blur as well as clarify the rules and
                    signification around the author figure. The ambiguity surrounding these errors
                    recalls the ambiguity within transmission of text online as demonstrated by Alan
                    Liu.  discusses the process by which the separation
                    between the first user (writer) and second user (reader) results in the
                    ambiguity of intentions. Although he refers to the structure of a poem and the
                    directions that need to be issued as to how to reconstruct it after digital
                    transmission (email), his argument about the need for structure and rules is
                    applicable in the case of errors. In print, errors and marks act as ordering
                    structures which delegate specific sets of texts to specific genres and formats
                    to authors, but in the digital culture they create an enigma of anonymity. The
                    properties of The Killing Joke document reinforce
                    this type of anonymity and speculation over truthfulness. Within the digital
                    realm errors aren’t enough to confirm authorship; it is encryption, the website
                    authority and the document ownership which provide a more complete understanding
                    of authorship. 
            

                Section 5: Photoshop and Watchmen
                Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons’ Watchmen, originally
                    published in 1986, presents the reader with several types of typewritten and
                    published text. The narrative of the story is told in three modes: one being the
                    journal of Rorschach, the text of a pirate comic, and the third through a
                    narrator presenting excerpts from a superhero’s autobiography as well as
                    informational pamphlets and medical records. The autobiography is of Hollis
                    Mason, one of the original superheroes within this fictional representation of
                    America in the 1980s, and has been reprinted for the reader with conscious
                    awareness of the circumstances. Although the reprint is not in traditional
                    typewriter Courier font, indicating word processing, there are notes that have
                    been attached to the top of each page in typewritten script seen in Figure 6. 
                        Alan Moore, Watchmen. Attached notes to
                            the script pages.
                        
                    
                
                In an example of an excerpt from the fictional autobiography, the note reads:
                        presented here are the excerpts
                        from UNDER THE HOOD. In this next chapter Hollis Mason discusses...
                        reprinted with permission of the author 
                    . The note supports the romantic notion of
                    print authorship from the logic that in order to reprint permission is needed of
                    a singular person. But overall authorship belongs to the creators of the graphic
                    novel, who in turn created both the note and the autobiography. Therefore the
                    digital confuses notions of authorship as it allows creators the ability to
                    overlay notes and paperclips in realistic fashions with program such as
                    Photoshop. Although originally written in 1986 this new version was recoloured
                    and scanned in 2004, which allowed for the modification of depth ratios present
                    in the overlay image.
                The uniformity of the note’s letters is similar to the uniformity of false text
                    at the end of Miller’s Daredevil: Volume 1 as the
                    letters in the notes have no inky bleeds, smudges or even scan marks. The
                    attempt to present this evidence as truthful to the typewriter is noticeably
                    exemplified in the slanted alignment of the notes and the sections of text that
                    are interrupted by physical page boundaries. The projection of authority and
                    knowledge through the note is supported and subverted simultaneously by the
                    interruption of these physical constraints. This fractious union is
                    representative of the implications that stem from recreating typewritten text in
                    a digital format as the typewritten text searches for constant validation but is
                    never justified in contextual meanings. It is the form and physicality that
                    produces its associations with power and authority within the digital.
                One of the more realistic portrayals of typewritten text comes at the end of
                    chapter six, with Rorschach's criminal records, psychiatric evaluations and
                    letters. Attempts to assert the typewritten page as real come from visual clues
                    such as coffee stains, stamp marks and errors, seen in Figure 7. 
                        Alan Moore Watchmen. Various spelling
                            errors and marks create realistic text.
                        
                    
                
                Through the police report and evaluation the subversion of authority and
                    knowledge is witnessed in misspellings and clerical errors, such as in the
                    middle of the report with the word neretheless
                    . This mistake illuminates the process of creating a
                    realistic fake document. In misspelling neretheless, there are actually
                    two errors: the first error is the forgotten v, the other the reversal of
                    the r and second e. The v is on the bottom row of the
                    QWERTY assemblage, common to typewriters and computers, therefore it is unlikely
                    that it would have been switched with the r two rows above. This
                    conclusion is supported by the quantitative model purposed by Neil Kay’s (2013)
                    equations for the typewriter’s probability of conjoined letters. The reversal of
                    the e and r appears much more common, as these two are frequently
                    paired together and are located beside each other on the QWERTY keyboard layout
                        . This manipulation and romanticised notion of the
                    typewriter is supported by the existence of other errors throughout this
                    psychiatric evaluation, which include three main types. The first is the
                    reversal of letters with examples scine (since), and hte (the);
                    improper spacing in short ly (shortly) and hima s (him as); and
                    addition/subtraction of letters in decide (decided), eduscation
                    (education) and forced ing (forcing) . Therefore it indicates the salient precept that errors and misalignments
                    exist in order for a printed text to assert its validity as belonging to
                    reality. This dictates a template for errors; specific mistakes or glitches
                    signify a real text of non-digital writing just as certain marks or disruptions
                    signify a scanned page.
                This idea is perpetuated in Alan Moore’s (2008) The Killing
                        Joke afterword, where a short narrative tells the story of a man
                    creating a hypothetical killing of Batman. The status and authority of the
                    author, as well as the digital, are encoded within it. The man videotapes his
                    confessions and ideas and thus the words are translated into the realm of the
                    digital. By portraying an author in a digital context, the idea is subversive in
                    its stance towards our understanding of the figure of the author as cult status
                    romantic image. It conflates the time of writing and producing, erasing part of
                    the gesture of writing as the modern writer is born simultaneously with his text
                    , just as digital word processing conflates writing
                    and editing. This erasure is not in totality; it indicates a shift in the
                    notions of the author and the creative process which must now be considered in
                    the digital era. By using a digital forensics methodology which examines the
                    spelling errors and small page markings as well as larger contextual instances,
                    a developing type of research is witnessed. The decentering of research
                    disallows a simplistic understanding of meaning or authorial intent and instead
                    focuses on the materiality as well as the ramifications of the text. 
                
                    Section 6: Internet Websites and From
                        Hell
                     argues that fandom is now beyond the classical
                        sense and that the height of American consumption is in the technology of reproduction
                            itself. This can be applied to the discourse surrounding
                        reproduction of scripts and texts on Internet forums and sites that compile
                        various editions. Through a weekly column published online, graphic novel
                        author Warren Ellis engages with questions about the industry, the process
                        of creation and notions of authorship. Ellis cites examples of different
                        artists’ formatting techniques and styles, including types of word
                        processing programs and digital inferences. Many styles use a screenplay
                        type structure with some authors preferring screenplay software, such as
                        Celtx, while other authors manually format their scripts in Microsoft Word
                            . The implications of different techniques as
                        well as technology affect the discourse around them, causing social orders
                        to form around the techniques, such as the famous Marvel method.
                    On the artist Eddie Campbell’s personal website, his collaboration with Alan
                        Moore, From Hell, is posted in various
                        fragments. Campbell has reproduced Moore’s original script through the
                        confines of the Internet webpage, raising questions of authorship as Moore
                        originally wrote the text but Campbell has posted it online thus producing
                        anonymity about the true author. The popularity of From
                            Hell, due in part to the consumer driven culture mediating it,
                        has spurred this release of scripts, which are transitory moments of
                        creation and are encoded in the html of the webpage. Inconsistencies fill
                        the script posted by Campbell; in one panel’s directions NO dialogue
                        contrasts the following panel with No dialogue
                        . The inconsistency of capitalization hints
                        that the script appearing online has been translated between files or
                        physical mediums. Each panel description is written in all caps, similar to
                        scripts previously witnessed earlier in this article and illustrated in
                        Figure 8. 
                            Eddie Campbell and Alan Moore, From
                                    Hell. Screenshot of online posting of the script.
                            
                        
                    
                     discusses this as characteristic of Moore’s
                        style and cites Dave Gibbons on this technique: If you type the description in upper case, you
                            can just put the caps lock on and bash away, without worrying about the
                            niceties of capitalization at the start of sentences. Having dialogue in
                            lower case differentiates it from the description, obviously. More
                            importantly, it means that you can use caps for bold and don't have to
                            bother going back and underlining. It's a typewriter thing. By
                        identifying a typewriter mentality comparative to digital writing, the
                        digital edition loses authorial power for the reader scrolling through
                        reproduced scenes. On further posts Campbell 
                        has scanned Moore’s photographs which were taken to create real life
                        references for the collaborators and contain Moore’s handwriting, giving
                        direction to Campbell. All of these different forms of media assemble on the
                        website to instruct the reader on the creative process, but the reader’s
                        interactions will ultimately be varying just as the website changes itself.
                        It is never revealed to the reader if these are finalized versions,
                        intermediary versions, or just correspondence between the two collaborators
                        and the ephemerality of the scripts becomes integrated into the increasing
                        ephemerality of the digital. There is no definite time mark attributed to
                        these pieces except for the posting date, nor is there context for how each
                        post was actually created. For example, did Campbell retype the script on
                        Microsoft Word and copy and paste it into a WordPress text box, or did he
                        type it directly into html of the webpage? Changes in the coding between
                        html and Microsoft Word can alter the text itself and thus the lack of
                        information about composition subverts the notion of authorship by creating
                        ambiguity about authenticity and translation.
                    Also available on the webpage is the ability for users to comment, enabling
                        the reader to become an active participant in the creation of text. Web page
                        forums allow users to maintain anonymity while influencing others’
                        interactions with the primary text. The archive includes these emerging
                        forms of communication that modify and regulate the discursive object. User
                            Mike comments on Eddie Campbell’s (2007a) original post: I was
                                reading through January and saw the photo you posted of your work as
                                "low-brow art" - this links to a picture of From Hell in the main
                                Freemason's library in Washington, DC, which incidentally is open to
                                the public and a magnificent collection.
                            http://www.flickr.com/photos/42072348@N00/141732314
                            Feel free to use the pic as you see fit.
                            Off-topic for this post, I'm afraid, but I use blogspot too, and I
                                know how hard it is to see comments after they move off the main
                                page. 
                     This post reconfigures the work and its discursive statements while creating
                        a link to other media-based networks. Other users respond to this comment
                        and thus the network grows; however, not all responses relate directly to
                        this topic and the network behaves as a rhizomatic function. Value is
                        displaced as Mike is possibly a pseudonym and unrepresentative of the
                        true, real life author and his associated knowledge. There are no academic
                        associations or a definitive value system for assessing the validity of
                        Mike’s claims without following the link provided, and nostalgia functions
                        in a different context than previously witnessed in print forms. 
                
                
                    Section 7: Conclusion 
                    The projected desire to witness evidential proof of realness echoes through
                        these documents and is manifested in part by the anonymity associated with
                        the digital era, e.g. Internet communities. It functions through nostalgic
                        relations and associations but ultimately transfigures the relationship
                        between writer and text through the digital. Errors create not only
                        organizational patterns but emotional imprints. Sentimentality of errors
                        galvanizes identification of authors; it makes them human and relatable,
                        something which is in opposition to the anonymity the Internet offers. By
                        simplifying discursive rules to sets of errors, authors past appear easier
                        to access as cult figures than those of the future who manuscripts are
                        purely digitally composed. Moore now uses Microsoft Word to create his
                        scripts (2000a), but his process is kept invisible by comic book publishers,
                        thwarting transparency of authorship. The Internet offers an alternate
                        possibility for writer-reader interaction by allowing this transparency to
                        pass at the risk of anonymity.
                    The errors and marks leave traces just as emails are stored and inscribed
                             and are indicative of the
                        possibilities that digital forensics produces. What a digital forensics
                        reading of these images offers is insight into the production process and
                        the types of implications scanned or recopied typewritten scripts offers. It
                        also establishes how digital text asserts authority in comparison to printed
                        work. In both examples it is in the conditions around a text, not the actual
                        text itself, which mediate our experiences with nostalgia, capitalism and
                        subjectivity through the digital realm.
                
            
