Title:  Multiple and Converging Literacies: A Review of 
Volume:  008
Issue:  3
Date:  9 October 2014
Abstract:  
                A review of Learning the Virtual Life: Public Pedagogy in a
                        Digital World (New York: Taylor & Francis, 2012), edited by
                    Peter Trifonas. This review provides a detailed summary of the subjects explored
                    in Trifonas's collection of articles on digital pedagogy and their implications
                    on learning in an information society. Its aim is to provide researchers and
                    interested parties with a clear account of each chapter's argument in itself and
                    in relation to the other voices speaking on related subjects both within and
                    beyond the collection reviewed here. While this review's primary goal is to
                    remain objective, serving as a guide to busy scholars unfamiliar with Trifonas's
                    text, it also argues for the value of this collection while remaining critical
                    of its limitations as an anthology.
            
Full Body Text: 
Multiple and Converging Literacies: A Review of Learning the
                    Virtual Life, edited by Peter Trifonas.
Literacy is becoming an increasingly contested term. Our ability to navigate or even
                define literacy in the 21st century is subject to a variety of influences, both
                digital and analog. In defining what digital literacy is, one subscribes to a set of
                socio-political and, often, epistemological truths. Learning
                    the Virtual Life: Public Pedagogy in a Digital World introduces its
                readers to a diverse collection of perspectives regarding literacy in the digital
                age. 
As this text is comprised of a collection of essays, each chapter contends with the
                others for its message to permeate and strives to overcome the noise of the
                structure. While common themes emerge from the text as a whole, each chapter
                explores a unique perspective regarding virtual life. The digital culture is one of
                massive disorientation, with information delivered at frighteningly fast speeds.
                Trifonas recreates this atmosphere by sampling a diverse range of voices and
                philosophies from an international body of public pedagogues. To best provide the
                public with a feel for this text, I provide a survey of individual, chronological
                chapter summaries below and conclude with some general observations on the entire
                selection. As the reader will quickly realize, Learning the
                    Virtual Life serves as a microcosm of the virtual life itself: dense
                with information and divergent perspectives, and thus resulting in a ubiquitous
                quality that’s a little hard to disentangle.
The first chapter of the book, written by Peta Mitchell, explores the tensions
                arising from a digital literacy emerging from a written, scriptural tradition of the
                academy. Due to this disparity, the author argues that a relative lack of critical self-awareness in [sic]
                    research and teaching practices exists . Mitchell situates his argument within the framework of Michel de
                Certeau’s scriptural economy,
                where written discourse is the wealth produced by the institution . Reinforced over time, the scriptural economy contributed to the prestige of print
                    publications, though many scholars appear to overlook how digital
                literacy may problematize this traditional notion of prestige . While many scholars point out how emerging
                technologies, open access, and digital publication could displace the
                scriptural economy, none of these scholars break the circuit of the scriptural economy
                themselves . However, Mitchell pushes beyond
                the scriptural/digital dichotomy to ask 
                    what, then, might a critical
                        approach to digital literacy in the University look like?
                    
                . The new medium could inspire a critical reflection on the scriptural economy
                as a discursive formation rather than normative. Further, Mitchell observes, digital
                writing 
                    disrupts the solitude and
                        interiority of the essay . . . and foregrounds communities of writing
                        through communal writing
                    
                . While these evolving spatial politics are not essentially democratic or
                liberatory, they do hold the potential to expose and subvert traditional academic
                literacy; the key is to step back from the established economy and think
                critically.
In the second chapter, New Epistemologies, the authors
                follow a Post-industrial strain of thought, expanding on Jean-François Lyotard’s
                suggestion that knowledge has lost its use value in return for exchange value. Like the previous chapter, Jenson and Castell agree
                that these new media conditions could disrupt the authority of the written form, and
                they explore this idea regarding representations of knowledge and the self in
                various digital environments. Pulling from pop culture and contemporary news
                examples, such as Tila Tequila’s MySpace success and a personal account of the
                Virginia Tech shootings, the authors define a wholly post-modern conception of
                knowledge: knowing as a kind of
                    obsessive account keeping, or digital curation . The digitally represented
                    self, however, is one of constant flux, managed not only
                personally, but interpersonally, through online networks, throwing previous notions
                of public/private boundaries into disarray. In contrast, Second Life offers a
                digital environment where one has significantly more autonomy in creating identity,
                unbound from the socioeconomic realities of the analog world. Jenson and Castell
                then turn their focus to Wikipedia, and the legitimation crisis it brings forward, where 
                    the epistemic basis of its claims to
                        knowledge is seen as unstable, unreliable . . . [and] radically
                        open
                    
                . The legitimation game played and reinforced by the academy is deeply
                affected by such an epistemological shift. Readers and non-experts are called to the
                domain of the producers and experts, which calls, as the authors suggest, for a corresponding shift in post-literate
                    pedagogy that views production 
                    as a necessary and enduring
                        condition of knowledge-transmission
                    
                . Wikipedia operates in a radically democratized space, which not only
                expects, but also requires crowd participation to survive. Thus, Wikipedia
                remediates epistemic foundations: knowledge, like one’s digital self, is in constant
                flux, suggesting a deeply constructivist perspective. Ultimately, the epistemology
                outlined here encourages a pedagogical shift from students as consumers to students
                as producers.
Next, Michael Hoechsmann reminds the often idealistic early-adaptor readers that 
                    the majority of young people spend
                        their online time creating and sharing identity texts in highly constrained,
                        commercial environments
                    
                . In contrast to the first two essays, this chapter takes a decidedly less
                optimistic view of the digital landscape, suggesting that the primary online
                activity of today’s youth is entertainment-centered, involving Consciousness, Communication, Community, and
                    Consumption — in short, behaviors that youth have been performing for a
                long time, regardless of technology . Using
                Richard Lanham’s text Economics of Attention , Hoechsmann takes a closer look at the cultural
                production of the youth population. He views the relationship between adults and
                youth as a vicious cycle, where
                the adults misinterpret youth intentions and youths sense indifference and
                inattention from the adults . Participatory
                digital spaces, such as Facebook, act as a stage where users must perform their
                identity in order to exist. These same spaces serve as communication platforms and
                communities where youth hang out, develop networks, and strengthen and coordinate
                offline relations. Yet the sites on which youth engage are not neutral environments;
                they are virtually unregulated domains
                    run by private enterprise, led by commercial intentions . The author concludes that despite the rhetoric of change
                surrounding new media practices, much remains the same. 
Richard Kahn follows with the challenge of reconstructing the term
                    technoliteracies from a highly contested domain of competing
                definitions, aiming for an understanding that is 
                    at once oppositional, radically
                        democratic, and committed to sustainability
                    
                . In accordance with John Dewey , Kahn recognizes
                technology as inherently political and historical, though he doesn’t share Dewey’s
                techno-optimism, noting the various sorts of oppression that could arise from
                emerging technologies. For this discussion, Kahn turns to Ivan Illich (Illich 1973),
                who emphasizes that the tools of technology hold within them the rules and codes of
                the designer, as unequal as they might be. Next, Kahn focuses on defining literacy,
                not as 
                    a singular set of abilities but [as]
                        multiple
                    
                , again reminding the reader that such a concept is closely tied to issues of
                power. The author then situates the increasing importance of technological literacy
                historically, particularly its emerging in the late 1960s and becoming a popular
                cultural issue by 1983 with the publication of A Nation at
                    Risk
                ; technoliteracy could no longer be ignored. By the turn of
                the millennium, technoliteracy was seen as a crucial skill, though still largely a 
                    site of struggle [and] a contested
                        terrain used by the left, right, and center of different nations to promote
                        their own interests
                    
                . Kahn goes on to say that those
                    interested in social and ecological justice should look to define and institute
                    their own oppositional forms of technoliteracy . The political battleground is changing and
                educators and activities are needed to ensure that the interests of the oppressed
                are being discussed. A critical sense of all literacies, not just technoliteracy,
                must be developed. In a world where media culture serves as a form of pedagogy, it is crucial that individuals
                are aware of the behaviors and roles being suggested by the media . Inoculation is not enough, Kahn argues.
                Rather, students must be able to read,
                    analyze, and decode media texts and further 
                    interrogate the political economy,
                        cultural bias, and environmental effects of computer-related
                        technologies
                    
                . Technoliteracy, as defined by this article, 
                    must teach people to become more
                        ethical producers,
                    
                . Such producers, then, can aid in redesigning technology towards human needs,
                rather than commercial ends. 
Today’s information ecology comprises 
                    a system of people, practices,
                        values, and technology in a certain environment
                    
                . This ecology, the authors of the Learning Environment
                    and Digital Literacy chapter argue, do not only replace similar analog
                practices, but rather 
                    alter the basic foundations of our
                        existing conceptions of own cultural basis and value, attitudes and
                        activities
                    
                . The authors call for a new curriculum, advocating for more learning
                experiences that promote digital competence. Like the previous chapter, these
                authors account for the fluid and contested nature of the term digital
                    literacy. The authors then observe that while the notion of the digital divide originally implied
                access issues, today, it is more likely a matter of quality of usethat creates the gap,
                and continues to be a global problem . Two
                Finnish digital literacy pedagogical practices are then defined as case studies.
                First, a project called Towards Future Literacy Pedagogies
                (ToLP) explored pedagogies that
                    prepare young people for the literacy challenges of a globalized, networked and
                    culturally diverse world with the ultimate goal of developing curriculum
                and teaching practices . The second project,
                    Fostering ICT Usages in Pedagogical Practices
                (FICTUP), 
                    aimed at transforming expert
                        teachers’ pedagogical practices with technology
                    
                . Through these detailed accounts of technology-based initiatives, the authors
                conclude that the focus should remain on pedagogical practices rather than
                technology. While technology can often be a useful educational tool, it must be
                implemented with due pedagogical consideration.
Stuart Poyntz’s chapter, What Haunts the
                    Narcissus-Narcosis, proves to be one of the more challenging reads. The
                author shifts the reader’s focus from definitions of literacy to mediation, a
                process the author views as an active one that alters the meaning of the message
                being mediated, and applies a heavy dose of Derrida and McLuhan. Through Derrida,
                then, the author reminds the reader that critical agency doesn’t depend on
                authority, but rather 
                    it is a function of the instability
                        inherent in the production of meaning itself
                    
                . This idea provides media educators new ways of introducing analysis to their
                students that are, at least in theory, independent of the educators' authoritative
                role. Within a McLuhan-inspired framework, the author traces moments of crisis and opportunity in media and
                offers them as possible locations for new media critique . Ultimately, Poyntz invites these theorists’ perspectives into his
                essay to identify ways in which media educators can benefit from critical theory,
                specifically of those stated above. While it certainly continues to be a challenge
                to teach critical agency without favoring the perspective of the teacher, the author
                aims to provide 
                    ways of putting levels of analysis
                        in productive tension
                    
                . 
While the next chapter, Wikilearning as Radical
                    Equality, is highly theoretical, it appears to be equally provocative
                and influential. In identifying the four antagonisms (which Slavoj Zizek argues
                Capitalism will not solve), authors Juha Suoranta and Tere Vadén define a radical
                new form of learning to combat the antagonism of intellectual property. The authors
                argue that learning in the already
                    existing world of free resources, software and collaboration brings the
                possibility to shift from an alienated education to a more just model . Wikilearning
                imagines a self-organized group of learners assembling open access knowledge. The
                two authors have collaborated on pieces in the past on similar topics, and have
                co-authored a book on this very issue. In both this text and their work more widely,
                Suoranta and Vadén resist closed, top-down models of education and advocate for
                radical equality, beginning with a transformation of the student/teacher paradigm.
                Sites such as Wikipedia and Wikiversity offer a strong demonstration of 
                    the power of collective learning in
                        an ethical and very straightforward way
                    
                . Highly knowledgeable of and informed by a pool of critical thinkers, such as
                Slavoj Zizek, Jacques Lacan, Jacques Rancière, Gilles Deleuze, and Félix Guattari,
                these authors set their argument into a critical and convincing framework. Together,
                Suoranta and Vadén provide the reader with an alternative model of education, one
                that is voluntary, rather than compulsory, inclusive, and self-directed. The goal of
                such an education isn’t unreflective
                    certainty, as the traditional model promotes, but rather reflective uncertainty, suggesting
                an epistemology of fluidity and transition. The implications of such a society are
                immense; as the authors not-so-humbly suggest, 
                    the wikiworld is about changing the
                        premises of living in the world
                    
                .
Beginning with a thorough survey of perspectives regarding the impacts of technology
                of youth culture, pedagogy, and education, John Potter acknowledges larger trends in
                youth technology engagement. Specifically, Learner Voice and
                    Lived Culture explores the pedagogical implications in response to two
                projects. The first project focuses on hearing the learner voice through audio and
                video production. Potter finds that 
                    the desire to engage with the
                            learner voice approach was representative of a
                        wider need to see experience of popular culture reflected and acknowledged
                        within pedagogy
                    
                . In reviewing the data from the first project, there appears to be a large
                disparity between how students are engaging with technology inside and outside of
                school, revealing a youth-led demand for more crossover between these two social
                environments. The second project, while still involving student-generated digital
                video production, shifts more towards authorship and identity. This project finds
                that 
                    this new media literacy practice can
                        be metaphorically conceived as a form of curatorship in
                        the organisation of digital media assets . . . which might be profitably and
                        usefully explored in pedagogical reforms
                    
                . Such mixing and remixing of the widely available symbols of cultural capital
                online allows student curatorship to render previously invisible processes visible,
                especially regarding student voice and identity. Both studies offer examples of
                Gee’s affinity spaces, as Potter observes these students behaving
                    as new media practitioners,
                conflating a wide variety of skills and literacies to produce a media asset . Potter leaves the reader with two future
                implications. First, pedagogy needs to implement technology provisions which 
                    fit better with the needs, values
                        and experiences of young people
                    
                . Secondly, the author stresses the importance of finding 
                    rich sources of data through
                        self-representational work with younger learners
                    
                . In all, Potter’s piece argues for increased media literacy practice and
                exposure across the curriculum. 
In response to a line of research contending that open spaces such as Wikipedia are
                little more than amateurs spreading misinformation, John Willinsky argues quite to
                the contrary. In his case study, Willinsky examines Wikipedia as 
                    a new site of knowledge, with a new
                        level of public access to research and scholarship
                    
                . By examining Wikipedia’s interaction and interconnectivity with other open
                sites of knowledge, such as in this case the Stanford
                    Encyclopedia of Philosophy (SEP), the author discovers that such sites
                can contribute greatly to one another. In many cases, individuals who were
                encountering philosophy concepts on Wikipedia followed links through to the SEP,
                finding more specialized knowledge. Many Wikipedia articles are informed by the
                content freely available on the SEP and often provide references to many different
                SEP topics in one article. Willinsky draws from the conversations of Wikipedia
                editors as they discuss changes and potential changes to articles within the
                discussion tab on a variety of Wikipedia articles. Examining these conversations
                allows the reader to get a feeling for the depth of analysis and understanding
                across the Wikipedia community. The educational quality of Wikipedia, Willinsky notes, comes largely from
                the 
                    stance that its editors are taking
                        on knowledge
                    
                . There is a great rhetorical argument and epistemic implication in the ready
                appearance of the three process tabs at the top of each Wikipedia article:
                    editing, discussion, history. These three elements are essential to
                learning, and as the title of this chapter suggests, Wikipedia, and open spaces like
                Wikipedia, provide a space for this new public literacy to emerge.
Returning to the idea of epistemology, the editor of this collection, Trifonas, and
                Robert Luke describe virtual living in terms of Lyotard’s The
                    Postmodern Condition
                . Accordingly, knowledge, like the language in which
                it’s bound, is temporal. Representation, the authors note, 
                    deforms, denatures, and supplements
                        the originary eidetic structures of conceptual formations
                    
                . With the help of global technology, knowledge is not necessarily tied to the
                circulation of capital; rather, social actors can exchange information freely, or at
                least nearly so. The implications of this shift in information exchange, then,
                engender an alternate epistemology, one that builds a framework for new forms of
                education and educational spaces. The authors advocate here for a critical
                information literacy that not only incorporates the technical skills necessary to
                navigate digital spaces, but also understands and participates in the culture of the
                new environments. Furthermore, the authors emphasize access and accessibility as
                core components of critical information literacy, thus further advocating for the
                vast array of individuals who engage in the same digital spaces. Since the digital
                culture is one of participation, to overlook access issues would detract greatly
                from this central idea. The authors call for transparency in technology as it
                evolves and becomes embedded into existing cultural institutions, and thereby
                highlighting the underlying changes in methodology and its cultural implications.
                Finally, the authors arrive at telepistemology, or the remote
                and virtual nature of today’s knowledge communities. It is here, in these poorly
                defined and rapidly changing virtual environments, that ideas are formed, shared,
                and shaped again, thus fostering a global learning network.
Chapter eleven provides a critical analysis of Grand Theft Auto
                    IV and, more specifically, its expansion pack, The
                    Ballad of Gay Tony. This video game offers a 
                    series of homosocial bonding within
                        the context of otherwise traditional forms of masculinity
                    
                . While the main character frequently displays traditional hegemonic masculine
                traits, including violence and objectification of women, the game itself progresses
                a narrative plot based around defending an openly gay character, creating a rather
                complex dynamic. Such a game provides a safe place for individuals to explore and
                negotiate homosocial bonding. Amidst the milieu of homophobic and sexist commentary
                and suggestive humor coded into this game’s landscape, there appear to be spaces of
                covert intimacy that problematize the more explicit environmental prejudices. Many
                relationships, especially in contrast to earlier releases of GTA, are between men,
                and are often analogous to dating. The player is rewarded for behaving in ways that
                promote homosocial bonding. It is through the game’s humor that a balance is struck
                between overtly homophobic language and common homosocial behavior, as characters
                exchange ironic, and often crude, observations about each other’s hyper-masculine
                qualities. Such blatant mockery pushes these traits to the foreground, causing the
                players to reflect on the idea, and hopefully, assess their own language usage in a
                world also saturated by homophobic thoughts and behaviors. As modern technology is
                often cited as a tool that disembodies our identities, Marc Oullette renews
                frequently overlooked concerns of gender in this discussion of virtual life,
                providing a much-needed assessment of how digital environments can and do reflect
                our views on contemporary issues.
Themistoklis Aravossitas provides a familial account of coming to teach with
                technology in the subsequent chapter. After seeing the many positive encounters his
                children were having with technology in school, Aravossitas developed a blog concept
                to explore and demonstrate the identity and activities of his school . Situating his experiences among the history
                of blogging and the evolution of Web 2.0 software, the author describes many uses of
                this technology, noting the transformative power this may have on our notion of
                literacy. Blogging offers both new ways to communicate as well as new ways to
                transmit those messages . Thus, the idea of
                literacy is intricately linked to that of technology, which may help engender new
                opportunities and demands throughout the education system. Roles of teachers and
                students must be renegotiated in terms of the new communities that are made
                available through emergent technologies. Such expectations can only be met, the
                author argues, if educators take a transformative approach to pedagogy — if they are
                willing to construct appropriate curricular requirements, while emphasizing critical
                literacy. Unlike many of the other authors in this text, Aravossitas provides an
                explicit application of his ideas in terms of classroom use, including some
                preliminary results of this implementation. This feature may prove beneficial to the
                reader who is new to or nervous about technological endeavors in education. 
The final chapter turns from writing in an online space to a more immersive
                experience: digital gaming. While Peter Trifonas does well to problematize and
                contextualize the debates on the virtual world, he ultimately states that digital technologies have transformed
                    cultural perceptions of learning and what it means to be literate,
                rooting this cultural phenomenon deeply within the realm of technology . With an air of skepticism, Trifonas
                questions the language commonly used to describe Web 2.0 behaviors such as
                    interactivity and immersive, each elusive and
                problematic in their own ways. Approaching the concept of digital games, then, the
                author proposes a variety of questions spanning from inquiries into historical
                comparisons to contemporary cultural appreciation. One major shift is a growing
                tendency to use games outside the entertainment field to immerse players into a highly realistic
                virtual site of army training, commerce, education, or industry, among others . Virtual worlds can promote a wide variety of
                social exchanges and even 
                    construct new types of shared
                        cultural participation and communality
                    
                . These new forms of cultural participation, when considered in light of
                pedagogical concerns, have great potential to transform the learning environments of
                the future.
These seventeen contributors offer a diverse mix of perspectives on digital learning
                topics. It remains difficult, even after reading the text, to say anything
                conclusive about this growing field. And perhaps that’s the point. That the
                education technology field is emerging quickly with hopeful implications is certain;
                as this text suggests, it is doing so most likely with more advocates than critics.
                Nevertheless, while many points of connection appear between the chapters, what
                really stands out is how highly contested the digital terrain remains. Trifonas has
                selected voices for this text that challenge one another, demanding of the reader
                the critical skills so thoroughly advocated for throughout the collection. To
                distill the ideas of these several authors into a single narrative would be contrary
                to its ideology and internal logic. Like the digital realm itself, Learning the Virtual Life offers multiple answers,
                complete with contradictions and competing ideologies.
As you take the journey through the multiplicity of these pages, one reader may sense
                the underlying anarchist tendencies of Illich permeating through, where another
                reader gathers a sense of technological determinism, or in contrast, the sheer
                possibility of technology in the classroom. The experience of reading Learning the Virtual Life will largely depend on the
                reader’s (de)construction of each chapter/perspective. Yet, this diversity in
                content is not met by the same diversity in form. Many of the chapters are packed
                with critical voices that may prove challenging to newcomers in the field, while
                offering little in terms of application. The task of utilizing these frameworks
                remains within the hands of the readers, to interpret and implement the ideas of
                these digitally-minded thinkers, however they see fit.
