Title:  Inside the Trading Zone: Thinkering in a Digital
                    History Lab
Volume:  014
Issue:  3
Date:  01 September 2020
Abstract:  
                
                The goal of this article is to critically reflect on the practical and
                    epistemological challenges of doing historical research in the digital age. The
                    analysis is based on a case study of the Doctoral Training Unit (DTU) Digital History and Hermeneutics, an interdisciplinary
                    research and training programme that was established at the Luxembourg Centre
                    for Contemporary and Digital History (C²DH) of the University of Luxembourg. The
                    DTU is designed as interdisciplinary trading zone that applies the
                    method of thinkering – the tinkering with technology combined with the
                    critical reflection on the practice of doing digital history. Based on this case
                    study, the article addresses the question of how to constitute an
                    interdisciplinary trading zone in practice and how to situate this trading zone
                    in physical working environments, like a Digital History Lab and shared office
                    space.
            
Full Body Text: 

                1. Introduction
                It kind of starts off with a historical perspective.
                            That is that people from different domains don’t understand each other.
                            There is quite a wall. Because when you have been studying a topic from
                            a paradigm of your discipline for a long time, and others are dealing
                            with similar things but in a totally different way, then there are
                            certain blockages between them. And there has always been a curiosity to
                            be the trader between those different domains. I think what we are doing
                            here is to explore the digital tools to build bridges. [...] [However]
                            people are not willing to come out of their comfort zone often.
                        (interview, PhD 3, digital archaeologist) With these words, a PhD
                    student described the ambitions but also the challenges of the Doctoral Training
                    Unit (DTU) Digital History and Hermeneutics: a
                    four-year interdisciplinary research and training programme that was established
                    at the Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (C²DH) of the
                    University of Luxembourg in March 2017. The DTU aims to provide an experimental
                    space, in which different communities of practice and their epistemic cultures
                    negotiate new forms of knowledge production and dissemination in the field of
                    digital history.The Doctoral Training Unit (DTU) Digital History and Hermeneutics (DHH) is funded by the
                        Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR) as part of their PRIDE project grant
                        scheme. See the project’s website for more information: http://dhh.uni.lu. The programme
                    involves thirteen PhD students with different disciplinary backgrounds, varying
                    from history, philosophy, linguistics, geography, archaeology, computer science
                    and human-computer interaction. One of the central aims of the DTU as such is to
                    form a trading zone, a space for interactions and negotiations between
                    these different knowledge domains, in order to explore how the emergence of
                    digital research technologies and infrastructures has impacted the practices of
                    doing historical research.
                
                    1.1 Research questions and argument
                    While the digital has increasingly provided a common ground between
                        the humanities and the computer sciences during the last decades, this is
                        not to say that connections are easily made – as the opening citation of
                        this article indicates well. Using the case study of the DTU, we aim at
                        discussing a number of critical questions that resonate with the topic of
                        this special issue: How to build bridges between different knowledge domains
                        in a specific research environment? How to stimulate interdisciplinary
                        collaboration and to get scholars out of their disciplinary or
                        methodological comfort zones? What is at stake in such interdisciplinary
                        trading zones? Who are the traders – and what is being traded? Investigating
                        these questions is not only relevant for the field of digital history, but
                        for the wider domain of digital humanities at large: many DH research
                        projects involve collaboration across different disciplinary fields and
                        domains. While much theoretical work is being done on interdisciplinarity in
                        digital humanities (e.g. , , ), the questions of
                        how to constitute an interdisciplinary trading zone in practice and how to
                        situate this trading zone in physical working environments remain largely
                        underexplored.
                    This article focuses on the DTU as a case study of an interdisciplinary
                        trading zone and its situated research practices in digital history, the
                        field that engages with digital tools and technologies in historical
                        research practices. The shift from digital history 1.0, which was
                        basically about analysing digital sources with traditional historical
                        research methods, to digital history 2.0, which requires more
                        advanced competences when doing things with historical
                            data
                        , made historians adopt digital tools, methods
                        and concepts from other disciplines, like the computer sciences, and
                        collaborate with computational experts for analysing large historical
                        datasets. The aim of this article is to investigate the practical and
                        epistemological negotiations of such digital historical research practices
                        in an interdisciplinary setting.
                    Thereby, we explore how physical spaces of collaboration, specifically the
                        Digital History Lab of the University of Luxembourg and the C²DH open
                            space, could play a role in the formation of trading zones and serve
                        as platforms for interdisciplinary knowledge production and dissemination.
                        It will be argued that physical spaces, like a common office and laboratory,
                        as research and training environments can be conductive for
                        interdisciplinary collaboration and exchange as well as for stimulating
                        processes of thinkering: the playful experimentation with digital
                        tools and technologies for historical research. We argue that training
                        infrastructures enabling hands-on collaboration are constructive for both
                        the formation and transformation of interdisciplinary trading zones in the
                        field of digital history.For the purpose of this article, we situate
                            the field of digital history within the wider domain of digital
                            humanities. Both constitute trading zones between the humanities and
                            computer sciences as distinct communities of practice. While Patrik
                            Svensson has offered some reflections on the field of digital humanities
                            as a trading zone or meeting place in a more general sense (see,
                            for instance , ), we conceptualize the DTU as a trading zone within digital history
                            specifically. Whether this twofold potential can be realized,
                        however, is dependent on various factors, such as time investment, research
                        profiles, and the willingness to cross disciplinary and discursive
                        boundaries. Reflecting on these matters, this article provides insights that
                        are beneficial for scholars, administrators, curriculum developers and heads
                        of research units in the field of digital history and the wider domain of
                        digital humanities.
                
                
                    1.2 Methodology
                    Our analysis draws on literature studies on interdisciplinarity
                        , infrastructuring
                        , trading zones
                        
                        
                        , and communities of
                            practice
                        , and is empirically based on an ethnographic
                        study including the analysis of a series of self-reflexive training reports
                        and semi-structured interviews, in which the PhD students of the DTU reflect
                        on their research practices and experiences of the project’s first year. The
                        reports were written either individually or collectively after the various
                        skills trainings, which were organized during the first year of the DTU as
                        part of its DH incubation phase.The DH incubation phase is
                            inspired by the Digital Scholarship
                                Incubator (DSI), offered by the Centre for Digital Research
                            in the Humanities at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. In
                        total, nine skills trainings were organized, which led to the production of
                        thirty-nine reports in total. The reports were part of the skills
                            training’s final assignment, for which the PhD students could obtain
                            credits as part of their formal doctoral school training. The purpose of
                            the reports was to critically reflect on the learning processes and
                            outcomes of the skills trainings, for instance the challenges of working
                            with a particular digital tool, like Tableau, QGIS or Voyant. Some of
                            the reports were published on the blog of the DTU website (https://dhh.uni.lu/category/blog/) as well as on some of the
                            PhD students’ personal blogs. The reports were analysed and coded
                        on the basis of a number of predefined themes: digital history and
                        hermeneutics, interdisciplinarity, thinkering, infrastructure, communities
                        of practice, and spaces or places of collaboration. In addition, interviews
                        were held with twelve of the PhD students of the DTU.The broad range
                            of disciplinary backgrounds, but also the gender balance and
                            geographical spread or national variety is exemplary for the composition
                            of the DTU project team. We have seven male and six female PhD students,
                            coming from Australia, Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Estonia,
                            Germany, Italy, Iran, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and the USA. At the
                            start of the project, the age range of the PhD students was between 23
                            and 39 years old. Candidates were interviewed once or twice for
                        an average of one hour. All interviews were audio-recorded, fully
                        transcribed and pseudo-anonymized on the basis of the researcher’s
                        disciplinary background, which they could formulate themselves.The PhD
                            students voluntarily participated in this research, and could withdraw
                            their participation at any moment. All research has been approved by the
                            Ethical Research Committee of the University of Luxembourg, and was
                            evaluated on the basis of the most recent General Data Protection
                            Regulation (GDPR). Similar to the self-reflexive training
                        reports, the interviews were analysed and coded on the basis of the
                        aforementioned themes.
                    The article focuses on the DTU as object of study. The PhD students of the
                        DTU have of course numerous interactions with the wider environment they
                        operate in - e.g. with the C²DH staff, their supervisors, or invited experts
                        from partnering institutions and the wider scientific community. In
                            the DTU lecture series which started in the
                            project’s second year, for instance, international experts were invited
                            to present new research methods and tools from their areas of research
                            and discuss these with the PhD students. See for more information: https://dhh.uni.lu/category/activities/lecture-series/.
                        Inspired by laboratory studies in social studies of science 
                        , however, we decided to focus on the PhD
                        students exclusively as a spatially bounded group of their own within which
                        different communities of practice interact . This
                        helped us to form a micro perspective on
                        interdisciplinary collaboration and negotiation practices in the field of
                        digital history . 
                    The DTU is certainly not an exclusive example of a trading zone.
                        Interdisciplinary settings in doctoral education have a long history
                            See for instance the report of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
                                20 years of Research Training Groups. Matrix
                                for New Doctoral Cultures: Innovative, Interactive,
                                International: https://www.dfg.de/download/pdf/dfg_im_profil/geschaeftsstelle/publikationen/20_jahre_graduiertenkolleg_en.pdf.,
                        and many collaborative projects in digital humanities  and so-called makerspaces
                         are inspired by the idea of collective
                            thinkering. The specificity of the DTU is its focus on digital
                        history and its emphasis on the hermeneutic reflection on the practices of
                        historical research in the digital age. 
                
                
                    1.3 Overview article
                    The article is structured along three complementary perspectives on situated
                        research practices and the Doctoral Training Unit as an interdisciplinary
                        research and training programme. The first perspective, sense of
                            place, investigates the spatial and organizational framework of
                        the DTU, the Digital History Lab, and where and how they are situated in or
                        related to the C²DH as one of the three interdisciplinary research centres
                        of the University of Luxembourg. It also discusses the C²DH open space,
                        which was designed as shared office for all thirteen PhD students of the
                        DTU, to discuss the role of spaces and places of communication in
                        interdisciplinary collaboration. 
                    The second perspective explores the DTU as a trading zone in
                        digital history. By zooming in on the research practices and various
                        training activities that were organized within the DTU framework, it
                        analyses how this DTU framework has been experienced in practice by the PhD
                        students. We will identify and distinguish certain boundary objects
                        
                         between the humanities and computer sciences as
                        distinct communities of practice within the DTU as interdisciplinary trading
                        zone.
                    The third part explores the DTU from the notion of thinkering,
                        providing an epistemological and methodological reflection on the use of
                        digital methods and tools in situated digital historical research practices.
                        In the conclusion, finally, we reflect on some of the main opportunities and
                        challenges of thinkering as pragmatic digital hermeneutics in an
                        interdisciplinary trading zone like the DTU, and the role of the Digital
                        History Lab and the C²DH open space as physical spaces and platforms of
                        collaboration.
                
            

                2. Sense of place
                
                    2.1 The DTU framework and training programme 
                    The DTU is hosted by the Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital
                        History (C²DH), which is one of the three Interdisciplinary Centres (IC) of
                        the University of Luxembourg. Because of the interdisciplinary character of
                        the DTU, the training unit was a great possibility to strengthen
                        collaboration between researchers (mainly historians) working at the Centre
                        and colleagues from other Centres or Faculties of the University. The DTU
                        team consists not only of the thirteen PhD students, but also includes their
                        supervisors, a coordinating post-doc, the Management Team, and the PI
                        (principal investigator). The DTU is framed by a number of international
                        partner institutions which agreed to support the project and to serve as a
                        critical sounding board for DTU activities.For the list of project
                            partners, see: https://dhh.uni.lu/partners/. The C²DH moreover stimulates
                            the collaboration of scholars with experts from the public sector. In
                            the case of the DTU, this particularly involves key players in the
                            country’s digital cultural heritage field, such as the National Library,
                            National Archives, Centre National de l’Audiovisuel, which are involved
                            in large digitization projects in the framework of the Digital Luxembourg (Digital Lëtzebuerg)
                            initiative and DARIAH-LU strategy.
                    
                    
                        Aims and objectives
                        The DTU departs from the constatation that there is growing gap or
                            a-synchronicity between the fast development of digital research
                            technologies and infrastructures, and their rather slow appropriation
                            within historical research practices. Everyday we witness the emergence
                            of new digital infrastructures, software and tools, be it for text
                            mining, data visualization, GIS-analysis, virtual and augmented reality
                            apps, et cetera. While these new possibilities are surrounded by a
                            discourse of revolutionary potential for future research, their
                            appropriation in teaching and research is slow and very limited in scale
                            so far. (See for a discussion , .)
                        Nevertheless, addressing the question how the
                            digital turn does impact the practices of historical research has become
                            more urgent than ever . In the introduction
                            to the volume History in the Digital Age,
                            Toni Weller stated that history as a field of
                                enquiry is standing on the edge of a conceptual precipice.
                                Historians need to be thinking about the radical impact of the
                                digital turn in historiography and historical methodology in a
                                critical and engaged manner
                            . This is exactly the aim of the DTU:
                            to critically reflect on the epistemological and methodological
                            implications of the digital turn in historical research practices. It
                            thereby builds on the concept of digital hermeneutics, defined as
                            the critical and self-reflexive use of digital tools and technologies
                            for the development of new research questions, the testing of analytical
                            assumptions and the production of sophisticated scientific interpretations.
                                https://www.C²DH.uni.lu/events/digital-hermeneutics-history-theory-and-practice.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        DTU skills trainings 
                        But how to organize and realize such a training programme in an
                            interdisciplinary and international setting? Based on the assumption
                            that a PhD trajectory runs through several phases, the DTU was divided
                            into three consequent phases: a DH incubation phase (first year), a DH
                            problematization phase (second and third year), and a final phase of
                            writing and defence (third and fourth year). In this article, we will
                            only focus on the first phase, the DH incubation phase, which aimed to
                            familiarize the interdisciplinary group of PhD students with a critical
                            mass of digital methods and tools. For this purpose, nine specific
                            skills trainings were organized within the DTU framework: Text Mining;
                            Digital Source Criticism; Database Structures; Introduction to
                            Programming with Python; Data Visualization; Tool Criticism; Algorithmic
                            Critique; GIS-analysis, Mapping and Cartography; and Experimental Media
                            Ethnography. The aim of the skills trainings in the DH incubation phase
                            was to establish a common ground and shared experiences, and to
                            encourage the PhD students to critically reflect on the use of digital
                            tools and technologies in their own research practices. 
                    
                
                
                    2.2 Situated working environments: Digital History Lab and C²DH open
                        space
                    
                        Digital History Lab 
                        The DTU training activities mostly took place in the Digital History Lab.
                            Within the C²DH, the lab has been designed to serve as a space for
                            experimentation and hands-on teaching. It is part of a larger
                            Lab-infrastructure of the Faculty of Humanities, Education and Social
                            Sciences (FHSE) of the University, bringing together five laboratories
                            from different departments (the GIS-Lab, the Experimental Psychology
                            Lab, the Media Lab, the Usability Lab, the Digital History Lab). As
                            these Labs are all located on the first floor of the Maison des Sciences Humaines (House of the
                            Humanities) (see Figure 1), they offer a fantastic infrastructure for
                            doing hands-on and experimental research in a great variety of
                            disciplines in the humanities and social sciences. Within this setting,
                            the Digital History Lab is equipped with a multitude of scanning devices
                            and digitization equipment. Designed as a laboratory setting for
                            trainings, seminars, workshops, experiments and as infrastructure for
                            the scanning of research materials and sources, the Digital History Lab
                            has developed into a critical infrastructure for the Centre and a safe
                            environment for playing with digital technologies. 
                        
                            Floor map of the first floor of the Maison
                                    des Sciences Humaines (MSH) of the University of
                                Luxembourg, including the Digital History Lab.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        C²DH open space
                        In order to facilitate the communication and exchange between the
                            thirteen PhD students of the DTU, they were all located together in an
                            open office space of the C²DH. As a collective working space with single
                            offices the open space created some challenges in terms of spatial
                            arrangement, so we decided to group four desks into smaller units in
                            order to create smaller physical and social neighbourhoods. As the open
                            space has step by step been populated by other PhD students who have
                            joined the C²DH since its creation in 2017, it now hosts some thirty PhD
                            students in total and the room is no longer an exclusive space for DTU
                            members. The open space includes a smaller seminar room, which is
                            acoustically isolated from the rest of the open space. This seminar or
                            project room can be used by the DTU students for group discussions or
                            team meetings. Next to the open space, the Centre has installed a cosy
                                communication space with sofas and coffee tables that serves
                            as meeting space for informal exchanges, smaller public events (e.g.
                            guest lectures) as well as space for the monthly plenary sessions
                            of the C²DH in which C²DH staff is informed about ongoing activities,
                            decisions of the Management Team or general University politics. 
                    
                
            

                3. Inside the Trading Zone
                The DTU has explicitly been designed as a trading zone, as an experimental
                    place for knowledge transfer and exchange between different communities of
                    practice. In the case of the DTU, these include the knowledge domains of
                    history, philosophy, linguistics, geography, archaeology, computer science and
                    human-computer interaction. The concept of trading zone originates from history
                    of science and sociology of knowledge, where it has been used to analyse how
                    different communities of practice interact when working in an interdisciplinary
                    setting 
                    . Communities of practice can be defined as groups
                    of people who collectively engage in shared learning activities and base their
                    group identity on a shared craft, domain and practice 
                    . 
                Three aspects are particularly relevant for analysing the DTU as
                    interdisciplinary trading zone: (1) the notion of
                        interdisciplinarity, (2) the notion of a common
                        ground or common language within interdisciplinary
                    trading zones, and (3) the notion of locality or collaborative
                    space to facilitate interactions between communities of practice. By zooming in
                    on these three aspects of digital history trading zones, this part explores how
                    the DTU framework has been experienced by the PhD students and which boundary
                        objects we can identify between the distinct disciplinary traditions
                    within the DTU.
                
                    3.1 Interdisciplinarity
                    Interdisciplinarity is at the very heart of the concept of trading zone: the
                        transfer and exchange of concepts, methods, tools, techniques and skills
                        between or across different disciplinary fields or domains. Digital history
                        can be framed as an interdisciplinary field or domain of the wider
                        discipline of history, as digital historians have been incorporating methods and tools from the domain of computer
                        science . In Interdisciplining Digital Humanities, Julie Thompson Klein
                        distinguishes between methodological
                            interdisciplinarity and theoretical and
                            critical interdisciplinarity
                        . While methodological interdisciplinarity is
                        concerned with the application of digital
                        technologies and their methods to humanities scholarship, theoretical
                        interdisciplinarity concerns the epistemological reflection on the nature of
                        these digital tools and technologies. The DTU explicitly deals with both
                        methodological and theoretical forms of interdisciplinarity. 
                    One of the advantages of interdisciplinarity is bringing together approaches
                        and perspectives from different knowledge domains. As one of the PhD
                        students states: we are all coming from different
                            [disciplifignary] backgrounds, [...] have different point[s] of view,
                            [and so] see reality in different ways (interview, PhD 1,
                        computer scientist). A good illustration is one of the collaborations that
                        was formed within the DTU framework, in which a digital humanist, linguist
                        and digital heritage specialist worked together in reconstructing the
                        historic landscape of Larochette Luxembourg for a joint article. Bringing in
                        different perspectives and forms of expertise was very beneficial for them,
                        as one of the collaborators explained: [W]e all
                                went [to the area] and actually walked around the town of Larochette
                                together. And [the linguist] said: Look at the
                                    street signs, you can see that this is named after the field
                                    that stood here; and look, the church was here because this car
                                    park is called graveyard. While [the digital heritage
                                specialist] said, If you look at the property
                                    boundaries between the houses, you can see where the city wall
                                    used to be. While [the digital humanist] stated: If you just take like three steps to the side
                                    here, your perspective totally changes. [...] Everybody
                                was literally bringing their view of landscape into it.
                            (interview, PhD 7, digital heritage specialist)
                    
                        Opportunities of interdisciplinary collaboration 
                        The possibility to learn from each other is seen as one of the main
                            benefits and advantages of participating in the DTU. Participants engage
                            in interdisciplinary collaboration because of a certain need for
                            expertise from another field. A PhD student argues: Everybody is an expert in a certain field. And if I need something
                                or if I have questions, it’s easy to approach people and ask them
                                what to do. (interview, PhD 9, philosopher). Likewise,
                            another PhD student states: I don’t know
                                    anything about text mining [...] But I know a lot more about GIS
                                    than some others. We are all experts in our own fields, and this
                                    makes it nice [to be part of the DTU]. So if I have a question
                                    about text mining, there is someone [in the team that] I can
                                    ask. (interview, PhD 2, historian)
                        While humanities scholars can learn from computer scientists’ expertise
                            of specific digital methods and tools, computer scientists seem to be
                            interested in collaborations with historians especially because they
                            hope to develop specific applications for their models and
                            algorithms. As a computer scientist in the group sums up: the historian needs the expertise from the computer
                                scientist, and the computer scientist needs an interesting
                                application. And then they can collaborate (interview, PhD
                            1, computer scientist). Some interdisciplinary collaborations go beyond
                            the mere methodological exchange and applicability of data, but involve
                            a debate about the epistemological underpinnings of disciplinary
                            traditions and schools of thought. A computer scientist in the group
                            states: I want to look at my data from the
                                    perspective of a historian. For example, to analyse how the
                                    language of people has changed throughout time. For this I can
                                    use the help of a historian: what kind of questions come to mind
                                    when they have this kind of data? (interview, PhD 8,
                                computer scientist) However, sharing or exchanging between
                            methods and perspectives across different disciplinary traditions does
                            not only provide new opportunities. It can also be challenging in
                            practice.
                    
                    
                        Challenges of interdisciplinary collaboration 
                        There has been much debate about the longstanding cultural-epistemic
                            differences  between the humanities and
                            computer sciences, and whether bringing computational techniques and
                            quantitative methods like statistics to the domain of humanities can
                            make the work of the historian more valid
                            and scientific
                            
                            . Old questions concerning the validity,
                            objectivity and evidentiary quality of history as a social
                                science that characterized the epistemological debates during
                            the classical period of historicism re-emerge in the digital age through
                            tensions between close and distant (machine-based) reading, exemplary
                            and representative, statistical and historical evidence. Although such
                            dualistic conceptualizations have been challenged ever since the
                            emergence of computational humanities in
                            the second part of the twentieth century, the idea that historians
                            produce subjective interpretations and
                            scientists objective facts as forms of
                            knowledge production still prevails today .
                            (See for a discussion on objectivity and subjectivity in scientific
                            knowledge production also .)
                        The DTU aims to overcome these dichotomies by utilizing the concept of
                            digital hermeneutics. As a hermeneutics of
                                in-betweenness it allows to address the tensions between
                            quantitative and qualitative or empirical and hermeneutic approaches in
                            a productive way . In Reading Machines, Steven Ramsey similarly argued to locate a hermeneutics at the boundary between
                                mechanism and theory in order to channel the heightened objectivity made possible by the machine
                                into the cultivation of those heightened subjectivities necessary
                                for critical work
                            . The concept of digital hermeneutics
                            invites us to critically reflect on how digital tools and
                            infrastructures produce new historical information by transforming
                                raw data into cooked historical analyses and narratives . (For a critique on the idea of data as
                                raw or neutral, see also .)
                        Despite of the ambition of the DTU to develop the concept of digital
                            hermeneutics as a way to overcome the longstanding cultural and
                            epistemic differences between the humanities and the computer sciences,
                            they nevertheless play an important role in how the PhD students
                                think about their communities of practice. The
                            interviews show ample evidence of how the PhD students strongly locate
                            themselves in disciplinary traditions and epistemic cultures. One of the
                            PhD students, for instance, stated that the real
                                difference between the humanities and the hard sciences is that the
                                humanities are a lot more subjective in many ways
                            (interview, PhD 7, digital heritage specialist) and that [f]rom the humanities perspective, everything is about
                                interpretation and perspective (interview, PhD 6, digital
                            humanist). Computational methods and techniques, on the other hand, like
                            machine learning and big data algorithms, are perceived to enhance the
                            objectivity of historical analyses. Reflecting on a recent collaboration
                            with a digital historian, for instance, a computer scientist in the
                            group argued that: ... if a person looks at the
                                    [historical] data and then says something, it’s subjective. It’s
                                    human interpretation. While you can [also] ask the same
                                    [historical] questions in an objective way using machine
                                    learning or any computer science algorithm. (interview,
                                PhD 1, computer scientist)
                        Using scientific methods in humanities’ scholarship has been perceived to
                                prove the validity of your work
                            (interview, PhD 6, digital humanist) and to strengthen the reproducibility of the data analysis
                            (interview, PhD 7, digital heritage specialist). Having a specific
                            working environment or laboratory to do scientific
                                experiments is seen as helpful in that regard: On the third floor [...] they consider themselves
                                scientists, because they have a lab. They do tests, and they use a
                                scientific method (interview, PhD 6, digital humanist). 
                        Computer scientists may indeed use different methods and skills. In order
                            to analyse historical data computationally, for instance, one needs to
                            be able to build a database and work with it. According to a digital
                            historian in the group this is actually one of the most important skills
                            in digital history: Simply because we [as
                                    historians] have always worked with source material. When we
                                    enhance that source material with meta-data, and add this
                                    meta-data to a database, we can see more patterns and may
                                    discover a lot more than just by looking at the material
                                    itself (interview, PhD 4, digital historian).
                            However, the same digital historian also warned that if you think like a
                            computer scientist [too much], you start seeing
                                things in ones and zeros; whereas reality is often more complex. I
                                think that this complexity is not always thought of in computer
                                science (interview, PhD 4, digital historian). Despite of
                            the new opportunities offered by computer scientists, the humanist way of thinking and knowledge
                            shouldn’t be sacrificed in interdisciplinary trading zones (interview,
                            PhD 3, digital archaeologist). When being asked to reflect on the future
                            of digital history, one of the digital humanists in the group argues:
                                    ... we have a discourse [at the moment]
                                    that technology is good, because it can help you if you already
                                    have a humanist mind. But if you don’t, it’s not going to help
                                    you develop one. You just base your entire career on these
                                    tools. [...] The most relevant skill [in interdisciplinary
                                    collaboration] remains the same that has always been, which is
                                    understanding: the humanities approach. (interview, PhD
                                6, digital humanist)
                    
                
                
                    3.2 Common ground and language
                    A second characteristic of the DTU is the ambition to establish a certain
                        common ground and, possibly, to share a common vocabulary and develop a new
                            interlanguage
                        . After all, key terms and concepts often mean
                        very different things to different scholars or communities of practice.
                        Whereas historians speak about sources, for example, librarians or
                        archivists talk about documents and computer scientists refer to
                            data. Such terms and concepts can be described as boundary objects in the negotiation of new
                        knowledge, characterized by a process of heuristic
                            groping
                        .
                    Whether a common language really emerges, however, depends on the type of trading zone. In their article Trading Zones and Interactional Expertise, Collins
                        et al. differentiate between interlanguage, subversive, enforced and
                        fractionated trading zones  (Figure 2). The type
                        of trading zone depends on whether a group is homogeneous or heterogeneous,
                        and whether the trading or group dynamics is based on collaboration
                        or coercion (involving power relations). As opposed to enforced trading
                        zones, which are characterized by high heterogeneity and high coercion,
                        interlanguage trading zones may only develop in groups with strong
                        collaboration and high homogeneity. Subversive trading zones are
                        characterized by a power imbalance between the involved collaborating
                        parties or language communities, whereas fractionated trading zones show a
                        high degree of collaboration and heterogeneity .
                        (See for a discussion of the four trading zones also  and .)
                    
                        The four types of trading zones according to .
                        
                    
                    Particularly relevant about this model is the temporal dimension involved in
                        the development of interactional expertise, namely the possibility to move between different kinds of trading zones over
                            time
                        . Groups can change, for instance,
                        from enforced trading zones (coercive-heterogeneous) to interlanguage
                        trading zones (collaborative-homogeneous). The ambition to create a specific environment for learning, practising and
                            reflecting on digital history
                         combined with the high heterogeneity of
                        the group given the PhD students’ diverse disciplinary backgrounds, ages and
                        nationalities, made the DTU an enforced trading zone
                        in the beginning. This was especially the case for the DH incubation phase,
                        in which the skills trainings were meant to establish a common ground among
                        the PhD students. 
                    
                        In search of a common ground
                        The DH incubation phase, as enforced trading zone, partly succeeded in
                            its aim to establish a common ground among the PhD students. The
                            trainings, for instance, provided an opportunity to
                                learn something about computer science or philosophy
                            (interview, PhD 2, historian) or to deal with technical or practical
                            problems, such as applying or evaluating Optical Character Recognition
                            (OCR) to large bodies of textual sources for computational analysis:
                                    That is something that the training
                                    made me more aware of, I think. For example, when I was going
                                    through the frequency tables and texts that I used, I asked
                                    myself: when were they OCR’ed? [...] How good is the OCR? Which
                                    libraries applied it? And why have they done this? These are
                                    questions that I try to think about, although you cannot always
                                    answer them. (interview, PhD 5, historian)
                        Sometimes, the skills trainings were useful to better understand how
                            researchers from other domains are dealing with specific digital tools
                            and methods. For a computer scientist in the group, for instance,
                            GIS-analysis was not completely new, yet
                            still participated in the training out of curiosity to see how historians use GIS tools: what kind of questions they
                                try to address and what kind of problems they try to solve
                            (report GIS-analysis, PhD 1, computer scientist). Likewise, for another
                            PhD student in the group ... the most powerful
                                    thing [in the training] was to learn how different the problems
                                    are that people face in their everyday work and how they are
                                    being solved, because the entire purpose of an interdisciplinary
                                    group [like the DTU] is to be able to try [certain]
                                    methodologies from one field and apply them to another.
                                (report, PhD 7, digital heritage specialist)
                        Occasionally, the skills trainings even fostered collaborations between
                            the PhD students and so stimulated a transfer of knowledge and skills
                            across disciplines. In relation to the skills training on programming
                            with Python, for instance, a historian in the group wrote: For me, it was not always clear how to construct
                                    certain parts of the code, or to understand their meaning, but
                                    with help from [a digital historian] and [a computer scientist]
                                    they made this more insightful for me. […] I learned a lot about
                                    Python and that everything starts with being able to read and
                                    understand code; something that I am more skilled in now than
                                    before the workshop. (report, Programming with Python,
                                PhD 5, historian)
                        Needless to say, the skills trainings also came with a significant time
                            investment. While they were potentially interesting, one of the PhD
                            students remarked that the [main] goal is to finish
                                my PhD; that’s the most important thing (interview, PhD 2,
                            historian). More PhD students in the group were critical about the
                            trainings, especially because not all of the digital tools, methods and
                            skills were necessarily applicable to their individual PhD research
                            projects – which indeed varied significantly in terms of topic, scale,
                            type of data, method and approach. In fact, the trainings were mostly
                            evaluated based on their applicability and usefulness for the PhD
                            student’s own research. It made one of the PhD students argue that the
                            skills trainings had to be elective, because they
                                are not relevant for everyone. If you would just put everyone in the
                                same room and make them study, make them learn, it’s not productive
                                I think. It’s just a waste of time (interview, PhD 10,
                            linguist). The PhD student further explained: ... we all came from different backgrounds [...] by having one
                                    session on text mining, you cannot make a person capable of text
                                    mining just after one day. And the same goes about databases. I
                                    know that some [of the PhD students] have experience with SQL. I
                                    attended the training and all I came out with was just a general
                                    understanding of how databases work. [...] So, it was just an
                                    introduction. I think that those trainings, if they had the
                                    purpose of bringing everyone to the same level, they didn’t do
                                    that. And they couldn’t by definition, by the time frame, by the
                                    level. [...] because everyone has different projects. Not
                                    everyone is interested, and gets into the same level of, say,
                                    data visualization or programming. Some [of the PhD students]
                                    did not want to start programming. They said, [the training] is
                                    a waste of time. I’m not going to use it, so why do I need
                                    it? (interview, PhD 10, linguist)
                        Clearly, the DTU incubation phase did not serve everyone equally. The
                            question whether the skills trainings should be compulsory or not, was
                            extensively debated within the DTU Management Team as well as by the
                            complete project team during evaluation meetings. Eventually, half-way
                            the first year of the project it was decided to make the trainings no
                            longer compulsory but optional, so the PhD students could choose which
                            trainings were relevant to attend for themselves. The idea to establish
                            a common ground among the PhD students by means of a series of skills
                            trainings in digital humanities research practices, in other words, led
                            to some form of resistance. The DH incubation phase was experienced as
                            an enforced trading zone and, subsequently, led to a renegotiation of
                            the DTU’s training programme, framework and aims.
                    
                
                
                    3.3 Locality and physical proximity
                    A third characteristic of a trading zone is locality. According
                        to historian of science Peter Galison, locality is central to the definition
                        of a trading zone, which he defines as an arena in
                            which radically different activities could be locally, but not globally,
                            coordinated
                        . Digital humanists, in contrast,
                        often describe or qualify the recent intersection of the humanities and the
                        computer sciences as a generalizable global
                            phenomenon (see for a discussion ).
                        While digital research infrastructures and online communication technologies
                        have certainly fostered new forms of collaboration at a distance, our
                        interest was to study the situated and local research practices.
                    
                        The open space as local trading zone
                        For the design of the DTU, locality therefore played an important role.
                            One of the project’s distinguishing and grounding principles was to have
                            one shared open office space instead of having team members work in
                            different departments and locations. The concept of the open plan
                            office, typically a shared room occupied by more
                                than four people, where desks are arranged in groups, and where
                                there are few barriers between desks
                            , can be traced back to the 1920s
                                . After the 1960s, the open plan office
                            became implemented more widely in workspace design (see for a brief
                            history ). In academia, however,
                            this development is relatively new. While individual cellular offices
                            remain the norm, there have been movements towards more open work environments since the early 2000s . This trend was pushed, among others, by new
                            managerial and financial paradigms (promoting flexible use of space and
                            cost efficiency ) as well as demands for more collaborative and interdisciplinary
                                research
                            . Research in the fields of social
                            psychology and organizational studies shows that group interactions
                            benefit indeed from close proximity: being physically near one another
                            is constructive for (interdisciplinary) collaboration, communication and
                            exchange (see, for instance , , ).Interestingly, a recent study in organizational behaviour
                                science actually shows that the architecture of the open workspaces
                                impacts human collaboration negatively: rather than prompting increasingly vibrant
                                        face-to-face collaboration, open architecture appeared to
                                        trigger a natural human response to socially withdraw from
                                        officemates and interact instead over email and instant
                                        messaging
                                    . With this theory in
                            mind, all thirteen PhD students of the DTU gathered together in one
                            shared office space, also called the C²DH open space (Figure 3).
                        
                            Picture of the C²DH open space, designed as collaborative working
                                environment for the DTU PhD students.
                            
                        
                        For some of the PhD students, being in the same department (C²DH) and
                            being situated in one collaborative working space as a group stimulated
                            exchanges within the team. A PhD student states: I
                                think it’s thanks to the open space that we collaborate. Thanks to
                                the fact that we work in a similar department (interview,
                            PhD 1, computer scientist). Another PhD student emphasized the
                            importance of physical proximity, which the C²DH open office provides as
                            a working environment: It’s important to be near
                                each other. Yes, it creates an opportunity to do something
                                [together] (interview, PhD 3, digital archaeologist). Of
                            course, virtual spaces or platforms of communication, like Skype,
                            Facebook and Slack, also provide possibilities for collaboration and
                            exchange: You don’t have to be in the same [space
                                in order to collaborate]. I mean, you can use Skype, use different
                                [media], you can even call. [However] it’s easier when you are in
                                the same space (interview, PhD 2, historian). One of the
                            downsides of communication via online platforms is that it comes with
                            certain conventions, which could make it more difficult to approach
                            someone else in the group: When I am here [in
                                    the open space] and the others are also here, it almost doesn’t
                                    involve any risks to just easily talk to people. Collaborations
                                    almost always start through chats, I think. Well, okay, you can
                                    send an official email as well, but in my experience starting
                                    off with official emails doesn’t work with people who already
                                    have enough interesting things to do. (interview, PhD 3,
                                digital archaeologist)
                        Face-to-face communication and presence are mentioned as important
                            characteristics of physical platforms of exchange. As one of the PhD
                            students argued: It would be impossible to get any
                                collaboration done if we were working from home all the time. [...]
                                I think it’s true that face-to-face is important, for initiating
                                collaborations in the least (interview, PhD 6, digital
                            humanist).
                    
                    
                        The open space as non-trading zone
                        While the C²DH open space provides presence, proximity and locality, it
                            clearly came with some limitations as well. One of the main challenges
                            of open plan offices in academia is to find a balance between the promotion of communication and collaboration on
                                the one hand and the provision of privacy on the other
                            .
                        One of the issues at stake are noise and disturbance. Some of the PhD
                            students prefer to have a quiet space as working environment, where they
                            can concentrate and work on their own without disturbing others: If I really have to concentrate on something, if I’m
                                writing something, I prefer to have a space of my own. Because I
                                also feel kind of self-conscious, like I’m disturbing the others if
                                there’s stuff I need to do (interview, PhD 7, digital
                            heritage specialist). More participants note that people in the open
                            space can’t work really with all the chatting going
                                on (interview, PhD 3, digital archaeologist) and signal the
                            fact that people are wearing headphones all day
                                just to prevent others from disrupting them from their own
                                project (interview, PhD 10, linguist). Some PhD students, on
                            the other hand, prefer to have some background noise: Most people don’t like the open space because it’s too
                                loud. I [personally] don’t like the open space, because it’s too
                                quiet (interview, PhD 6, digital humanist). The examples
                            make clear how difficult it is to meet the expectations of everyone when
                            it comes to a common working environment.
                        Another factor limiting the trading zone-effect of the open space was the
                            fact that ten out of the thirteen PhD students of the DTU have a second
                            office in the research institute, department or internal research groups
                            that their supervisor is affiliated to. The wide variety of disciplinary
                            research affiliations created a certain administrative and institutional
                            confusion for some of the PhD students, especially in the beginning of
                            the project. For others, having a second office space was beneficial as
                            it provided a solution to some of the aforementioned problems the PhD
                            students experienced in the open space. It allowed them to divide
                            between specific working environments in relation to types of work that
                            for instance required more concentration: Well,
                                    I have the other office [at the Computer Science department]
                                    that I use sometimes. I go there once or twice a week, because
                                    my supervisor requires me to. That's why I separate [between] my
                                        focus time and more easy time.
                                (interview, PhD 10, linguist) This last citation indicates how
                            the supervisors played an important role in this issue as well. The
                            spatial and institutional division of the PhD students was not very
                            constructive for the building of a trading zone. Certainly, it didn’t
                            help the formation of a certain group identity with the project team. A
                            historian in the group reflected about the second offices in terms of a
                                loss for the DTU: We [have] already
                                    lost two people [mentions names]. And
                                    [two other PhD students] aren’t here [in the open space] often.
                                    [...] Probably, because they have to be at their department. A
                                    lot of us have second offices. I also have one...
                                (interview, PhD 2, historian)
                        
                        A third reason why the open space didn’t foster interactional expertise
                            as expected might be related to the fact that the DTU missed a common
                            research project in which all PhD students would have to participate.
                            Collaborations between PhD students rather happened bottom up and
                            at smaller scale based on shared (thematic) research interests or
                                methodologies.In 2018, so after the project’s first year, two
                                internal collaborations have been successfully accomplished within
                                the DTU framework. One is a project between a computer scientist and
                                a digital historian, who collaborated to analyse the role of gender
                                in computer science conferences by means of digital classification
                                of research areas based on topic modelling. Another
                                interdisciplinary publication within the DTU includes the
                                collaboration between a digital humanist, digital heritage
                                specialist and linguist, dealing with the 3D reconstruction of the
                                historic landscape of Larochette Luxembourg in cultural heritage
                                education by means of building a virtual reality application. See
                                for publications of these collaborations respectively  and . For
                                a list of all publications and other research output of the DTU
                                project team, see: https://dhh.uni.lu/category/activities/publications/.
                             A computer scientist in the group argued: [In general] I would say a common environment helps
                                    [to stimulate group collaborations]. However, I don’t think ours
                                    [the open space] is yet such an environment. [...] I expected
                                    the DTU to have a more common research [project], in which we
                                    would all collaborate. That way, I think, the common workplace
                                    would be really relevant. But this is somehow missing now. [...]
                                    Most of our exchanges happen in the seminars and in the skills
                                    trainings [...]. Most ideas started from those kinds of
                                    meetings. (interview, PhD 8, computer
                            scientist)
                        To sum up, the actual exchanges and collaborations did not take place in
                            the open space, but in some of the other venues for collaboration
                            provided by the C²DH and the University. These include, among others,
                            the PhD seminar room, the University’s Learning Centre, the C²DH lounge
                            area, the kitchen next to the open space, the University canteen, and –
                            in the case of the skills trainings and research seminars – the Digital
                            History Lab. The social setting of these venues plays a crucial role in
                            fostering internal exchanges; whether informally over lunch, during a
                            coffee break, or in group activities. While the open space mainly
                            functioned as shared office space, the thinkering happened in
                            these other spaces.
                    
                
            

                4. Thinkering
                From the start, the Digital History Lab was designed as a space for doing
                    hands-on experiments with digital tools and technologies. By turning historians
                    into experimenters who experience the mangle of
                        practice
                     of science in action
                     – such was the original idea – we would combine a
                    pragmatic approach to a hermeneutic process of critical reflection. Such
                    experimental settings of knowledge production have been coined as collaborative thinking
                    , thinkering
                    , heuristic groping
                    , or bricolage
                    . All these concepts build on the idea of a
                    hands-on approach fostering situated learning
                     and learning by doing
                    . We finally decided to adopt the term
                        thinkering as umbrella term for the hands-on philosophy of C²DH at
                    large, merging the tinkering with technology with the critical reflection on the
                    practice of doing digital history.The term thinkering also
                        prominently figures in the menu of the C²DH website: https://www.C²DH.uni.lu/thinkering.
                
                
                    4.1 Thinkering within the DTU framework
                    How has the DTU framework stimulated or facilitated such thinkering processes
                        within the project group? Did the skills trainings and research seminars
                        contribute to new forms of knowledge production in digital history research
                        practices?
                    Building on the concepts of digital hermeneutics
                        , the so-called third
                            wave in DH scholarship , and critical
                        approaches to digital humanities ,
                        it is increasingly important to understand how digital tools or technologies
                        mediate, represent, structure and produce research results. Since, in the
                        words of one of the PhD students, we often use these
                            tools without actually knowing how they work (report Digital
                        Source Criticism, group 1). There is thus an urgent need to open the
                            black box and critically reflect on what the use of the digital
                        tool or technology means for the historical research process in all its
                        phases. Or as Jennifer Edmond wrote: For historians to
                            harness big data, the black boxes will need to become glass
                            boxes
                         (cf. ; ).
                    In order to enable this to happen, the DTU framework focused on (1) the heuristic potential of thinkering, which involves
                        the methodological implementation of digital tools in historical research
                        practices, and on (2) thinkering as hermeneutic
                            practice, which involves a critical reflection on the meaning of
                        using such tools and the epistemological consequences of the transformations
                        from source to data to database for historical analysis.
                
                
                    4.2 The heuristic potential of thinkering
                    One of the most applied tools and methods in digital humanities is distant reading: the analysis of large bodies of
                        text-based data by means of computational techniques . As one of the PhD students in the group
                        explained: ...if I have a library of encrypted
                                texts, it would be really time consuming to read all of [these
                                texts] and see how people of this area think about a particular
                                topic. I can [also] do that with an algorithm, if the books are
                                digitized, in less than one hour. [...] if we can build this
                                environment [within the DTU] between historians and computer
                                scientists, a historian can use this tool for analysing a whole
                                dataset of text for extracting what he has in mind.
                            (interview, PhD 8, computer scientist)
                    Distant reading methods were explored specifically in the skills trainings on
                        text mining and programming with Python, where participants experimented
                        with text analysis tools, like Voyant . In one
                        of the DTU research seminars, a historian in the group showed how applying
                        distant reading techniques could be useful to find, analyse and visualize
                        meaningful patterns in a digital corpus of historical texts: ... looking for specific words and when counting them
                                over time, you really saw something happening. [...] because of the
                                word frequencies, you could zoom in on certain things, for instance
                                how they changed over time. And then it appeared that for all my
                                [historical] journals something was happening in the same
                                year. (interview, PhD 5, historian)
                    
                    Likewise, in the skills training on data visualization, it was explored how
                        network visualization tools like Palladio and Gephi could be used as
                        heuristic instruments to show new and to that point
                            unknown connections in the data (report Data Visualization, PhD
                        2, historian). Visualizing such connections may help us
                            see trends and patterns which may not be seen in, for example, a
                            spreadsheet containing a lot of numerical data, or in an unstructured
                            text (report Data Visualization, PhD 10, linguist). It may even
                        help to find anomalies or even mistakes in
                            data, which were not visible before (report Data Visualization,
                        PhD 8, computer scientist). 
                    As one of the PhD students remarks in this regard, the shift from close
                        reading as traditional approach in the humanities to distant reading with
                        text mining is all about ignoring specific features of
                            individual texts of the corpus and focusing instead on identifying
                            large-scale trends and patterns throughout the collection
                        (report Text Mining, PhD 10, linguist). Sometimes additional tools had to be
                        used to remove certain elements in order to make the digitized map more
                        useful for GIS-analysis (Figure 4): ... the
                                georeferencing process requires a high level of accuracy to map
                                physical space onto a map while maintaining the correct proportions.
                                This meant editing via Photoshop to remove unnecessary whitespace,
                                especially at the joints of the map where it folds. During my first
                                georeferencing attempt, the software was unable to proportionally
                                juxtapose the image of the map with the georeferenced data. By
                                removing white space it increased the overall accuracy.
                            (report GIS-analysis, PhD 6, digital humanist)
                    
                        Image before and after whitespace removal. Image from GIS-analysis
                            skills training report.
                        
                    
                    Before being mined, searched through, or visualized, data thus needs
                        to be corrected, adjusted or (re)structured to make them suitable for
                        computational analysis. In the skills training on Database Structures,
                        participants learned how to structure big data into SQL databases and work
                        with queries to search through and analyse specific datasets.
                        However, the creation and implementation of database structures also came
                        with certain challenges. As one of the participants wrote: Although it seems easy at first, thinking about
                            establishing a database from scratch is quite a complex feat. The need
                            arises to think about the categories and relationships of the data that
                            is to be put into the database (report Database Structures, PhD
                        11, linguist). Thinking about databases and which categories and
                        relationships to include is not just a technical, but also a conceptual
                        exercise. For example, in an internal collaboration on gender in computer
                        science conferences, thinking about data categories and relationships led to
                        a problem of how to cluster data in a database for making useful queries.
                        Structuring data by means of an ontology and entity relationship
                            diagram finally resulted in a graphical representation of the
                        relations between certain data entities and their attributes (Figure 5).
                        However, what exactly constitutes an entity, relation or
                            attribute is subject to human interpretation and therefore not
                        always self-evident: For example, first we were
                                thinking about putting the People category [...] in the
                                    Individuals table, but then we saw this would work better
                                as a separate table. We first created the diagram on paper, and also
                                visualized/sketched our database tables to make the structure more
                                clear and understandable for ourselves (report Database
                            Structures, PhD 5, historian; PhD 4, digital historian; PhD 10,
                            linguist)
                    
                        Database structures: from sketch to ontology. Image from database
                            structures skills training report.
                        
                    
                    In short, by thinkering with digital methods and tools in the skills
                        trainings and research seminars, the PhD students learned about how to work
                        with database structures, text mining algorithms and data visualization
                        techniques in order to analyse, visualize and interpret their historical
                        sources and to discover certain meaningful patterns, relations or anomalies.
                        However, as historians of science and technology have argued before, using a
                        tool is neither good, nor bad, nor neutral
                        , but also shapes our practices and
                        interpretative framework 
                        . Consequently, structuring and representing data
                        by means of databases and ontologies inevitably involves some form of
                        transformation, translation and interpretation, which is necessary to
                        reflect on as well. 
                
                
                    4.3 Thinkering as hermeneutic practice
                    Applying digital methods and tools not only comes with methodological
                        challenges and opportunities, but also implies certain epistemological
                        consequences that need to be addressed by the historian or humanities
                        scholar.
                    
                        From source to data
                        Since most historians in the group are not dealing with born-digital
                            sources but with retro-digitized sources, the skills training on digital
                            source criticism explored the transformation process from a historical
                            source to data by means of hands-on exercises. In the exercises,
                            participants needed to digitize a historical source themselves – a
                            historical text, analogue photo, audio recording, or 3D object. This
                            made them conscious about the ontological shift in the digitization
                            process and how this impacts their research practices. One of the
                            participants realised how actual pieces of reality
                                are transformed from a historical type of knowledge to [a]
                                quantified one during the process of digitisation, and how inanimate
                                the data loss is (report Digital Source Criticism, group 1,
                            PhD 3, digital archaeologist). Another participant confessed:
                                    I became much more aware of the process
                                    that is behind all kinds of digitisation techniques: from
                                    scanning books, to digitising pictures, audio or 3D material.
                                    [...] Before the workshop I hadn’t thought about if or how
                                    digitalisation altered my source material. (report
                                Digital Source Criticism, group 1, PhD 5, historian)
                        Other participants reflected on the loss of certain physical and material
                            qualities. Due to the transformation from material source to data, they
                            argued, it is not a physical object anymore [...]
                                we can’t touch, taste and smell the photo [...] weigh the picture or
                                feel what kind of texture the paper is made of (report
                            Digital Source Criticism, group 1). Another report mentions the loss of
                                scale, colour, size, materiality, scent, sound,
                                historical sensation and context, storage, preservation,
                                restoration, price, accessibility, emotional / commercial /
                                scientific value, whether it is personal or public property, which
                                power relations can be involved, etc. (report Digital Source
                            Criticism, group 4). Reflecting on what such loss of material qualities
                            could mean for the historian in the hermeneutic research process, one of
                            the PhD students states in the report: I found
                                    it surprising that when you manipulate sound on a computer and
                                    for example cut and paste different pieces of audio, it is
                                    almost impossible to trace if or when parts were changed. This
                                    creates problems for historical research as it is almost
                                    impossible to know what the original file was. (report
                                Digital Source Criticism, group 1, PhD 5, historian)
                        On the other side, people noticed how the digitization process not only
                            led to a potential loss of information, but could also enhance the
                            possibilities for research and investigation: a digitized source allows digital touch-ups, zooming, and other new
                                functionalities (report Digital Source Criticism, group 2).
                            Digitization, in other words, makes the source more accessible and
                            searchable: Being able to zoom in, the background
                                of the picture becomes somewhat clearer and shows us that there is a
                                window in the back of the photograph. Although we manipulate the
                                picture by zooming in to get a closer look, we don’t lose the
                                    original data file of the picture (report Digital
                            Source Criticism, group 1). However, as another report argues: greater accessibility [...] would turn out to be
                                useless if digitised sources lack the necessary metadata
                            (report Digital Source Criticism, group 2). It exemplifies the
                            importance of source criticism as a key competence of doing history in
                            the digital age. For this reason, the C²DH has invested in
                                developing an online teaching platform on digital source criticism
                                called Ranke 2. See for more
                                information: https://ranke2.uni.lu.
                        
                    
                    
                        From data to database
                        In addition to the reflection on the transformation from source to data,
                            the skills trainings also reflected on the epistemological consequences
                            of the transformation from data to database. Especially the skills
                            training on Database Structures discussed how the transformation from
                            data to database could have an impact on the process of historical
                            interpretation and understanding. One of the participants raised the
                            question as follows: Databases represent data
                                    in a highly structured way. This means that we had to bring our
                                    raw data into a structured form. We did this by creating an
                                    ontology. [However] if the database is set up with the help of
                                    this ontology, it can be difficult to reconstruct the decisions
                                    that led to the creation of the ontology and the database. In
                                    this way, it could be the case, that some potentially valuable
                                    information is lost. (report Database Structures, PhD 9,
                                philosopher)
                        It seems of crucial importance to reflect on and be critical about how
                            database structures may impact research results, not only in terms of
                            their indexical logic and semantic hierarchy, but also in terms of
                            missing or corrupted information. Close reading is therefore necessary
                            to complement – or possibly to contradict – certain results produced by
                            distant reading methodologies. As some of the PhD students argue:
                                    Through close reading and entering
                                    provisional data into the dataset we noticed that some issues
                                    remained unresolved. Most problems relate to missing data, and
                                    sometimes it is very hard to define family relations when people
                                    do not have a name (i.e. three sisters, my father). One possible
                                    solution would be an added field called other names (i.e.
                                    father of person x). (report Database Structures, PhD 5,
                                historian; PhD 4, digital historian; PhD 10, linguist)
                        The question of representation and the importance of being conscious
                            about possible errors or mistakes hidden in the raw data played a
                            crucial role in participants’ reflections. Based on experiences with the
                            data visualization tool Tableau, one of the historians in the group
                            stated: With this experiment, I learned once
                                    again that it is very important to treat your data very
                                    securely, because only after doing these experiments and going
                                    back to my data files I noticed that I did not see certain
                                    faults that were still in the data files that I used. This
                                    constituted for example empty cells that were not supposed to be
                                    empty, countries or parts of a country that were not streamlined
                                    [such as] the use of UK when England is mentioned, but
                                    writing UK Scotland when the correspondent was from a
                                    Scottish city [...] Before starting to explore information
                                    visually it is [therefore] important that you double-check all
                                    your information at least twice or three times, otherwise you
                                    keep going back and forth between the data and the
                                    visualizations which can take up a lot of time — as was the case
                                    with the experiments I did (report Data Visualization,
                                PhD 5, historian)
                        The various examples show that experimenting with digital methods and
                            tools served both a heuristic and hermeneutic objective. In short, the
                            DTU skills trainings and researchers seminars enabled PhD students to
                            acquire both a practical and a conceptual tool kit fostering a
                            more reflexive attitude in digital history research practices.
                    
                
            

                5. Conclusions
                Digital history, as an interdisciplinary field, has brought both challenges and
                    opportunities to situated research practices. While the DTU training programme
                    has certainly contributed to the development of both a practical and conceptual
                    tool kit among the PhD students involved, the question remains whether it has
                    also contributed to the idea of the DTU as a digital history trading
                        zone. To what extent have the skills trainings and research seminars
                    stimulated interdisciplinary collaborations and contributed to the development
                    of a common ground and interlanguage within the team?
                
                    5.1 Between formative and transformative trading zones
                    We can identify various tensions in both the formation and transformation of
                        the DTU as a digital history trading zone. With formation, we
                        mean the importance of institutional spaces (i.e. C²DH open office) and
                        research infrastructures (i.e. Digital History Lab) in the establishment and
                        development of the DTU as platform for interdisciplinary collaboration and
                        thinkering. With transformation, we mean the impact of situated
                        research and thinkering processes on new digital history research practices
                        and the interdisciplinary acculturation
                         (cf. Kemman 2019)
                        among participating PhD students. Though formative and
                            transformative trading zones are intrinsically related, it is
                        helpful to distinguish between the different dynamics involved.
                    We have discussed how interdisciplinary exchange and collaboration comes with
                        a significant time investment. Since the PhD students have to finish their
                        individual PhD dissertations within three to four years, this puts a certain
                        constraint or limitation on the amount of time that they can invest in
                        interdisciplinary interactions. In other words, from the beginning of the
                        DTU, there has been an ongoing tension between the individual PhD research
                        on the one side and the collaborative aims of the DTU as interdisciplinary
                        project on the other. The tensions between individual and collaborative work
                        were to a certain degree mirrored and even reinforced by institutional
                        tensions between the C²DH – as host institute of the DTU – and the other
                        research institutes or departments that ten of the thirteen PhD students
                        (and their supervisors) are affiliated to. The dynamics between the various
                        institutional affiliations led to centrifugal forces, challenging the shared
                        open space as initial trading zone for the project. 
                    In addition to the tensions in the formative trading zone, the
                        perceived dichotomies between the humanities and the computer sciences as
                            subjective versus objective forms of research make proof
                        of disciplinary tensions in the transformative trading zone. Although
                        the DTU skills trainings were potentially helpful to establish a common
                        ground and so stimulated interdisciplinary exchanges and connections among
                        the PhD students, they also came with some form of interdisciplinary
                        resistance. Not only on the side of the PhD students, but also on the side
                        of the supervisors and instructors of the skills trainings. 
                    Transforming the formative trading zone into a trading zone were
                            interlanguage and real interactional expertise were happening
                        proved basically to be a challenge of communication. In fact, the skills
                        trainings have made discursive differences between disciplines explicit. It
                        is through the collaborative work that the different epistemic traditions
                        become visible and make people aware of the implicit traditions of their
                        community of practice. By experiencing these differences and making them a
                        topic of reflection, the enforced trading zone at the beginning of
                        the DTU slowly but steadily changed into a transformative trading
                            zone which was able to adapt to the specific needs and interests of
                        the PhD students involved. Sometimes, even a new terminology or
                            interlanguage appeared, bridging (discursive) disciplinary
                        boundaries. In one of the self-reflexive reports on the skills training on
                        GIS-analysis, for example, a participant describes an original historical
                        map as a non digital-born source: Our task
                                was to identify ground points both on the historical map and the
                                digital map in order to match the former with the latter and
                                “anchor” the historical map to the digital one. In this way, a
                                    non digital-born source such as an historical map can be
                                not only digitalised but also enriched with other digital
                                information and be suitable for analysis using digital
                                tools. (report GIS-analysis, PhD 1, computer scientist,
                            emphasis added)
                
                
                    5.2 Lessons learned
                    We can draw at least three concrete lessons learned. The first lesson is the
                        meaning of spaces and places of collaboration and communication for
                        interdisciplinary projects. When organizing an interdisciplinary doctoral
                        training unit, most of the attention often goes to the creation of an
                        interesting training programme or curriculum. Based on our reflections of
                        the Digital History Lab and the C²DH open space as situated research and
                        training environments, however, we found that the spatial dimension is just
                        as important for establishing an interdisciplinary trading zone. A second
                        lesson concerns the governance of this trading zone, in particular the
                        disciplinary and institutional disparity resulting from the dynamics between
                        the C²DH, as the host institution of the DTU, and the various disciplinary
                        research institutes that the PhD students and their supervisors are
                        affiliated to. Unlike some of the literature on interdisciplinarity in
                        digital humanities, we learned that the value of bridging disciplinary gaps
                        in a digital history project is actually not a given – even among the DTU
                        team members. For this, perhaps, the supervisors could have played a more
                        stimulating role in the centralization of the DTU as an interdisciplinary
                        project. A third lesson is that the tension between the individual PhD
                        research and the aims of the DTU as a collaborative project could be solved,
                        at least partly, by designing common research projects within the DTU
                        framework right from the beginning. Although some bottom-up and small scale
                        collaborations already emerged in the first year, and new ones have been
                        formed in the second year as well, the question is whether such internal
                        group collaborations could have been stimulated more, or whether this would
                        have created just another instrumentalization of interdisciplinary
                        collaboration similar to the DH incubation phase.
                    In conclusion, we argue that the formation and transformation of
                        interdisciplinary trading zones depends on various factors, including time
                        investment, collaborative spaces and research infrastructures, communication
                        skills, research profiles, and scholars willingness and ability to cross
                        both spatial and disciplinary boundaries. Getting PhD students out of their
                        disciplinary comfort zone and making them fit for an
                        interdisciplinary trading zone thus comes with a lot of challenges.
                        Instead of striving for a homogeneous and fully collaborative
                            interlanguage trading zone - which possibly remains a theoretical
                        option rather than a realistic possibility - we argue that digital history
                        trading zones should actually embrace their own diversity, heterogeneity and
                        hybridity . Because, as Peter Weingart has
                        argued, interdisciplinarity is not the promise of
                            ultimate unity, but of innovation and surprise by way of recombining of
                            different parts of knowledge, no matter which
                        . The creative uncertainty that
                        results from such engagement clearly fosters new questions and curiosity –
                        which should be the aim and motivation of any scientific endeavour. 
                
            

                Acknowledgements
                This research is supported by the Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR)
                    (10929115). The authors thank the editors of this special issue and the
                    anonymous peer reviewers for their valuable feedback. They furthermore thank the
                    PhD students of the Doctoral Training Unit who participated in this studies for
                    their time and for sharing their experiences.
            
