Title:  The New Place of Reading: Locative Media and the Future of
          Narrative
Volume:  005
Issue:  3
Date:  15 November 2011
Abstract:  
        Locative technologies hold out the promise to transform literary space in all of its
          dimensions, including its represented spaces, reading interfaces, and the very spaces
          within which literature is produced and consumed. Yet, despite the growing use of
          location-based technologies, authors and readers alike have been slow to take to
          site-specific narrative due to limitations inherent in both the current design of locative
          media systems and our received notions of what constitutes the narrative experience.
        This paper argues that new mobile reading platforms in general are altering conceptions
          of literary space in highly conflicted ways, by radically expanding the sites where
          narratives can be accessed and experienced even as they reinforce a residual notion of
          literary reading as a sedentary and decontextualized experience. Locative media likewise
          hold out the promise of increased mobility and contextual awareness, but confront several
          cultural and technological factors preventing such an enhanced emplacement of narrative,
          factors that current performance-oriented approaches cannot fully address. At the level of
          cognitive engagement, the conditioned expectation of being
            transported to a remote fictional world interferes with readers'
          appreciation of the locative narrative's close ties to the real world, as well as the
          contextual effects it elicits by means of transportation through the actual world. At the
          technical level, the discontinuous algorithms of place that inform the architecture of
          most locative media systems hinder the perception of narrative patterning and flow across
          more extensive spaces.
        Locative media thus operationalize the spatial tension between conventionally sedentary
          modes of literary engagement and new modalities of mobility, a tension that is
          constitutive of our present mediality. The study concludes with a discussion of StoryTrek,
          a next-generation locative hypernarrative system designed to enable more complex, dynamic
          and fluid modes of embodied narrative spatiality. By encouraging the user to actively form
          complex narrative links between real and fictional spaces, StoryTrek enables utopian forms
          of spatial play that neutralize both the spatial limitations of current locative media
          design and the sedentary reading practices that continue to structure the experience of
          digital literature.
      
Full Body Text: 
The New Place of Reading: Locative Media and the Future of Narrative

        The Changing Spaces of Reading
        Prognostications about the future course of technology will inevitably seem quaint in
          hindsight, but if the current convergence of handheld mobile devices, location-based
          services and eBook readers continues, then the future of reading will be less a matter of
          time than a matter of space. For well over a decade, artists and authors like Kate
          Armstrong and Teri Rueb, interactive audio installations like 
            Urban Tapestries
          , 
            [murmur]
          , 
            textopia
           and 
            34 North 118 West
          , and alternate reality game designers such as Blast Theory and 7scenes, have all
          successfully integrated locative media with narrative experiences in ways that challenge
          our very definitions of the literary. As artistic practice, locative media represent a
          productive hesitation between literary fiction, documentary, audio-visual installation,
          and site-specific theatrical performance; as cultural practices, they are located in the
          everyday sites of commerce and leisure within both natural and built environments, at the
          crux of the user's public and private identities. Site-specific digital literature is thus
          perfectly situated to engage large audiences who already adopt locative media for other
          purposes, including the massive global geocaching and alternate reality gaming
          communities, those who daily use GPS-enabled applications for activism, flash mobs and
          other civil disturbances, and anyone who uses new mobile location-based apps and services
          for shopping, wayfinding, tourism or recreation. Add to this install base the millions of
          book lovers who are embracing the explosion of popular mobile reading formats and
          platforms for eBooks and audio books, and the potential audience for locative narrative
          seems vast indeed.
        And yet, the growing use of location-based technologies in a wide variety of social
          contexts has not produced a sizeable audience for locative media storytelling. Locative
          narrative, like literary hypertext, remains an avant-garde and coterie practice, still
          largely unknown as an artistic medium, let alone as a popular fictional genre. Authors and
          readers alike have been slow to take to site-specific narrative due to limitations
          inherent in both the current design of locative media systems and our received notions of
          what constitutes a narrative experience. Even literary critics who take notice of locative
          texts have tended to underplay the medium's affinities with conventional literary
          narrative and apparently natural precedents such as epic poetry or the literature of
          place, choosing instead to trace the evolution of locative media from modes of cultural
          engagement having no necessary narrative content, such as games, psychogeographical
            situations or site-specific theatre. Locative theorists have
          de-emphasized the medium's narrative dimension while attending to its lyrical,
          archaeological and, most significantly, performative dimensions. For example, both Chris
          Eaket  and Rita Raley have rightly argued that locative media,
          like cybertexts generally, demand heightened degrees of performativity from their users,
          whom Raley describes less as readers than as embodied, multimodal participants: 
            critical engagement [with mobile narrative]
              requires a range of cognitive and bodily activities, only one of which is reading in
              the sense of the visual processing of linguistic signs. That is, reading in the
              physical environment particular to mobile media quite often also involves seeing,
              moving, listening, touching. Participating in a mobile narrative is then precisely
              that — physical participation that is also understandable as performance
            
          . Raley's description perfectly captures the total environmental involvement
          demanded by many locative artworks, and also suggests an explanation for their lack of
          popularity, since literary enthusiasts are still more likely to approach reading as a
          sedentary mental activity at odds with the modes of embodied interactivity popular among
          gamers and geocachers. As empirical studies of hypertext users have shown (; ), not everyone wants to be forced to
          perform their own stories.
        Performance-oriented approaches can account for the uniquely embodied interactivity of
          locative media, but do less to account for the conventional features of printed literature
          which they retain, including a primarily textual emphasis; a narrative arc; a reliance on
          novelistic discourse, focalization and identification; and, most significantly for the
          present discussion, the experience of being transported to a
          fictional world, a phenomenon that occurs only in narrative media . Understood as the cognitive and emotional process
          by which readers become absorbed into fictional worlds, transportation has
          been empirically demonstrated to operate through a complex blend of effects that depend on
          a reader's attention, awareness, identification and affect, but is usually explained by
          analogy to physical travel. In order to be transported to a fictional world, it is said
          that a reader first has to leave the real world behind: 
            At the core of the metaphor of being
              transported lie readers' subjective reports of having left the real world behind when
              visiting narrative worlds
            
          . Young readers are trained from an early age to inhabit printed fictions as spaces
          framed off from the real world, and to focus attention on these represented spaces while
          detuning their real-world contexts of reading. Even literary critics rarely attend to the
          relation between the settings and chronotopes (or time-spaces) represented within
          narratives, and those actual spaces in which readers are themselves situated.
        Because the metaphorical departure is experientially real, narrative transportation can
          interfere with the new mobility enabled by digital reading devices. The reader of a
          printed text might have to leave the real world behind in order to be transported to a
          fictional world, thereby 
            los[ing] access to . . . the world of
              origin
            
          ; but with locative narrative quite the opposite is true, as being transported to
          the fictional world is literally dependent on transportation through the real world. This
          study argues that locative media hold out the promise of an enhanced mobility and
          situational awareness, but fail to overcome the expectation of conventional narrative
          transportation that continues to structure narrative worlds as spatially contained and
          isolated from the real world. The readerly detachment experienced at the level of
          cognitive engagement is reinforced at the technical level by the discontinuous algorithms
          of place that inform the current design and implementation of most locative media systems,
          and which prevent users from narrativizing their physical environments. Far from
          representing 
            a challenge to the hegemony of words
            
          , then, locative narratives mobilize printed literature's traditional mode of
          decontextualized engagement within new spatial contexts in ways that often interfere with
          the performance of place, foregrounding the productive tension between the traditional
          experience of fictional transportation and new modalities of mobility that constitutes our
          present medial condition. I conclude by describing StoryTrek, an innovative system for the
          authoring and reading of location-based narratives designed to elicit controlled artistic
          effects from the spatial tension between conventionally sedentary modes of literary
          engagement and more dynamic, continuous and complex models of spatial interaction. By
          putting both conventional literary transportation and new locative mobilities into play,
          StoryTrek neutralizes the tension between them, and opens a space for newly emergent
          narrative media.
      

        The Contexts of Mobile Reading
        
        Although the mobile revolution certainly provides the broader context for locative media
            , neither the increasing familiarity of
          location-based services and mobile applications nor the growing popularity of reading apps
          for mobile devices have done much to enhance the popularity of locative storytelling. In
          fact, new eBook and audio book formats remediate reading habits and assumptions associated
          with printed literature that prevent a broader recognition of the literary potential of
          locative media. New eBook and audio book platforms are altering conceptions of literary
          space in highly conflicted ways, by radically expanding the sites where narratives can be
          accessed and experienced, even as they reinforce a residual notion of literary reading as
          a sedentary experience that transports the reader to a fictionalized
          space removed from the actual world. The case of audio books helps to demonstrate why new
          mobile reading platforms have done little to promote the wider adoption of locative
          narratives. The comparison is informative, as the majority of successfully implemented
          locative narratives to date have used portable audio devices tied to GPS receivers to
          trigger playback of pre-recorded story segments as the user approaches certain geospatial
          coordinates. This technical modality, which tends less toward literacy than a second orality
          , has encouraged the emphasis on performativity in critical
          approaches to the locative.
        An audio delivery format allows users of locative media to safely navigate the physical
          environment while building upon their personal engagements with popular mobile audio
          listening technologies. Portable audio books, including recordings of literary recitations
          as well as eBook devices that support mp3 format or text-to-speech, are enabling a culture
          of ubiquitous mobile (if not location-aware) reading. Many now listen
          to audio books while walking, driving, mowing the lawn, or performing other activities not
          traditionally associated with reading. In a study of the effect of portable mp3 players on
          how people listen to music, Michael Bull characterizes the iPod as a device that enables
          the accompanied solitude of the individual
          listening experience combined with social proximity, providing listeners with 
            an intoxicating mixture of music, proximity and
              privacy whilst on the move
            
          . He stresses that the same portable technologies that bind users to consumer
          culture also provide a background accompaniment to the personalised narratives they create while moving through
          their daily lives in order to aestheticize and bring sense to the unpredictable and
          chaotic urban environment, spaces of
            freedom within the culture of capitalism that help to manage individuals'
          utopian hopes and desires . Bull describes this
          activity as largely non-interactive, since the iPod enables a user to become absorbed in
          self-created narratives while detuning one's immediate surroundings, so that the 
            disjunction between the interior world of
              control and the external one of contingency and conflict becomes suspended
            
          . In this way, new recording and playback media are changing not only the customary
          spaces of listening, but the entire auditory experience.
        If listening to music while strolling through the city allows individuals to reorder the
          contingency of the streets, the immersive attention and cognitive overhead required to
          follow and become lost in a previously scripted narrative are likely to preclude the
          creation of the sort of personalized narratives that Bull describes. Audio books likewise
          absorb the user into an alternate space, but it is a represented space that is less easily
          connected to the auditor's external environment. They offer a more complete detachment
          from capitalized urban space than that which Bull observes among music listeners,
          encouraging an even deeper withdrawal from communal space into a private literary
          realm.
        In her pioneering study of audio books, Deborah Philips emphasizes that although iPods
          and similar devices allow literary texts to be experienced in the company of others,
            [t]he literary culture that has been
            harnessed by that market remains strikingly unchanged by the technology. . . . [W]ithin
            the world of the audio book, the stratifications of high- and lowbrow, the
              classic and popular fiction remain
            stable, preventing a broader democratization of literary culture . Audio books have failed to produce new literary
          genres that exploit the dynamic, interactive, multiplayer and performative features that
          are so integral to the experience of hypertext literature, videogames and social media: 
            The websites and marketing materials for
              audio books make very little of the ways in which an audio book is a different
              commodity from a printed text
            
          . Whereas the downloadable mp3 track has changed not only listening conditions but
          also music production, fragmenting the album format for easier download and optimizing the
          musical composition itself for smaller headphones, the vast majority of audio books exist
          as spoken versions of printed texts — perhaps abridged, but otherwise unaltered in their
          linear structure, content and interactivity.Although interesting advances have been
            made with interactive audiobooks , there are also signs that
            mobile technologies are starting to explore new conceptions of the literary. For
            instance, Electric Literature, a bi-monthly literary
            anthology billed as the first literary app for iPhone, features animated trailers for
            stories as well as Single Sentence Animations, a mode of cinematic ekphrasis in which
            artists interpret a single sentence from a featured author's text; and Simon &
            Schuster has issued similarly enhanced ebooks for the iPad that
            embed scalable video within the text. eBook publishers have yet to explore the locative
            dimension, however.
        
      

        Locating the eBook
        It is not surprising, then, that the coming of the eBook should be compared to the mobile
          audio revolution of recent decades: Amazon's Kindle eBook reader was hailed upon its
          arrival as 
            the iPod of books
            
          , while recent months have brought widespread speculation about whether Apple's iPad
          will transform the book publishing industry in the same way the iPod revolutionized the
          music industry . As with audio books, the mass appeal of
          eBooks is predicated precisely on their portability and ease of reading on the bus, the
          beach, in the coffee shop or in bed (even if their expense still makes reading in the
          bathtub a risky undertaking). As consumer technologies, eBooks are positioned within the
          general shift towards mobility, promising increased access to literary texts worldwide
          while making large personal libraries portable for ubiquitous access. The Amazon Kindle,
          Barnes and Noble Nook and iRex DR800SG e-readers all allow users to purchase and download
          books from anywhere with cellular reception, greatly multiplying the sites of literary
          distribution. Amazon expressly markets its Kindle reader as a device for collapsing
          distance: 
            Our vision for Kindle is to have every book ever
              printed, in every language, available in 60 seconds from anywhere on earth
            
          . At the same time, its portability promises to increase the user's mobility: 
            You can send your documents directly to your
              Kindle and read them anytime, anywhere 
            
          . This expanded mobility reflects the demands of an increasingly flexible and
          globalized creative economy, in which spaces of production and
          consumption blur, and both work and leisure become increasingly subject to time- and
          space-shifting. The very name of Amazon's new eBook reader software for Windows, Kindle
          Everywhere, cloaks the corporate goal of total market penetration in the usability ideals
          of ubiquity, interoperability and democratic access.
        While eBook devices are already affecting production methods and distribution channels,
          there is less evidence of radical change in how literature is consumed. eBook readers
          arguably lend literature an expanded mobility, increasing the range and density of textual
          dissemination and reception, but do not fundamentally change how readers relate to and
          interact with these newly expanded sites of reading at the associative or cognitive
          levels. Even as they embrace digital media's portability and ease of dissemination,
          current eBook hardware and software are radically altering literary space at the levels of
          access and storage, while attempting to remediate the relative permanence and stability of
          conventional printed literature at the level of interface, content and experience. eBook
          readers are currently designed and marketed to remediate the form, scale and experience of
          a printed novel as closely as possible. These eBook readers take extraordinary measures to
          approximate the look and feel of a printed book. The Bookeen Cybook, for instance,
          features a wifi-enabled, grayscale e-ink display in a pocketbook format, bound together in
          a genuine artificial leatherette binding designed to emulate 
            the look and feel of tree flakes encased in
              dead cow
            
          . The iRex iLiad uses a metal bar to emulate the action of turning a physical page
          (moreover, you have to think of it this way to turn the page in the right direction, as
          clicking forward will by default move the story backwards). Even the Stanza iPhone app
          features an elaborate visual and haptic simulation of a turning page. Although implemented
          to enhance usability, these conventions inherited from the print medium in fact constrain
          the user's notion of what reading ought to be. In so doing, they hide the fact that
          reading in the digital age no longer need, or generally does, look anything like the
          solitary, sedentary and immersive practice demanded by printed books.
        Megan Benton has traced this social obsession with the look and feel of the printed book
          to the 1920s, showing how books became especially important in this period as signifiers
          of cultural capital. At this time, she observes, there were two kinds of Americans: those
          who valued books for their own sake, and those who treated them as things, commodities to provide amusement or impress the
          neighbours, like a new radio or automobile. In a growing commodity culture, spawned by new
          industrial methods and advertising, editors, publishers and critics took notice of what
          some called domestic bookaflage, the
          selection and presentation of books in one's home so as to project the cultural persona
          that others would perceive . However quaint such
          notions may seem today, the fact is that Cybooks, Kobos and Kindles are all so much
          domestic bookaflage, updated for digital consumers; only instead of acting as camouflage
          for a lack of literacy, eBook devices disguise our contemporary
          hyperliteracy, our constant engagement with reading and writing across new
          media and modalities in new spaces and social contexts. As Katherine Hayles has shown, the
          idealized detachment and disembodiment of the literary experience results from a long
          history involving social and legal definitions of literary work and property. The kind of
          close, immersive reading that has come to define both scholarly and casual engagements
          with the literary demands a certain detachment from one's own
          immediate, embodied setting, and disconnection from the world of commerce and mere 
            information
            
          . Current eBook readers are designed to remediate this conventional experience of
          disconnection, encouraging transportation while carefully curtailing the kinds of
          connectivity and situational awareness that characterize other mobile devices.
        eBooks do not change existing conceptions of literary space so much as they extend them
          outside of traditional reading settings. Mobile devices have radically altered the sites
          at which people read while not only continuing to ignore the user's context and situation
          in the world, but promising to overcome it entirely through ubiquitous product
          distribution. eBooks, like audio books, do not generally connect narratives to new
          locations or change the spatial contexts of reading so much as they recreate this learned
          sense of disconnection, encouraging mobile readers to decontextualize and leave
            behind ever more real-world locations. Even when taken on the road,
          narratives experienced on Kindles and iPods reproduce the sense of
            placelessness demanded by immersive reading, setting them apart
          from the growing number of mobile apps that use GPS or wifi to sense the user's location
          in order to provide contextually specific and geographically relevant information. For
          instance, LibraryThing's Local Books app for iPhone will find libraries, bookstores,
          literary readings or book fairs near the user's current location; by contrast, neither the
          eReader Pro, Stanza nor iBooks reading apps offer any locative awareness, all tending
          instead to enable conventional immersive reading in ways that obviate the effects of
          locality. Ignoring one's immediate context while engaging in immersive reading allows a
          reading subject to ignore his ephemeral, quotidian or grossly material historical and
          geographical situation, while attending instead to supposedly
            timeless literary knowledge and values. Gutenberg elegists may
          bemoan the rise of distracted modes of reading encouraged by online
          news sources, blogs, twitter feeds and other social media, but eBooks still await the
            casual revolution that will liberate them from the constraints of
          literary transportation, and reconnect them to the world of information.Of course,
            reading is never actually a placeless phenomenon. New research into
            the cultural geographies of specific reading locales offers some evidence that the
            supposed placelessness of reading may depend upon its exact
            opposite: that is, privileged access to specific sites of reading as well as the leisure
            time in which to visit those sites. For example, in her study of the reading habits of
            young adults in a rural Canadian community, Paulette Rothbauer shows that for rural
            youth with no access to sites of reading or clear articulations to a local print
            culture, reading is literally a placeless activity that occurs outside of any reading
            community. 
        
      

        The Place of Reading and the Reading of Place
        Locative narratives provide precisely the interactive and performative element that is
          currently missing from eBooks and audio books, which may explain why they have not gained
          a wider appreciation. To begin with, most locative narratives must be experienced 
            in situ
          , running directly counter to the model of mass dissemination that governs both
          printed literature and eBooks. Of course, it is precisely this site-specificity and
          contextual awareness that give locative narrative the potential to utterly transform our
          understanding of literary space. As Jeremy Hight puts it, locative media allow us 
            to move narrative from the printed page and
              literary journals to alternate spaces and new possibilities of dissemination, audience
              and community. Publication now can be signal, air, a spot of land. It can be on maps,
              and it can be only transcribed by a person as they move. . . .
                Place is semantically read more as a point, a specific
              designation or end point, while space is read more as an open
              area, place of storage, an area to be filled . . . .
            
          . While Hight evokes the expanded catalogue of narrative locations enabled by
          locative media, his distinction between isolated places and extensive
            spaces only emphasizes what I argue to be the locative's most
          serious technical limitation. Most locative systems function only within specified
          locales, and are furthermore designed to respond to relatively isolated geospatial
          coordinates. Anne Galloway rightly warns that it is 
            impossible to reduce locative media to
              discrete (or stable) objects of computation, or to singular representations
            
          ; nevertheless, it is fair to say that most locative apps and artworks alike remain
          technically limited to a punctuated model of spatial interaction. Locative systems
          typically provide set feedback at specific coordinates on the model of geospatial tagging,
          leaving the user to infer the spatial and narrative connections between isolated points of
          interest (POIs), a design model they share with the commercial navigation systems that
          guide users to their destinations through turn-by-turn directions by way of rest stops and
          service stations. By breaking down our subjective experience into easily commodifiable
          atoms of time-space, and positioning us in relation to local sites of commerce and
          exchange as tokens of our medial progress, such devices allegorize our contemporary
          obsession with the here-and-now, and our inability to perceive any socio-political
          organization beyond capitalism.
        Likewise, most locative narratives function by connecting discrete narrative moments to
          specific points on the grid, such that audio clips or text lexia are activated whenever a
          user reaches a particular location. The system knows where the user is at any given
          moment, but does not understand how she got there, or the implications of her particular
          path, approach, or style of navigation. Such works tend to privilege the node over the
          edge and site over duration, presenting not a story so much as a tour of disconnected
            sites.This limitation perhaps explains the technical and conceptual reliance of
            rich locative narrative works such as 34N113W, John Klima's Saint Joe or Teri Rueb's
            TRACE on linear modes of transportation (be it subways, trains or hiking trails) for
            narrative constraint. While users will inevitably perceive connections between
          the narrative segments triggered at distinct waypoints, such locative systems do little
          algorithmically to encourage either their authors or readers to make these schematic
          connections more explicit. They are incapable of responding to more complex patterns in
          the user's physical context, ever-changing style of motion, or embodied interactions with
          the environment. Just as reading practices inherited from print literacy continue to
          encourage readers to disconnect the fictional narratives they read from their actual
          spatial environments, so design conceptions borrowed from navigational and location-based
          services limit the interactivity, responsiveness and spatial awareness of locative
          narratives.
        This situation is beginning to change, with locative works like InterUrban
          , URBAN ENCOUNTER
           and The Interpretive Engine for Various
            Places on Earth
           offering a narrative experience that taps into the dynamic,
          context-specific and communal sensibility enabled by new networked media. In the same
          spirit, we have developed StoryTrek, a prototype authoring and reading tool for locative
          hypernarrative that breaks out of the design specifications currently limiting
          site-specific narrative. Our system represents a departure from the waypoint and
            graffiti model of interaction offered by most locative and augmented reality
          applications. Such applications know where you are at any given moment, and can provide
          information about your immediate surroundings - the digital equivalent of a road sign or
          memorial plaque - but have no idea how you got there or where you might go next.
        Instead of linking geospatial points to static narrative segments, the StoryTrek
          authorware enables the creation of spatial stories that respond in real time to the vector
          of the user's physical movement and ever-changing geospatial context, providing narrative
          patterns matched on-the-fly to the user’s location, route and style of navigation. The
          authorware enables the creation of locative narratives, or storytreks, by
          layering story patterns (inspired by Mark Bernstein's structural 
            patterns of hypertext
            
          ) over Google maps, while the reading tool tracks the user's physical movement
          through these areas, matching her motion pattern with any number of relevant story
          patterns. Users navigate our system simply by walking through an urban or natural
          environment with a GPS-enabled mobile device in hand, while the story follows along,
          tacking and turning in response to the reader's unstructured motion. With conventional
          hypertext narratives, readers can to some extent direct the path of the story by choosing
          from a series of in-text hyperlinks, although numerous theorists have questioned the
          degree to which the reader is actually freed to choose his own path, rather than merely
          choosing from among multiple rails laid down by the author. StoryTrek frees readers from
          the confines of the link, setting them loose to follow any path in the world while the
          story tags alongside, transforming the act of linking into an even more eventful, agential
          and contextualized process.
        
          The StoryTrek Authorware.
          
          
        
        For our initial test implementation, Pippin Barr of the IT University of Copenhagen
          created Crisis 22, a suspense/horror narrative that focuses
          on a character's repeated experience of a traumatic event enacted through space, in homage
          to Michael Joyce's afternoon: a story
          . This surreal love story documents the inner turmoil and regrets
          of a solitary narrator as he wanders through a landscape that appears realistic and
          allegorical by turns. As you move forward through the streets, the system returns a
          present-tense narrative of walking through a city toward a rendezvous. Turning around and
          backtracking in this particular storytrek fills in the protagonist’s back-story, while
          turning away from a straight path yields digressive actions taking place around him.
          Pause, and the system knows that you are lingering, and triggers an interior monologue.
          Wherever you decide to go, the system presents a coherent but dynamically changing
          narrative cued to your relative location and movement. The narrative experience arises
          from the interactions of the story's internal logic with the reader's immediate physical
          environment and activity over time.
        
          Pippin Barr's Crisis 22.
          
          
        
        
          Crisis 22 was built atop a Google map of Carleton University
          in Ottawa, but its fictional and functional settings are ambiguous. Unlike other locative
          systems tied to specific geospatial coordinates, our system is designed to respond to
          narrative and navigational patterns, allowing stories produced and set in one particular
          location to be experienced in any given place the user happens to be. This unique
          locational layering feature allows specific locative narratives to be widely disseminated
          and experienced by users in a variety of spatial contexts, greatly enhancing the medium's
          mobility over place-bound approaches
            . It also multiplies the story's settings: the fictional
          setting of the story, the implied geophysical setting for which it was originally
          produced, and the specific user's physical context all interact to produce an entirely new
          kind of narrative spatiality. In her survey of the various uses of maps in digital
          narrative, Marie-Laure Ryan describes four different types of textual spaces upon which
          hypermedia literature relies: the space of the textual world; the spatial architecture of
          the text; the material space of the textual representation; and the spatial environments
          in which the texts actually reside, be they in libraries or in databases . These levels are not strictly hierarchical, and frequently overlap
          even in non-adaptive hypertext narratives. They can also be further subdivided: for
          instance, the space of the textual world combines the various spatial attributes of
          language with the conventions governing narrative chronotopes, while the material space of
          the textual representation comprises the spatial attributes of the interface along with
          the semiotics of iconography, typography, spatial layout and page design. In practice,
          StoryTrek foregrounds the interfaces and overlaps between all of these spatial levels,
          moving between questions of how space gets into narrative and how narrative gets back into
          space.
        StoryTrek has significant implications for the authoring and structuring of locative
          media, for the concept of the link, and for the worlding effects of
          digital narrative and games. The system repurposes readerly disorientation as the basis
          for a richly contextual experience, transcoding the navigational barriers of conventional
          hypertext (random jumps, drifting, backtracking, and so on) into a meaningful form of
          input. This sense of embodiment and agency at times enhances the user's experience of
          narrative immersion: after all, walking is a natural form of interactivity that tends not
          to interfere with the user's immersion in the story world to the degree that interacting
          with a mouse does. And yet, traveling with StoryTrek does not always make it easier to
          become lost in a fictional world, as when reading a novel on a train; on the contrary, our
          preliminary observations suggest that novel and unexpected effects occur as the user
            toggles her attention between the storyworld and the real world.
          Qualitative user tests reveal that when the represented space of the textual world
          corresponds closely to the actual spatial environment of the text, it sometimes functions
          as a welcome navigational aid that encourages narrative immersion and conventional
          transportation, while at other times proving highly disorienting and disruptive to the
          immersive experience. The system complicates and redefines spatial description, spatial
          deixis, focalization and identification, processes that are not fully understood even
          where printed narratives are concerned.
        StoryTrek constantly raises tensions between real and represented spaces; for instance,
          some users who wanted to emulate the spatial action of the story were prevented by busy
          road traffic or impassable physical terrain. These users reported real anxiety and
          frustration at this inability to enact the story bodily, one mark of the tension between
          habitually sedentary reading habits and the emergent performativity of locative media. Our
          system requires readers to abandon their decontextualized reading habits and develop new
          strategies for linking real and textual spaces. Catherine Emmott has shown that readers
          construct mental representation[s] of
          the spatio-temporal context[s] of
          narratives by combining general knowledge of the world, in the form of basic perceptual schema about how the world
            works, with text-derived
          knowledge . We have observed StoryTrek users drawing
          on perceptual cues of their immediate environment as a third source of knowledge about the
          story, using phenomenal data about the world around them to help fill the
            gaps in the fictional world. Users have playfully identified
          passers by with characters in the story, an imaginative repurposing of serendipitous
          encounters that Bull also documents among iPod users .
          We have witnessed StoryTrek users run away from invisible threats, join a group of
          children at play when instructed to do so by the text, and even dip a
          toe in the nearby river to engage with the story while testing how responsive the system
          is to her specific location and actions. These embodied performances add a new dimension
          to the act of narrative linking, and present an alternative to the aesthetic of
          fragmentation and montage characteristic of so many hypertext narratives.
        
          Sarah and Celine read Crisis 22.
          
          
        
        
          Celine tests the boundaries of StoryTrek.
          
          
        
      

        From Spatial Play to Spatial Politics
        This simple act of dipping one’s feet has far-reaching implications for digital
          narrative. According to Ryan, readers of conventional narratives tend to operate through
            the principle of minimal departure:
          except where explicitly told otherwise, readers will assume that that the fictional world
          closely resembles their own world — that the fictional sky is blue and that humans need to
          eat and breathe . StoryTrek readers tend to follow a different
          principle, attempting to forge unusually close links between the real and fictional
          worlds, yet without necessarily leading to either immersion or the one-to-one mapping
          characteristic of conventional realism. Instead, meaning is created through the reader’s
          self-conscious linking of different layers of space and context. If conventional
          transportation allows readers to leave their 
            public self-consciousness behind
            
          , then storytreks encourage them to enact their experiences of the narrative world
          publicly and self-consciously. In our user tests so far, readers have gone out of their
          way to create interpretive links between the text and the real world and to perform them
          publicly, binding their reading experiences to those of a larger community of users. Green
          et al. assume that readers require a strict boundary between the real and represented
          worlds in order to be transported, noting that where situational factors affect narrative
          transportation at all, they primarily do so in negative ways. Real-world distractions can
          call a reader back to the real world, just as negative environmental factors may encourage
          a reader to escape to a fictional world . Green et
          al. project that new media could enhance transportation through interactivity, but only by
          allowing users to easily leave their
              physical and psychological realities behind and become fully immersed as an active
              participant in the narrative of an alternate, virtual
              reality
            . However, our experience with StoryTrek
          shows how real-world factors might well produce an enhanced form of transportation that
          allows readers to keep one foot in the real world (if not always in the river).
        Janet Murray has argued that in artistic representations, [t]here is a discomfort in not knowing the limits of the
            illusion, and that the experience of immersion in a fictional world is maximized
          by the combination of tremendous immediacy with
            a clearly demarcated border, the digital equivalent of the theater's fourth wall that 
            will allow us to surrender to the enticements
              of the virtual environment
            
          . StoryTrek denies such surrender to an immersive aesthetic by constantly
          encouraging users to cross the border between the real and represented setting, turning
          the discomfort of porous borders into a source of transgressive pleasure. These
          potentially disruptive effects raise several key design issues surrounding the spatial
          experience of hypertext narrative, including user (dis)orientation, navigational aids, and
          the relationship between cognitive, textual and virtual maps; at the same time, they can
          encourage the development of critical perspectives regarding the user's spatial situation
          within a global context. Whitson et al. have described the shift by some videogame
          producers away from the traditionally immersive first-person shooter perspective (which is
          closer to the experience of literary transportation than some dare to admit) . In order to encourage social gaming,
            neo-immersive games like those produced for the Wii
          use a combination of gestural computing and group play to emphasize the embodied nature
          and social context of digital gaming. Such games encourage users to divide their attention
          between immersion in the represented game world and interactivity with other players in
          the real world in a way that enriches both experiences and enables critical
          self-reflection. StoryTrek brings this neo-immersive aesthetic to literary narrative,
          using locative awareness to disrupt the reader's immersion in the story and enable a newly
          situated critical awareness.
        The urge to transform one's decontextualized reading into a publically performed
          interpretation suggests the storytrek's potential as a political and utopian art form,
          which ultimately may have less to do with the unfolding of time than a creative
          interaction with space. From its very inception, the utopian genre was less a blueprint
          for the perfect society than a rhetorical structure or toolkit for playing with and
          reconfiguring social space. As Louis Marin has famously shown, Thomas More's minutely detailed description . . . of the [Utopian]
            city's space reveals many 
            blind spots and empty spaces . . . . the
              political places [of Renaissance society] that have been erased from the map
            
          . Utopia describes a shifting, indeterminate space in
          which several competing residual social structures (monasticism, feudalism, communism)
          overlap, effectively cancelling out or neutralizing one another, and
          thereby clearing a space for new social formations that could not yet be fully articulated
          in More's day.
        StoryTrek enables a similar utopian spatial play by permitting the
          reader to participate in an ergodic point-by-point negation or canceling of her lived social context , thus opening up real space to imaginary alternatives. Whereas
          printed utopias achieve such spatial play discursively and rhetorically, StoryTrek invites
          the user to enact utopian negations through a 
            procedural rhetoric
            
           that takes full-body motion as input. Readers stroll, run, leap and zigzag across
          their physical terrain, activating fictional worlds through their mobile devices. As is
          characteristic of utopian spatial play in general, these fictional worlds do not replace
          the real world outright with fully formed utopian alternatives, but rather engage reality
          in a dialectic, neutralizing it point-by-point to prepare the ground on which new social
          configurations might emerge. At the same time, StoryTrek neutralizes the sedentary reading
          practices that continue to structure the experience of digital literature: the labour of
          reading can no longer be described as a purely leisurely activity, but instead becomes a
          profoundly social act in which the reader actively and publicly forms interpretive links
          between her fictional and actual contexts.
        While the StoryTrek authorware does not dictate the themes or content of the spatial
          narratives that users create, its emphasis on mapping and mobility encourages critical
          reflection on socio-cultural borders, the politics of space and travel, uneven global
          development, and the migration of populations, or what David Harvey calls the utopian
            spaces of hope that mediate between
          individual bodies, collective identities and global processes . We are currently hoping to exploit the system's potential for location-aware
          utopian spatial play through several ongoing projects that open rifts in space within
          which to imagine social alternatives. One such initiative involves the creation of an
            archival atlas of New World utopias that maps historical fictions,
          photos, plans, blueprints and visionary descriptions of urban spaces onto actual
          geospatial sites. By turning national archives inside-out, liberating these forgotten and
          dispersed literary traces from their storage boxes, we hope to infuse geographical sites
          with historical context - in particular, the indigenous, immigrant, environmental, and
          other minor histories effaced by imperialism and the project of
          modernity. We are using the city streets themselves as a dialectical
            interface that layers residual social structures onto emergent configurations,
          and links historical images and accounts of social migration, upheaval and urban renewal
          to more recent cartographies of uprise. If locative media 
            involve persistent tensions between pasts,
              presents, and futures that make certain identities and objectives possible or
              probable, and others impossible or improbable
            
          , then they also present the opportunity to contour those possibilities toward
          social progress.
        Other storytreks likewise engage the user in ludic explorations of emplaced social
          alternatives. Valerie Bherer, Cindy Ma and Elise Vist used StoryTrek to create Isolation U., an Alternate Reality Game in which you play a
          zombified undergrad at a post-apocalyptic campus, trying to survive the fast-spreading
          conformity virus. The game bears some similarities with ZombieTruth.com and Zwatch.org,
          collaborative alternate reality games that write an imaginary zombie virus (H1Z1) into the
          fabric of official government pandemic websites, in a viral exploit that piggybacks an
          alternate reality onto actual biopolitical databases. However, the embodied and locative
          dimensions of Isolation U. set it apart: the game uses
          motion-awareness to enact a physical quest that explores ideas of individual and
          collective agency through the symbolic landscape of the campus. As the user explores the
          campus, a story unfolds through the StoryTrek reader from the perspective of a newly
          arrived student who only wants to meet people and fit in. This fictional avatar's
          descriptions of the near-future campus, in which a private corporation has replaced all
          vestiges of traditional academic governance structures, are mapped onto the user's own
          perceptions of the actual campus. Walking into particular areas of campus will activate
          fictional advertisements for commercial products and services, or trigger encounters with
          corporate executives and groups of students happily consuming the recommended commodities;
          exploring other areas will lead to run-ins with student radicals, non-player characters
          who will try to convince your avatar that the university is brainwashing students through
          a zombie virus that compels conformity in purchasing habits. Although based on the history
          and geography of our own university, the game will work anywhere with functional GPS
          access, encouraging users to recreate the actual campus through spatial play, replacing
          the familiar spaces in which they live and work with contextualized, hypothetical and
          experiential alternatives . Isolation
            U. thus forces reflection on how private interests are colonizing public spaces
          of learning by targeting students at the very sites in which they work and play. At the
          same time, the game's kinetic algorithms allow users to repurpose the socio-technical
          networks through which capitalism and locative media alike operate, and to
            win actual geophysical space back from corporate sponsors in order
          to unlock the school’s mystery.
        
          Salaam Copenhagen, currently in development by Rilla Khaled
          and Pippin Barr, is based in the daily experience of immigrants living in Nørrebro, the
          largest Muslim quarter of Copenhagen. It integrates a number of narrative strands, each
          presenting the perspective of a particular Muslim character or avatar associated with a
          certain street. The user's varying movements through the streets yield different
          storylines that reflect the character's interactions and struggles with mainstream Danish
          culture, some positive, others less so. The narrative's primary goal is to help young
          Danish users identify with and understand the specific challenges faced by the local
          Muslim population, in the most embodied way possible . We
          anticipate that the added agency afforded by the StoryTrek interface will make the social
          barriers that face the user's avatars all the more poignant. We are also planning to test
          this storytrek with users in other cities far removed from its fictional setting, to see
          how well its intercultural insights travel to other socio-political contexts.
        These narratives all demonstrate how we might give narrative direction to locative media
          and location-based services, instead of just taking directions from them. Galloway argues
          that we need to look squarely at the present of locative media in order to assess how
          predictions about its future can create alliances and obligations that realize certain paths of development while
          precluding other visions . StoryTrek narratives
          allow readers to apprehend their location within cultural, political and technical
          alliances, and to forge pathways toward new kinds of community. While it is unlikely that
          such locative narratives will soon replace eBooks and audio books or alter
          decontextualized reading practices, they do point the way out of the locative's emphasis
          on the here-and-now, and toward more embodied, dynamic, collective and multiply
          contextualized applications.
      

        Acknowledgements
        I am indebted to the StoryTrek design team, Pippin Barr, Robert Biddle, Chris Eaket and
          Rilla Khaled, as well as the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for
          their generous support of our research.
      
