Title:  Edition, Project, Database, Archive, Thematic Research Collection: What's in a
               Name?
Volume:  003
Issue:  3
Date:  29 September 2009
Abstract:  
            What are the implications of the terms we use to describe large-scale text-based
               electronic scholarship, especially undertakings that share some of the ambitions and
               methods of the traditional multi-volume scholarly edition? And how do the conceptions
               inherent in these choices of language frame and perhaps limit what we attempt? How do
               terms such as edition, project, database, archive, and thematic research collection
               relate to the past, present, and future of textual studies? Kenneth M. Price
               considers how current terms describing digital scholarship both clarify and obscure
               our collective enterprise. Price argues that the terms we use have more than
               expressive importance. The shorthand we invoke when explaining our work to others
               shapes how we conceive of and also how we position digital scholarship. 
         
Full Body Text: 
Edition, Project, Database, Archive, Thematic Research Collection: What's in a
            Name?
What are the implications of the terms we use to describe large-scale text-based
            electronic scholarship, especially undertakings that share some of the ambitions and
            methods of the traditional multi-volume scholarly edition? What genre or genres are we
            now working in? And how do the conceptions inherent in these choices of language frame
            and perhaps limit what we attempt? How do terms such as edition,
               project, database, archive, and thematic
               research collection relate to the past, present, and future of textual
            studies? Drawing on a range of resources, including the Walt
               Whitman Archive, I consider how current terms describing digital scholarship
            both clarify and obscure our collective enterprise. In addition, I will use the final
            term, thematic research collection, to discuss yet-to-be-developed parts of
            the Whitman Archive dealing with place-based cultural
            analysis and translation studies as a way to illustrate the expansive possibilities of
            this new model of scholarship.
Digital textual studies seem to me inadequately described by the terms now available.
               Project is amorphous; archive and edition are
            heavy with associations carried over from print culture; database is both
            too limiting and too misleading in its connotations; and digital thematic research
               collection lacks a memorable ring and pithiness. The terms we use have more
            than expressive importance. The shorthand we invoke when explaining our work to others
            shapes how we conceive of and also how we position digital scholarship. We need a new
            term that is vivid enough to be memorable, elastic enough to cover a class of like
            things, and yet restrictive enough to allow us to include some scholarly undertakings
            and not others. Ordinary readers and academics alike rely heavily on the work of
            editors, yet the standing of editors in the academy has for decades been shaky at best.
            For many people, electronic work is even more dubious: what relatively short history it
            has is marked by distrust, denigration, and dismissal. We all know the charges, however
            distorted they may be: digital work is ephemeral, unvetted, chaotic, and unreliable.
            When suspicion of the value of editing combines with suspicion of the new medium, we
            have a hazardous mix brewing. There is a danger that if humanities scholars do not
            undertake the key work of textual transmission, this work will be done by librarians and
            systems engineers — that is, it will be done by people with less specialized knowledge
            of the content. In the fraught circumstances of the academy, driven by a prestige
            economy, humanities scholars are well advised to be highly self-conscious about what we
            do and how we describe it.

            Edition
            What do we mean when we use the term edition? Even among print editions,
               there are a number of variations: selected editions, reader’s editions, and some
               boldly claiming to be authoritative or definitive editions. The descriptive word
                  scholarly has been applied to numerous approaches: authorial or social,
               critical or documentary, genetic, eclectic, or best text . Successful scholarly editions yield a text established on explicitly stated
               principles by a person or a group with specialized knowledge about textual
               scholarship and the writer or writers involved. What makes the edition scholarly, of
               course, is the rigor with which the text is reproduced or altered and the expertise
               deployed in the offering of suitable introductions, notes, and textual apparatus.
            For those of us who work on prominent figures who have received previous treatment,
               our own textual work intervenes in an ongoing editorial tradition. A fundamental and
               often vexingly difficult question is, what should go in an edition? Like most digital
               editing endeavors, the Walt Whitman Archive must proceed
               with an awareness of the print past — in our case, especially of two significant
               attempts to present Whitman in scholarly editions: The Complete
                  Writings of Walt Whitman (G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1902) and The Collected Writings of Walt Whitman (New York University
               Press, Peter Lang, and the University of Iowa Press, 1961-2004). This awareness
               produces competing impulses: we want to benefit from and respond to past work, but we
               also want to avoid constraints on thought and action that were a result of
               print-based limitations. As editors, we acknowledge the ways of knowing that are
               enabled by our predecessors — they are the cultural history we inherit — but our job
               is also to extend their efforts and to produce new ways of knowing that are
               responsive to cultural, critical, and technological changes (as well as the discovery
               of documents and the development of new biographical insights) that have happened in
               the interim.
             The language of the Walt Whitman Archive’s first grant
               application to the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), drafted in 1999,
               shows how we were thinking of our digital work as in dialogue with the print past. We
               wrote, 
                  Our goal has been to build upon the
                     strengths of the Collected Writings edition, most
                     volumes of which were supported by grants from the National Endowment for the
                     Humanities. The amount of Whitman's work is so huge that no two scholars could
                     hope to edit it effectively in a lifetime — fourteen scholars spent the better
                     parts of their careers editing the materials that now make up the Collected Writings. But we do believe that
                     developments in electronic scholarship have made it possible to enhance and
                     supplement the Collected Writings by editing the
                     materials that have not yet been included (and adding the materials that have
                     come to light since the Collected Writings volumes
                     were issued) and by digitizing and encoding the Collected
                        Writings so that these disparate volumes — which often arrange
                     material in confusing and contradictory ways — can function seamlessly and so
                     that Whitman's materials can be presented effectively in any number of new
                     configurations: by genre, by date, by keyword, by subject. The electronic
                     environment can also allow us to make available not just printed transcriptions
                     of Whitman's manuscripts, letters, and books, but to deliver actual facsimile
                     images of the original documents.
                  
               
            
            It would be fair to acknowledge that Ed Folsom, co-director of the Whitman Archive, and I have had evolving views of the
               relationship between our undertaking and its most recent print predecessor, the
                  Collected Writings of Walt Whitman. Our gradually
               shifting views have been shaped in part by discussions with publishers. At various
               times, we considered entering into agreements with two publishers — Primary Source
               Media and the University of Virginia Press — and in fact reached late stages of
               contract negotiations with each of them. Initially, we reasoned that if a publisher
               could secure the permissions for us to use the copyrighted material in the twenty-two
               volumes of the Collected Writings published by New York
               University Press, a significant amount of work, some of it meticulously done, could
               be preserved and extended.After New York University Press published twenty-two
                  volumes of The Collected Writings of Walt Whitman,
                  the publishing house of Peter Lang published two additional volumes of Whitman’s
                  journalism, and the University of Iowa Press published a single supplemental
                  volume of Whitman’s correspondence. Of course this line of thinking raised
               a key issue: if a new publisher had to pay for the permissions, the site, or some
               significant part of it, would need to be commercial in order to recover these and
               other costs, and perhaps make a profit as well. We were not absolute purists
               committed always to building a completely free site. In fact, there were extended
               periods when we were convinced that such an approach would not be possible for a poet
               like Whitman who left so much debris everywhere. We thought that editing such chaos
               would demand the combined resources and know-how of the scholarly, library and
               archival, and publishing communities. Gay Wilson Allen, a general editor of the
                  Collected Writings, commented about editing Whitman, 
                  Sometimes his exhausted editors almost
                     wish that he had had two or three good house fires, and considering the houses
                     he lived in, it is also astonishing that he did not
                  
               .
            For us, then, a key question emerged: would we conceive of the Whitman Archive primarily as being the remediation of the Collected Writings? We recognized that our relationship to
               the Collected Writings is problematic: we have a
               half-century of valuable editorial work collected there, but the limits of a print
               format make this edition a trial to use. The Collected
                  Writings has been the standard edition, the edition cited by American
               literary scholarship over the past few decades, but much of the work needs to be done
               again and the presentation re-conceptualized. We struggled to come to terms with a
               giant from the print past. And yet this monumental edition was both enormous and
               characterized by some inexplicable omissions, most notably Whitman's revelatory
               poetry manuscripts. As our initial grant application pointed out, 
                  [W]e have Whitman's laundry lists in
                     print; we have the business cards of his sidewalk repairman in print, but we
                     don't have the manuscripts of Song of Myself in
                     print... His poetry manuscripts and periodical publications reveal, among other
                     surprising things, a Whitman who devoted extraordinary time and care to the
                     creation of a poetry that appeared to be quick and spontaneous; his manuscripts
                     expose an artist whose casual, loafing persona was in fact the result of
                     intensive and obsessive artistic labor.
                  
               
            
            In retrospect, it is clear that we have responded to the Collected Writings not by digitizing and encoding it but by
               prioritizing work on material not included there: photographs, bibliography, full
               texts of various editions of Leaves of Grass, archival
               guides to manuscripts, transcriptions of manuscripts, contemporary reviews of
               Whitman’s writings, and so on. If we were the first editors of Whitman, this order of
               development for an online resource would have been peculiar. Certainly some of
               Whitman’s prose, Democratic Vistas or Specimen Days, for example, or his correspondence might rank
               ahead of some of these items in most people's sequencing list. But of course we do
               work within a historical context, and what has seemed most pressing (and perhaps most
               fundable) have been those things altogether neglected or poorly treated by the Collected Writings.
            Sometimes we learn to be thankful for our failures, and I am certainly grateful now
               that our negotiations with publishers always went bust. I think — because of a recent
               NEH challenge grant to be discussed later — that the Whitman
                  Archive is in an unusual position: we now have a team of people and the
               resources in place so that, with reasonable luck, we ought to be able to achieve a
               more expansive Whitman Archive than the already quite
               extensive site, and to keep it freely available. There are of course examples of
               other large, not to say gargantuan, free sites. But we should not underestimate the
               challenges attendant on making vast amounts of material freely available since
                  free means no cost to the end user, not the creators.
            It is reasonable to wonder why Whitman needs to be edited if there have been two
               previous scholarly editions. And it is reasonable to acknowledge, in response,
               motivations that have nothing to do with the electronic medium specifically.
               Editorial work is one way to engage in historical criticism and to help bring the
               past into the present so it may live in the future. Although the shelf life of a
               scholarly edition far exceeds that of a monograph, scholarly editions begun half a
               century ago for Whitman in one case, or a century ago in the other, now seem
               inadequate. Their approaches require rethinking, not to mention the need to add
               material and convey new discoveries. Editions of modern writers are almost always
               selective. Still, a selection ought to include the most important items. If asked to
               pick Whitman's most important single text, many would name the first publication of
                  Leaves of Grass (1855). Here Whitman was at his
               boldest and most experimental, and the book has elicited some memorable reactions
               over the past 150-plus years: Ralph Waldo Emerson found it to be 
                  the most extraordinary piece of wit and
                     wisdom that America has yet contributed
                  
               . William Carlos Williams called the first Leaves
               
                  a book as important as we are likely to
                     see in the next thousand years
                  Williams, quoted in Hindus 1955, 3
               . Clearly, this is a highly significant book. And we might expect the 1855
                  Leaves to be the highlight of an edition of Whitman's
               writings. Strangely enough, neither The Collected Writings of
                  Walt Whitman nor the earlier Complete Writings of
                  Walt Whitman bothered to include it.
            How do we explain this omission? To a large extent, this odd result stems from
               twentieth-century editorial practices for establishing authoritative or definitive
               texts that encouraged the selection of a single text. The economics of print
               publishing — combined with the dominant editorial theories of the mid
               twentieth-century — made the so-called deathbed edition of Leaves of Grass the one most commonly featured in various commercial and
               scholarly editions. That final authorized printing of Whitman’s book is in fact
               presented twice in the New York University Press edition: it serves as the basis of
               both the Comprehensive Reader's Edition and the Leaves of
                  Grass Variorum. The deathbed edition is remarkable, but it could not be
               described as Whitman's most daring, most experimental, or even most coherent
               volume.
            Print editions of Whitman tended to falter when dealing with multiplicity, whether of
               versions or of authorship. Whitman is well known as the writer who couldn't stop
               writing, revising, and reissuing Leaves of Grass (a book
               that appeared in six radically distinct American editions in his lifetime). Less well
               known is Whitman's involvement in collaborative enterprises. In fact, when we think
               of the great collaborators in literary history, Whitman hardly jumps to mind.
               Instead, we remember that Whitman was so self-reliant that for the first edition he
               more or less did everything: wrote the poetry, designed the book, set some of the
               type, distributed the book, and anonymously reviewed it. He appears to be dead set
               against even the largely invisible and ordinarily neglected forms of social
               authorship, a poet acting out the role of the solitary singer made famous in Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking. Yet this poem also
               dramatizes collaboration, with one set of voices prompting another, bird song and
               human song, a single trill and the thousand responsive chords from a thousand
               different singers to follow.
            Arguably the medium of print itself encouraged earlier editors to take a restricted
               view that often remained blind to the social aspects of textual production. It is
               easier, frankly, to exclude contributions made by book designers, copyeditors,
               typesetters, and others. Yet if we think longer and harder about Whitman's own
               career, the extent of his collaboration — almost entirely ignored by The Collected Writings of Walt Whitman — is striking.
               Whitman collaborated with typesetters, designers, and proofreaders, as he readily
                  acknowledged,After the publication of the 1881-1882 Leaves of Grass, Whitman remarked, 
                     All this is not only my obligation
                        to Henry Clark, but in some sort to all proof-readers everywhere, as sort of
                        a tribute to a class of men, seldom mentioned, but to whom all the hundreds
                        of writers, and all the millions of readers, are unspeakably indebted. More
                        than one literary reputation, if not made is certainly saved by no less a
                        person than a good proof-reader. The public that sees these neat and
                        consecutive, fair-printed books on the centre-tables, little knows the mass
                        of chaos, bad spelling and grammar, frightful (corrected) excesses or balks,
                        and frequent masses of illegibility and tautology of which they have been
                        extricated
                     
                  
                and also in his journalism, both as editor and writer; in his extensive
               though anonymous contributions to the early Whitman biographies by R. M. Bucke and
               John Burroughs; in heretofore uncollected interviews (now being edited by Brett
               Barney); in his extensive conversations with Horace Traubel — a 5,000 page trove of
               information. In fact, his correspondence itself is fundamentally a collaborative
               undertaking involving (ordinarily) two-way engagements, though the strong authorial
               bias of the Collected Writings is clear in their
               featuring of just Whitman's outgoing correspondence.
         

            Project
            
               Project is a bigger, baggier term than edition and is far less specific
               in what it suggests about the type of work being undertaken. Project can
               describe everything from fixing a broken window on the back of a house to the Human
               Genome Project. In a literary context, editions and other results tend
               to emerge out of projects, but what constitutes the project
               is also the entirety of the undertaking: space, personnel, atmosphere, and the
               totality of all efforts. An edition might result from a project, without
               being the project, which includes all of the work conducted and records
               produced. The Whitman Archive, when regarded as a
               project, encompasses the compiled email discussion list that fitfully records the
               building of the Archive and the thinking that has gone
               into it. The documentation of a project, in our case, includes the behind-the-scenes
               Works-in-Progress page, with its assortment of information, including grant
               proposals, minutes from Whitman planning meetings over the years, a manuscript
               tracking database, an image warehouse, and project-related humor. 
            
               Project is not a favored word in every context. When I sent drafts of a
                  We the People challenge grant application to NEH
               program officers, I was struck by how forcefully they discouraged me from the using
               the word project, at least in the context of that competition. Their
               reasoning was that challenge grants were intended to fund permanent entities, unlike
               a project which they conceived of as having a finite temporal life. For
               me, Whitman Project and 
                  Whitman Archive
                were more or less interchangeable terms. I had to make a real effort to
               purge the document of all references to project. It was a neutral term
               to me: project was so natural as to be almost invisible in the drafts
               and certainly did not raise a red flag.
            This story raises a larger issue: what happens when an undertaking becomes not just
               rhetorically but practically open-ended, when it has the good fortune or obligation
               to be an ongoing concern? We were successful with our challenge grant application,
               and we are now well along in building a $2 million permanent endowment for the Whitman Archive. Thanks to this remarkable turn of events,
               the Whitman Archive can now plan on an ongoing annual
               budget comparable to what one might expect annually from a major two- or three-year
               grant from a federal agency or foundation. And, remarkably, in this case, there is no
               end date to that support.
            For the 2007 Digital Humanities conference at the University of Illinois,
               Urbana-Champaign, Matt Kirschenbaum coordinated a panel called Done. Finished Projects in the Digital Humanities. He asked, How do we
                  decide when we're done? What does it mean to finish something? How does the
                     open ended nature of the medium (a phrase we all pay lip service to)
                  jibe with the reality of funding, deadlines, and deliverables? What can we learn
                  from finished projects, both successful and unsuccessful? For that matter, how do
                  we define success and failure? Are we the ones who ought to be defining it?
                  If not, who? These are good questions, and at the Whitman
                  Archive we find ourselves concerned with them even as we face different
               considerations as well. What happens when work plans realistically could
               continue over generations? What is the best way to plan for that type of
                  future?Issues involving long-term preservation come to mind, of course. A
                  simple curation is not viable. That is, we cannot hand over to a library the
                  present-day Whitman Archive and expect people fifty
                  years from now to find its interface and technical underpinnings particularly easy
                  to use. This is in sharp contrast to a book published fifty years ago and
                  deposited in a library. For digital scholarship, we cannot foresee how
                  maintenance, updates, and migration will work in the future. A theoretical
               possibility of digital scholarship — the indefinite expansibility — has become a
               lived reality in our case. We are only now absorbing the meaning of this grant, but
               one implication is that it provides us with the license, perhaps even the charge, to
               be as bold and ambitious as our talents and energies allow.
         

            Database
            How adequate is the term database for describing the type of large scale
               electronic projects we have been considering? Throughout this essay, I have used the
                  Walt Whitman Archive as a testing point and
               illustrative example. To discuss the Whitman Archive in
               terms of database is especially timely now because PMLA
               recently featured an article about the Walt Whitman
                  Archive by Ed Folsom, Database as Genre: The Epic
                  Transformation of Archives, and included a handful of responses (along
               with Folsom’s response to the responses). The ensuing discussion made clear that
               people understand the term database in a variety of ways and attach
               different connotations to the word. These differences arise mainly from a distinction
               between 1) a strict definition of database — as a technical term in an
               electronic context database refers primarily to a collection of structured data that
               is managed by a database management system, most commonly based on a relational
               model; and 2) a looser use of database that employs the term on a more
               metaphorical level.
            As the PMLA discussion of the Whitman Archive indicates, database can be a suggestive
               metaphor because it points to the re-configurable quality of our material (and that
               of similar sites). The term also conveys simultaneously finished and
                  unfinished qualities; while a project can be logically thought
               of as done or not yet done, we usually conceive of a database as usable
               as soon as it begins to exist, and we take as a given that the data will continue to
               proliferate, potentially indefinitely. The Whitman
                  Archive resembles a database in that its content is discrete computer
               files that function atomistically: as functional units within a computing system each
               item is just as important as every other item.
            If the Walt Whitman Archive resembles a database
               (without meeting the specifications of a technical or a literal definition), so, too,
               does Whitman’s own process of composition. As Folsom notes, 
                  Whitman formed entire lines as they
                     would eventually appear in print, but then he treated each line like a separate
                     data entry, a unit available to him for endless reordering, as if his lines of
                     poetry were portable and interchangeable, could be shuffled and almost randomly
                     scattered to create different but remarkably similar poems
                  
               . At times, it almost seems as if Whitman were anticipating Raymond Queneau’s
                  
                  Cent Mille Milliards de Poèmes
                [One Hundred Thousand Billion Poems], a fascinating book in which the pages
               are cut horizontally so that each verse in each sonnet of the collection can be
               turned separately and all combinations of choices are poetically grammatical.
               (Queneau estimated that a reader would have to spend two hundred million years,
               working twenty-four hours a day, to read every combination.
                  
                     
                        C'est somme toute une sorte de machine à fabriquer
                           des poèmes, mais en nombre limité; il est vrai que ce nombre, quoique
                           limité, fournit de la lecture pour près de deux cents millions d'années
                           (en lisant vingt-quatre heures sur vingt-quatre)
                     
                     
                  
               ) Whitman’s own cutting and pasting of lines, and his rearranging of poems to
               make other poems is not this extreme — nor is it as extreme as Samuel Beckett's
               experiments in Lessness
               Beckett's short story Lessness was first published
                  in French as Sans. In his enigmatic story Beckett
                  experimented with random ordering of sentences in the making of fiction. —
               though there is some resemblance to both. Finally, though, what may appear random
               ordering in Whitman is best understood as restless experimentation, a combinatory and
               recombinatory poetics, guided by Whitman’s recurrent drive to improve the
               effectiveness of his poems. Here, for those willing to use the term
                  database metaphorically and to recognize non-electronic forms of
               databases, we can think of database as a key tool for Whitman himself: his storehouse
               of poetic lines, in both manuscript and print, was his working database for future
               compositions, one that he had always only partial access to because of the scattering
               of his documents but that nonetheless served as a means of composition.
            If we turn to more literal uses of the word database and think about the Whitman Archive, we see that it is a complex composite
               structure that includes numerous databases and XML files. Folsom’s description of the
                  Whitman Archive as a huge database is illuminating when taken
               metaphorically, though it is less helpful when taken literally, because the entirety
               of the Whitman Archive is not a single database any more
               than it is, as Jerome McGann asserts, merely XML files plus XSLT. In fact, the Walt Whitman Archive is comprised of numerous databases
               (some public and some not) along with many XML files including TEI, EAD, and XHTML
                  files.In a Reply to those who commented on his
                  essay, Folsom observed that the Whitman Archive is in
                  fact several databases.
                McGann goes on to claim that the XML and XSLT work together to 
                  allow users to access and — through an
                     X-query-based search engine — manipulate The Walt Whitman
                        Archive in the ways that Folsom rightly celebrates
                  
               . Ironically, though, in the course of denying the applicability of
                  database as a term suitable to the Whitman
                  Archive, McGann overlooks that our search engine is entirely dependent on
               translating the XML files into database form. At a more general level, McGann is
               perceptive in noting that any database represents an initial interpretation of the
               material. A database is not an undifferentiated sea of information out of which
               structure emerges. Argument is always there from the beginning in how those
               constructing a database choose to categorize information — the initial understanding
               of the materials governs how more fine-grained views will appear because of the way
               the objects of attention are shaped by divisions and subdivisions within the
               database. The process of database creation is not neutral, nor should it be.
         

            Archives and Digital Thematic Research Collections
            Having discussed edition, project, and
                  database separately, I now turn to consider the final two terms
               together, archive and digital thematic research collection.
               In the past, an archive has referred to a collection of material objects rather than
               digital surrogates. This type of archive may be described in finding aids but its
               materials are rarely edited and annotated as a whole. In a digital environment,
                  archive has gradually come to mean a purposeful collection of
               surrogates. As we know, meanings change over time, and archive in a
               digital context has come to suggest something that blends features of editing and
               archiving. To meld features of both — to have the care of treatment and annotation of
               an edition and the inclusiveness of an archive — is one of the tendencies of recent
               work in electronic editing. One such project, the William Blake
                  Archive, was awarded a prize from the Modern Language Association recently
               as a distinguished scholarly edition.It should be noted that my view of
                     archive differs here from that of some commentators. Peter
                  Shillingsburg, for example, remarks that 
                     the level of critical
                        intervention is miniscule in the electronic archive
                     
                  
               
            
            Digital archives are often notable for their depth and breadth of coverage of
               whatever the stated thematic interest is. Such scope has not been common in editing.
               Indeed it is possible to see a tension in the very term collected
                  edition because collecting and winnowing are two very different activities.
               Thomas Wentworth Higginson, in a review of the Complete Writings
                  of Walt Whitman, might have been commenting on the Whitman Archive when he wrote, 
                  [T]he present editors do not shrink
                     from inserting not only the details of every change, but even the unprinted
                     variations which have hitherto existed in manuscript only
                  
               . Of course, the more inclusive an edition becomes the more it may be dominated
               by the surviving discarded
               writings, especially for writers who kept many documents . Some feel that we do violence to the wishes of writers when we make
               their second-rate material available to the public, while others celebrate what they
               believe is made possible by inclusive editions: a new, deepened, and enriched sense
               of the artist’s process of composition, preoccupations, and achievements. Ultimately,
               the whole question of what is in keeping with the wishes of a writer is beside the
               point. We do not edit for writers themselves but for our own purposes as scholars and
               readers.
            Peter Shillingsburg expresses skepticism about the advantage of the archival
               approach: 
                  The computer makes possible, we
                     are told, the juxtaposition of all the relevant texts in their linguistic and
                     bibliographic variant forms. Thus a library of electronic texts, linked to
                     explanations and parallels and histories, becomes accessible to a richly
                     endowed posterity. To the extent that such archives contain accurate
                     transcriptions, high resolution reproductions, precise and reliable guides to
                     the provenance and significance of their contents, and the extent to which they
                     are comprehensive, to that extent they are definitive — until the next
                     generation of critics and scholars with new interests notices some other aspect
                     of texts that scholarly editors of the past (by then that will be us) took for
                     granted and ignored. But already, information overload has set in. The
                     comprehensiveness of the electronic archive threatens to create a salt,
                     estranging sea of information, separating the archive user from insights into
                     the critical significance of textual histories. 
                  
                Shillingsburg focuses on the limits of a form still being developed as opposed
               to the potential of that form. Nothing in the archive form intrinsically requires it
               to be estranging or
               alienating, of course. An electronic archive can be as welcoming as fresh water and
               as rewarding as the wit of its creators can make it. Having a lot of information is
               not inherently more estranging than having less information. Nothing guarantees the
               effectiveness of selective treatment accompanied by textual histories, and
               nothing guarantees effectiveness of more comprehensive treatment accompanied by
               textual histories. In each case, everything depends on the quality of the editorial
               work. Digital and print scholarship are equally embedded in history, and both share a
               vulnerability to aging.
            Another term that is more or less synonymous with electronic archive is
                  digital thematic research collection.In a series of talks in
                  the 1990s John Unsworth and Daniel Pitti began applying the term thematic
                     research collection to the type of scholarship under discussion in this
                  paper. Some prefer this term because it may avoid some of the misleading
               connotations of archive — ordinarily people assume that materials in a
               traditional print-based archive are unedited.Recent work in archival theory by
                  Heather MacNeill, Elizabeth Yakel, and Michelle Light and Tom Hyry, emphasizes the
                  non-neutral nature of archives themselves and urges the adoption of language such
                  as archival representation to highlight the mediating role of
                  archivists as they order, interpret, and develop information architectures within
                  socially constructed practice. Carole Palmer writes about thematic
                  research collections, 
                  Collections of all kinds can be
                     open-ended, in that they have the potential to grow and change depending on
                     commitment of resources from collectors. Most thematic collections are not
                     static. Scholars add to and improve the content, and work on any given
                     collection could continue over generations. Moreover, individual items in a
                     collection can also evolve because of the inherent flexibility (and
                     vulnerability) of born digital and transcribed documents. The dynamic
                     nature of collections raises critical questions about how they will be
                     maintained and preserved as they evolve over time.
                  
               
               Archive is a self-designated term, one adopted by the creators of
               resources. In contrast, digital thematic research collection is a term
               used by people describing the work created.
            
               Thematic research collection may be the most accurate term for what many
               of us are attempting, but it has not gained currency because it is neither pithy nor
               memorable. Carole L. Palmer notes that a digital thematic research
                  collection is the closest thing to the laboratory that we have in the
               humanities — the place where necessary research materials are amassed. I have argued
               elsewhere that in a 
                  digital context, the edition is
                     only a piece of the archive, and, in contrast to print, editions,
                        resources, and tools can be interdependent rather than
                     independent
                  
               .
            Does collecting — the emphasis in Palmer's description — qualify as research, as a
               scholarly genre? A digital thematic research collection possesses the virtues of a
               traditional scholarly edition while containing much more. We may nonetheless wonder
               about how helpful the term digital thematic research collection is to
               the uninitiated. Nothing in the term indicates editorial rigor and nothing points to
               the value added by scholarly introductions, annotations, and textual histories. The
               only thing that seems to separate it from a mass digitization project is the
                  thematic element. However, one can imagine a mass digitization project that
               is thematic and that lacks editorial supervision and intervention in the reader’s
               experience of the text. Can we find a better term that indicates this difference?
               Does digital thematic research collection communicate its meaning
               adequately?
            If literary scholars who are assembling electronic texts are becoming fundamentally
               or solely literary-encoders and literary-librarians, then, despite my
               own recognition of the inseparability of interpretation and encoding, I fear for the
               standing of their work when judged by faculty in humanities departments (Schreibman,
               as quoted in ). Without care and forceful
               practical examples and theoretical essays, the same prejudices and misunderstanding
               that drove editing and bibliography from the center to the periphery of literary
               studies will continue to prevail. We also need descriptions of digital thematic
               research collections that highlight the editorial work and other types of scholarly
               value that are added to the raw materials populating the collection. In many circles,
               editing — whether it is print-based or electronic — is regarded as pre-critical work.
               Some editorially related tasks are fairly routine and do not require scholarly
               expertise (the same is true of critical work as well). And yet others clearly do, and
               we need to find ways to clarify how historical knowledge, theoretical sophistication,
               and analytical strengths are necessary to the creation of a sound text or texts and
               accompanying scholarly apparatus in a successful edition.
            Some components of a digital thematic research collection or archive may stretch
               ordinary understandings of edition. Many thematic research collections
               or archives aim toward the ideal of being all-inclusive resources for the study of
               given topics. A good thematic research collection might begin with an edition
               conceived in inclusive terms. Digital thematic research collections go far beyond
               traditional editions in their presentation of many types of materials. They are often
               even more organic than print editions (despite their technological aspects) —
               that is, they grow, evolve over time, based very much on immediate circumstances. For
               the Walt Whitman Archive, new work on the Civil War is
               now underway because an expert on Abraham Lincoln at the University of
               Nebraska-Lincoln, Kenneth J. Winkle, and I perceived a scholarly need and are
               interested in collaborating on this undertaking. New work on translation — I will say
               more about both of these new endeavors later — developed because Matt Cohen, already
               associated with the Whitman Archive, was interested.
               Being published online but being simultaneously a work-in-progress allows for a
               flexibility in the Whitman Archive that print editions
               could never have. New scholars with new ideas may emerge at any time, creating new
               and unexpected additions to our work.
            I mentioned earlier that the theoretical possibilities of digital scholarship might
               oblige us to boldness — the present moment, when electronic scholarship is still
               nascent and the boundaries are still capable of being moved, provides a mandate to
               innovate and expand possibilities. Ideally, a digital thematic research collection
               would also allow for the study of cultural contexts. In the case of Whitman, we might
               want to study him as a city poet. He once said that Leaves of
                  Grass
               
                  arose out of my life in Brooklyn and
                     New York from 1838 to 1853, absorbing a million people, for fifteen years with
                     an intimacy, an eagerness, an abandon, probably never equaled
                  quoted in Reynolds 1995, 83
               . A life-long city-dweller, his work also emerged out of New Orleans,
               Washington DC, and Philadelphia/Camden, New Jersey. We would like for the site to
               enable and to promote interpretations of place-based writing that were not possible
               before. It would be useful to be able to study all of these areas with dynamic maps
               containing detail down to the block level. Period maps exist for Washington, DC, New
               York, Brooklyn, Philadelphia, and New Orleans. New discoveries will emerge once we
               can ask different questions because of having a great deal more information from
               census records, maps, health records, police reports, possibly even information on
               sexual subcultures, and so on.
            I have recently begun work on a digital undertaking that may or may not become part
               of the Whitman Archive. Whether the project ultimately
               is folded into the Archive or remains a separate,
               stand-alone collection, it certainly grew out of my work on the Archive. We might think about it as budding off of an existing digital
               thematic research collection and taking on a life of its own. The project Civil War Washington: Studies in Transformation draws on the
               methods of many fields — literary studies, history, geography, computer-aided mapping
               — to create an experimental digital resource. The President and the poet both
               experienced the War from vantage points in the nation's capital, Lincoln striving to
               reunite the divided nation and Whitman caring for tens of thousands of wounded
               soldiers. Their activities and perspectives chronicle the War and provide insights
               into the large and complex forces that transformed Washington from a sleepy Southern
               town to the symbolic center of the Union and nation.
            We are gathering uncollected factual data about an urban space that served as the
               center both of the Union’s War effort and of a divided nation, where hospitals arose
               overnight, wounded men moved in and out, contraband camps of fugitive slaves
               developed, and temporary shelters were erected to house the city’s swelling
               population, which tripled during the four years of the War. Washington was a noisy
               city during these years: the noise in the city was of construction as work on the
               Capitol continued; the noise just outside the city was of destruction as the
               Confederate army worked to tear it down. Even as bridges were defended and a ring of
               forts made this space the most heavily defended city on earth, Washington fostered
               vibrant life.
            
               Civil War Washington: Studies in Transformation will
               situate Lincoln and Whitman in the midst of a rich field of geo-spatial and temporal
               data. At the heart of the project will be richly layered, interactive maps plotting
               both geographic and temporal data that clarify the transformation of Washington, DC.
               The maps and underlying databases will make it possible to analyze change over time
               as structures grew and the population swelled and developed a new ethnic and racial
               mix. We will make possible multifaceted and dynamic studies of Lincoln’s and
               Whitman’s activities during the War years, based on textual and statistical evidence
               and using the power of maps and graphs to illustrate historical change. Lincoln's and
               Whitman's routes can be plotted on a daily and sometimes hourly basis. We believe
               that by providing a rich backdrop of census, health, and hospital records; theater
               schedules; horsecar routes; and other factual data, we will make possible a better
               understanding of Lincoln’s and Whitman's lives and their roles in the transformation
               of the nation and its capital.
            Another extension of the Whitman Archive now being
               undertaken serves to expand trans-linguistic, cross-cultural understandings. Whitman
               scholarship offers rich opportunities because Leaves of
                  Grass has been translated into every major language. One of the Archive’s objectives is to present editions of Whitman’s
               work key to literary, cultural, and historical study of the poet and his work’s
               effects. Thus Matt Cohen has taken the lead in tackling a digital edition of the
               first extensive translation of his work into Spanish. Álvaro Armando Vasseur’s 1912
               selection from Leaves of Grass is the work of a Uruguyan
               poet who translated Whitman not directly from English but via an earlier Italian
               translation. This fascinating text tells us a lot about the circulation of culture.
               Making a version of Leaves available to the Hispanaphone
               world seems fitting given current trends in U.S. demographics and in light of the
               many calls to internationalize American studies.
            We supplement the translation with a critical introduction and a sample
               back-translation into English in order to give those unable to read Spanish an
               opportunity to see how the text was altered in the process of translation. For
               example, consider the following lines as given by Whitman:
            
               The disdain and calmness of martyrs,
               The mother of old, condemn'd for a witch, burnt with dry wood, her children gazing
                  on,
               The hounded slave that flags in the race, leans by the fence, blowing, cover'd
                  with sweat,
            
             And here is how Vasseur rendered these lines as revealed in a literal back
               translation:
            
               The mother of old condemned as a witch and burned over dry firewood, before her
                  children’s eyes,
               The slave, persecuted like an imprisoned woman, who falls mid-flight, all atremble
                  and sweating blood.
            
            Vasseur's direct comparison of the slave to a woman presumably is based on their
               common lack of power, but it also creates some cross-gendered possibilities that turn
               the passage in new ways. Whitman had distinct units — separate lines — for the witch
               and the hounded slave. An association could be made between them because of their
               juxtaposition, but that association is hardly insisted on in the English original.
               Vasseur turns the suggestion of a link into an unmistakable link. Now racial slavery
               has become associated with the irrationality of the inquisition and serves to remind
               the reader of the widespread support of slavery by the church in the U.S. (and in
               South America). While this reading is only barely available in Whitman's original, in
               Vasseur's translation it appears on the surface. This passage clarifies that
               translating a text is interpreting it in another language. To ignore such
               interpretations is to ignore an enormous part of Whitman's reception in the
               world.
            We have either in progress or the planning stages work on Whitman and other languages
               (German, Russian, Ukrainian, Portuguese, and Chinese). This will begin to better
               place him in a world context rather than situtating him solely in Anglophone culture.
               The work will provide valuable texts to further Whitman studies and through
               associated commentary reflect the social, historical, and linguistic milieus of the
               nations in which the translations were done, thereby once again stretching the bounds
               of what a digital thematic research collection originally envisioned within much
               narrower parameters can do. These possibilities, the ever-emerging questions and new
               directions, go far beyond the ordinary edition in the pre-digital age.
            As I have indicated, we do not have an adequate term to describe the digital
               scholarly work now underway in numerous projects. What is it that we want our
               descriptive word to capture: is it the physical thing? Digital sites, contrary to
               popular (and sometimes scholarly) opinion, are physical things after all — they take
               up space, can be created and destroyed, and so on. Is it the nature of the content?
               If so, we need a word that suggests what can be an infinitely extensible resource. Or
               should we emphasize, primarily, the way we make the thing, the collective that has
               come together in order to do work on a new scale in humanistic study?
            Importantly, we should not strive to fit our work to one or another existing term but
               instead expect that, in time, terms will alter in meaning — or new ones will come
               into existence — so as to convey the characteristics of a new type of scholarship. I
               strongly agree with Peter Shillingsburg that a new term is needed, though I am not
               enthusiastic about his proposed term: knowledge site. (So many places
               and institutions could justifiably be called knowledge sites that the
               term seems unlikely to become identified with a particular genre of electronic
               scholarship.) I propose instead a not-immediately-intuitive but perhaps ultimately
               more promising alternative: arsenal.Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
                  famously explored the possibility of transforming an arsenal into pipe organs of
                  love. See his poem The Arsenal at Springfield.
                The online etymological dictionary helps explain the appeal of the term:

            arsenal
            1506, dockyard, from It. arzenale, from Ar. dar as-sina'ah house of
                  manufacture, workshop, from sina'ah art, craft, skill, from sana'a
                  he made. Applied by the Venetians to a large wharf in their city, which was
               the earliest meaning in Eng. Sense of public place for making or storing weapons
                  and ammunition is from 1579.

            I like the emphasis on workshop since these projects are so often simultaneously
               products and in process. I also like the stress on craft and skill, a reminder that
               editing is not copyist work. The public place for making suits current aspects
               of the genre under discussion and will no doubt characterize it even more in this age
               of social networking. The dockyard connotations of arsenal are helpful
               in suggesting a kind of inclusiveness about all the vessels, sloops, ketches, and
               yawls that can hook up to it. (The wharf and dockyard are places of multilingual
               exchange.) The obvious objection to the term arsenal is that it seems
               militaristic in current usage. Yet we should recall that magazine once
               primarily meant a storehouse for weapons and ammunition. If the primary meaning of
                  magazine can shift from being a storehouse of weapons to a storehouse
               of mixed content for periodical publication, who knows what could happen with
                  arsenal?I am less concerned that arsenal catches
                  on than I am that we recognize the fresh features of new work underway and that we
                  are self-conscious about what we want any new term to convey. We are, for
               better or worse, always entangled with force and power: the Internet itself has its
               origins in the military. Perhaps one step toward turning swords into plowshares is to
               seize a word like arsenal and make it our own. Can we imagine a world in
               which what is emphasized is not the created thing so much as the group of people who
               are now joined together for a common purpose?
         
