Title:  The Voices of Doctor Who – How Stylometry Can be
               Useful in Revealing New Information About TV Series
Volume:  014
Issue:  4
Date:  20 December 2020
Abstract:  
            
            This article presents possibilities of effectively using stylometric methods popular
               in the analysis of literary texts in the study of texts written for television, on
               the example of Doctor Who. The article examines the changes driving the development
               of the show moving from character-oriented in the so-called Classic Who
               (1963-1989) to showrunner-oriented in its revival started in 2005. It also seeks to
               describe stability of the characterization of the protagonist as evidenced in the
               dialogues, and to discuss authorial relations between showrunners and their teams.
         
Full Body Text: 

            IntroductionSupplementary materials mentioned in this article are available
                  at https://github.com/JoannaBy/The-Voices-of-Doctor-Who
               
            Distant reading, or more generally: exploration of large collections of cultural
               objects with quantitative methods, has long been successfully applied not only in its
               original literary (prose) scope as proposed by Moretti
                  (2000) but also in texts from other domains, e.g. journalistic reviews (e.g.
                  Benatti and Tonra 2015), poetry (e.g. Plecháč and Flaišman 2017), blog posts (e.g. Schler et al. 2006), tweets (e.g. Juola et al. 2011) etc. This paper seeks to explore the
               possible application of methods established in stylometry, such as hierarchical
               clustering, network analysis (both discussed e.g. in Eder
                  2017) or contrastive analysis with Zeta (Craig and
                  Kinney 2009, Burrows 2007), to audiovisual
               works, or, more precisely, to their textual layer alone. Furthermore, the paper aims
               to establish some conditions that need to be fulfilled to conduct such studies with
               respect to the existing traditions in both film studies and linguistics research. 
            The main substantive interest of this paper lies in presenting creative relations
               within television series production teams, with specific focus on the shift from
               character- to author-oriented script-writing. The first section of the paper sketches
               relations between distant reading and television studies, and summarizes existing
               research on quantitative studies of television discourse. The second section briefly
               sketches the outline of the show discussed in the case study in section three, a
               British science-fiction series Doctor Who. The third section proposes possible
               applications of quantitative methodology, namely stylometry, to exploring inter- and
               intra-textual relations in television shows, and the fourth presents the results of
               the case study, verifying the usefulness of the approach proposed here.
            It is true that a focus on the textual layer alone may seem as anathema to both
               traditional and digital film scholars. Not for a moment can one forget that there is
               more to moving (as well as talking) pictures than whatever their characters have to
               say. This does not mean, however, that quantitative analysis of that one aspect of
               film is insufficient or frivolous. At worst, the text of film dialogue may be
               examined quantitatively as any other text and thus constitutes a valid area of study
               in this limited scope. More hopefully, however, holistic approaches to film text –
               approaches that could combine the study of its textual and its visual aspects – may
               be devised in time. Even the most ambitious specialists in quantitative analysis of
               text do not pretend that literary novels are just about word counts. This is even
               more true of theatre, and yet theatre is a major object of textual studies: to cite
               the most obvious example, quantitative analysis of word frequencies is now an
               accepted method – and indeed the most reliable – in Shakespearean authorship
               attribution, and its importance is further highlighted by the oftentimes heated
               disputes between its practitioners.For just one instance, see Craig and
                  Kinney’s Shakespeare, Computers, and the Mystery of
                     Authorship (2009), scathingly reviewed by Vickers (2011) yet defended by Burrows
                     (2012) and Hoover (2012).
            
            Still, the text of film dialogue alone is of interest to quantitative literary
               studies. It is exactly this doubtful state of authorship concept and execution in
               television series that seems provocation enough to address some of the inescapable
               questions. For instance, is it at all possible to observe and to measure authorial
               impact in the textual layer of film alone? Can computational methods help us shed
               some light on the validity of the concept of authorship as argued by Martin (2013) and Jensen
                  (2017) and as summarized below? While we know that authorship attribution
               methods can help us distinguish between authors in the difficult contexts of short or
               multi-authored texts, are they also effective with texts that undergo many editions
               and possibly have writers imitate the style of a showrunner; with texts that are but
               one of the many aspects – some may say, a fairly insignificant one – of the
               multifaceted medium that film undoubtedly is?
         

            1. Distant reading and television studies
            
               1.1 Quantitative approaches to television studies
               Development of efficient image processing methods in recent years brought rising
                  interest in application of quantitative methods to television and film works. As
                  evidenced by papers presented during meetings of ADHO Special Interest Group Audio
                  Visual Material in Digital Humanities, this concerns especially their visual
                  layer. Hitherto-conducted studies range from cinemetrics (e.g. works of Mike
                  Baxter and Yuri Tsivian) to applications of high-level computer vision methods to
                  the study of moving images (e.g. the Distant Viewing TV project: Arnold and Tilton 2017) to whole systems dedicated
                  to archiving and analyzing of videos (CLARIAH Media Suite). Unsurprisingly, the
                  analysis of the audio layer is yet to be undertaken on a larger scale – state of
                  the art solutions to problems such as speaker diarization are still far from
                  useful, and, like computer vision, this type of analysis is greedy in terms of
                  computational power. Comprehensive studies examining all multimodal aspects of
                  films and TV series still belong to the future. 
               While the above-mentioned studies are of great importance, they align more with
                  the term of distant watching or distant viewing, and in this paper I
                  aim to draw attention to another aspect of audiovisual creations: to the textual
                  layer of dialogue. Sarah Kozloff (2000) noted
                  that film dialogue is often overlooked and considered of little importance and
                  interest to both film scholars or linguists. She argued in favor of the usefulness
                  of such studies, providing relevant examples and encouraging further ventures into
                  linguistic aspects of audiovisual creations. Later years brought noteworthy
                  projects on both film and television dialogue, most notably numerous works in
                  corpus linguistics and discourse analysis, produced, among others, by Monika
                  Bednarek, whose 2010 and 2018 books provide the most comprehensive review of the
                  research that combines linguistics and television studies. 
               In the latter book, Bednarek noticed the rise of popularity of more formalized
                  research on TV dialogue, including quantitative studies using corpora of
                  transcribed dialogues, and pointed to the examples of TV series studied within
                  various linguistic frameworks, including sociolinguistics (discussion in Richardson 2010), corpus linguistics (multiple
                  examples for this and other linguistic branches in the extensive bibliography by
                     Bednarek and Zago 2018), multimodal discourse
                  analysis (Bateman and Schmidt 2011, Bateman and Wildfeuer 2014, and Wildfeuer 2014) and audiovisual translation (Hołobut et al. 2016, 2018a, 2018b, Bruti and Vignozzi 2016). TV series in their textual layer also become
                  an object of research on narratives and themes, e.g. topic modeling-based plot
                  explorations conducted by Benjamin M. Schmidt
                     (2015) on a corpus of 80,000 film and television series scripts. 
               Significantly for this study, the research project conducted by Hołobut and her
                  team is also one of the first to apply stylometry to the exploration of stylistic
                  similarities in audiovisual data. In one of their first papers, Hołobut, Rybicki and Woźniak (2016) discovered
                  that, in the case of television series, genre was likely to overshadow stylistic
                  features specific to the author. In their further research, namely a stylometric
                  analysis of Pride and Prejudice and its adaptations,
                  Hołobut and Rybicki found that television series were imitating Jane Austen’s verbal style more suggestively than the cinema
                     productions
                  . Another attempt at applying stylometric
                  methods to television series dialogues was made by van Zyl
                     and Botha (2016), whose study of The Big Bang
                     Theory dialogue lists confirmed the existence of clear character
                  idiolects in television discourse. 
            
            
               1.2 Authorship in television
               Due to the multimodal nature of audiovisual works, in contrast to typical practice
                  in literary and linguistic studies, the concept of authorship is very difficult to
                  attach to one person in television. In fact, the issue of authorship has been rarely associated with television at all, as
                  authorship was diffused among many individuals and may more
                     properly have been claimed by a studio, company, or channel than by a
                     person
                  . Collaborative storytelling and the number
                  of people involved in the process of writing, rewriting and changes introduced
                  during shooting and even in post-production, are often emphasized by both
                  television creators and scholars. 
               While since the 1950s, film directors have been widely accepted as authors (or
                     auteurs) of their works, and much attention is given to analyzing
                  the works of such as directorial starts as Quentin Tarantino or David Lynch, the
                  directors of television series have had a much smaller influence and typically
                  only work on one up to a few episodes per season. Mittel also notes that while
                        the literary writer is ultimately celebrated for
                           authorship by origination, assumed (however
                        erroneously) to have written every word as an individual, a film's director
                        is granted authorship by responsibility, ultimately
                        making the necessary creative choices by supervising and guiding all of the
                        film's many collaborators, even if much of the specific work was done by
                        others.
                     
                   This perspective on authorship by responsibility is also often linked to
                  television, however, in relation not to directors but to showrunners (e.g. Steiner 2015, Jensen
                     2017, Lavik 2015). A showrunner is an
                  informal term used to describe a person who holds most creative power in the show,
                  usually combining the duties of main scriptwriter and executive producer. The
                  concept is used mostly in relation to American culture (e.g. David Chase, Joss
                  Whedon, Shonda Rhimes, David Simon), but there are also examples of showrunners in
                  the UK (e.g. Russell T Davies, Charlie Brooker) and Scandinavia (Hans Rosenfeldt).
                  Detailed origin and characteristics of this job have so far been subject to few
                  studies, with the most comprehensive analyses by Brett
                     Martin (2013) and Erland Lavik (2015). In
                  his book, Martin looks into the phenomena associated with the popularity of series
                  authored by some of the earliest openly-appointed showrunners and, based on
                  conversations with them and their collaborators, he details existing forms of this
                  mode of work. With all the information he collected, Martin does not hesitate to
                  refer to TV showrunners (such as David Chase) as authors, comparing the conditions
                  of their work to serial Victorian writers, such as Charles Dickens, Anthony
                  Trollope or George Eliot. He also points out that given their decision-making over
                     story direction to casting to the color of seemingly
                     insignificant characters’ shirts
                   they seem all-knowing
                     deit[ies]. Martin also observes that showrunners are typically writers
                  (with few examples of showrunners holding only producer credits) and that they
                  tend to emphasize their power over words and world-shaping. While typically there
                  are many writers involved in the writing of a series, there are various ways their
                  work can be organized: collaboration can include a writers’ room, where a
                  showrunner meets with writers to pass/develop ideas together in detail before
                  designating a team member to transform such detailed vision into actual script and
                  again to discuss it in the room; in another manner, writers contribute episodes
                  based on a general season narrative arch developed by a showrunner, who supervises
                  execution and introduces corrections and changes to maintain consistency. In turn,
                  in his book Lavik compares American, Dutch and Norwegian styles of showrunning and
                  argues that outside of the American perspective detailed by Martin, showrunners in
                  Europe give their writers much more authorial freedom and have themselves more
                  creative than administrative responsibilities. Interestingly, Lavik also
                  distinguishes between focused (one showrunner for the whole production of the
                  show) or distributed (showrunners changing every (few) seasons) overarching
                  authorship of showrunners, and actual authorship of writers. 
               The exact scope of influence of a showrunner is unclear and varies from series to
                  series. A script is usually rewritten many times at various points before, during
                  and after production, and, as noted by Jensen: other
                        writers work to support the vision founded by the showrunner, or creator.
                        That, however, does not mean that these writers (...) do not make a
                        difference in the final outcome of a series (they most certainly do), but
                        they do so within a paradigm laid down by the creator(s) of the
                        show.
                      Jensen also notes that despite this
                  complex authorship of television productions, the works of particular showrunners
                  bear similarities across various series, both in style and in specific interests
                  of the authors . He emphasizes interest in
                     seeing how the various works across an oeuvre depict a topic in different ways, maybe even in contradictory
                     ways
                   – this is to be expected from an author able
                  to create well-developed characters that differ in their ideas and nature as
                  expressed in their dialogue lines, and can be used to evaluate character-building
                  skills of the author. One method to do so may consist in contrastive analysis
                  discussed later in this paper.
               The concept of authorship of audiovisual works as adapted from literature poses
                  even more problems, as discussed in detail by Steiner
                     (2015) on the example of Game of Thrones and
                  its showrunner-auteur troika: of author
                  of the novels adapted into the series and series’ two showrunners, all
                  participating in writing of the stories. Determining the scope of influence of any
                  of them is a task posing a great challenge to quantitative and qualitative
                  approaches alike. Again, I will argue that one of stylometric methods, sequential
                  analysis, can facilitate this task, at least when it comes to the authorship of
                  the textual layer.
            
         

            2. Doctor Who – the background of the series
            
               2.1 About the show
               The British television series Doctor Who is a phenomenon for a number of reasons,
                  and a perfect subject for a study applying a variety of quantitative methods.
                  Broadcast since 1963 (with a break between 1989 and 2005), it is one of the most
                  popular science fiction series, critically acclaimed, with generally a mainstream
                  status (at least in Britain), and with a cult following. 
               The basic assumptions of the show are quite unique: 
               Its main character, the Doctor, travels with his companions in the TARDIS (Time
                  and Relative Dimension in Space), a ship capable of traveling through space and
                  time that takes the exterior form of a 1930s British police booth, but is bigger
                  on the inside. (...) the Doctor is not consistently portrayed by the same actor;
                  periodically the Doctor dies and regenerates in a new
                  humanlike form with a new personality .
               This form certainly contributes to the popularity of the show. Frequent changes
                  allow to keep it fresh and likely to attract both long-term fans as well as people
                  interested in only following one specific regeneration of the Doctor. Rebuilding
                  the show around new incarnation of the main character enables viewers to start
                  watching the show from various episodes and seasons without normal difficulty
                  related to following TV series from a random point, that is having to figure out
                  previous plot twists relevant for its understanding.
            
            
               2.1 Internal classification of the show
               The show can be, and is, divided in numerous ways both by producers, fans, and
                  scholars. The most basic division line is that between the Classic
                  (1963-89) – and the New, sometimes spelled Nu (produced from 2005
                  onwards). The 1996 feature film is considered a part of the Classic Who. 
               Another division line is defined by the respective regenerations of the Doctor,
                  thirteen as of 2018; this does not include the so-called Doctor 8.5, also known as
                  the War Doctor, appearing in the 50th anniversary special. Since the Doctor is the
                  main axis of the show and usually the one character who delivers most of the
                  dialogue (in the New series, an average of 30-40% of all lines belong to the
                  Doctor, i.e. twice as much as any of his companions), theirAs of 2018, the
                     Doctor new regeneration is female. This new Doctor, played by Jodie Whitaker,
                     identifies as a woman while the past 12 regenerations were played by men, which
                     is why I refer to the character using singular they/their/them pronouns unless
                     I mean a specific regeneration. change strongly influences the overall
                  shape of the show. 
               The 2005 revival introduced many innovations, primarily in narrative style and in
                  the introduction of the position of a showrunner. This has been discussed as both
                  a factor ensuring the success of the refreshed series and a reason behind a major
                  change in narrative style 
                  . As of 2018, the show has recently adopted its third
                  showrunner, Chris Chibnall, with the first, Russell T Davies, serving in the years
                  2005-2010, and the second, Steven Moffat, between 2010 and 2017. Each of them had
                  an established successful series writing career at the moment of taking over and
                  was well-known by the British public. The showrunners were generally seen as
                  bringing their individual style and vision to the show, and the years of their
                  work on Doctor Who were marked respectively as the Davies and the Moffat eras (see
                  e.g. in Chapman 2014) – a quick search reveals
                  that a Chibnall era is now also used in the Internet, though with as of yet
                  small frequency.
               This perspective of various strong influences offers an opportunity to examine not
                  only the authorship of the episodes, consistency of the show and character
                  stability, but also the relevance of particular divisions. 
            
         

            3. Empirical study
            
               3.1 Problems
               
                  3.1.1 Obtaining the data
                  The classic problem of any quantitative study is obtaining the data, especially
                     data of the right quality. The situation is no different if we decide to
                     conduct an analysis of television dialogue. If anything, it is even more
                     complex: we must first decide how we define the dialogue that is to be
                     analyzed: the scripts or the spoken text as it was actually recorded? While
                     some creators or broadcasters (e.g. BBC Writersroom) share scripts of their
                     show after the series is released, such an approach is rare and usually
                     concerns only a few sample episodes rather than a full series. Moreover, it is
                     not clear how much such released scripts vary from the final televised versions
                     of episodes; and since it is well known that dialogue is reworked continuously
                     during production and post-production to meet the changing conditions of
                     realizations, full compliance can never be assumed. 
                  One tempting source of data are large amounts of subtitles available freely on
                     the Internet. There are many arguments in favor of using subtitles: they are
                     widely available and can be easily scraped, converted and cleaned without
                     investing much effort and time. However, there are just as many arguments
                     against using them. Subtitles found in popular aggregator websites, such as
                        www.yifysubtitles.com or
                        www.tvsubtitles.org, are
                     usually of fairly good quality, but there is always a level of uncleanliness of
                     the data. They are usually created by ripping original subtitles from
                     DVD/BlueRay editions or through transcription conducted by amateur fans, both
                     factors increasing the risk of typos and arbitrary alterations, or of missing
                     some information. 
                  It is also important to remember that subtitling is a highly conventionalized
                     art. Professional standards (and distributors) place limitations as to the
                     length of text displayed on the screen at the time. Common practices include
                     rephrasing some original sentences, turning them into shorter equivalents when
                     the pace of speech is too fast, adjusting punctuation to respond not to the
                     actual manner of speaking but rather to the comfort of reading, or omitting
                     content spoken in foreign languages or as part of the music soundtrack (e.g.
                     song lyrics, even if sang by characters). Subtitles created by amateurs are
                     also likely to present various spelling conventions requiring
                        normalization.Subtitling standards are discussed in many papers and
                        fora, e.g. a brief summarization here: https://translationjournal.net/journal/04stndrd.htm As a side
                        note, the use of subtitles being a translation from the original for an
                        analysis of film/series content makes things even more complicated, highly
                        criticised in both translation and film studies, with Sarah Kozloff
                        explaining: Subtitles only translate a portion of the
                           spoken text, and only that portion that the subtitler has decided is most
                           important. This filters out emphases that may be unique to the film or to
                           that national cinema. Repetitions, interruptions, slang, curses,
                           antiquated diction, regional accents, of course, are all lost in
                           subtitles
                        .
                  Yet another approach proposes using transcriptions of the dialogue. When the
                     transcription is performed per commission, this method allows for greater
                     control over the text – including detailed information about who is speaking
                     (and how), and agreeing on notation and spelling standards. Its main
                     disadvantage is the cost in terms of time, obviously, but also money.
                     Describing her SydTV Corpus, Bednarek explains her reasons for deciding on this
                     solution: she was trading the size (choosing to have a 60-episode clean corpus
                     of approximately 250k tokens rather than a larger, yet messier one) for quality
                     – a factor crucial when conducting detailed analysis of language variation
                     features .
                  In this study, I too built a corpus of transcriptions, but using fan
                     transcripts selected from one of the many websites collecting them. Fan
                     transcripts are never perfectly clean, however they have a great advantage over
                     subtitles: they often offer information on who speaks the particular lines, and
                     they are a transcription of actual spoken dialogue. In this particular case,
                     the texts were transcribed by one person, with others only pointing out
                     corrections via e-mails to the author, which definitely helped in maintaining
                     consistency of notation. To ensure the quality of the dataset, apart from
                     automatic preprocessing and cleaning I conducted sample manual verification of
                     the quality by reading the texts and listening to New Who episodes, and by
                     skimming through the rest of the texts in the corpus, correcting an almost
                     negligible amount of typos. 
               
               
                  3.1.2. Dataset
                  The dataset used for this study was prepared based on the web scraped fan
                        transcriptsCollected from http://www.chakoteya.net/DoctorWho/index.html [last access: 10th
                        Jan 2019] and consisted of a total of 314 text files. The decision to
                     use fan transcripts rather than subtitles was grounded in the corpus linguistic
                     recommendations for research on TV series language , as discussed in the previous section. While the corpus covers the whole
                     show as of December 2018, the number of texts differs from the number of
                     episodes and stories as listed e.g. on Wikipedia. Over the course of the
                     development of the show, BBC offered various structures of a given season (or
                     series, as this is commonly referred to in British television discourse).
                     During Classic Who, each season was divided into serials: longer stories
                     of continuous narrative, which were further divided into 25-minute episodes
                     broadcast every week. Serials varied in length, going from two to twelve
                     episodes. In contrast, New Who consists mostly of stand-alone 45-50-minute
                     episodes, with occasional two- or three-part episodes, typical especially for
                     season finales, and for the Davies era. I decided against splitting Classic
                        serials into episodes and against concatenating New episodes into
                     stories; instead, I applied sampling (drawing samples of equal length from the
                     corpus) to even out the size of the examined texts.
                  Before the analysis, the data was cleaned of html tags and of any additional
                     information which was not a part of the actual dialogue (comments in brackets,
                     indications of speakers, etc.). Cleaning was done semi-automatically with a
                     number of regular expressions matching observed patterns during the manual
                     cleanup of several randomly selected episodes. The clean dataset was used to
                     create three types of corpora: i) all dialogue lines, ii) lines spoken by the
                     Doctor, iii) lines solely from the New Who seasons.
               
            
            
               3.2 Methods
               Stylometry is grounded in the observation that the distribution of certain
                  features, most notably most frequent words, is a strong bearer of stylistic
                  ‘signal’, which can be used to predict authorship, chronology, genre, or to lesser
                  extent topical similarities. The earliest attempts to compare the use of words
                  across texts date back to Lorenzo Valla in the 15th century and Augustus de Morgan
                  and Wincenty Lutosławski in the 19th century, with the latter considered to be the
                  first to compare top most frequent words, using this method to analyze works of
                  Plato. The approach became more popular after Mosteller & Wallace’s famous
                  study of The Federalist Papers
                  (1964), and started to develop intensely with
                  the availability of more powerful computers and Burrows’ study of Jane Austen’s
                  works (1987), in which he introduced a more
                  reliable method of comparing not just individual words but whole texts with his
                  Delta measure (2002).
               A stylometric study requires a few basic items: a corpus of texts which will be
                  turned into a frequency table detailing use of all available words, a method for
                  calculating a distance between their use across the texts (so called distance
                  measure) and a classification algorithm. An optional, but convenient addition is a
                  visualization method, allowing for easier interpretation of the final outcome. All
                  analyses in this study were performed using stylo, an R package for computational
                  text analysis , which includes algorithms for all these
                  steps and offers a wide selection of types of distance measures and classification
                  algorithms, not requiring more computational skills than preparing the corpus and
                  making an informed choice between appropriate options.
               One important step of preparing the experiment is choosing the right features to
                  analyze. While Mosteller & Wallace opted for using most frequent words (MFWs);
                  later studies experimented with the use of combinations (the so-called n-grams) of
                  subsequent characters, subsequent words or even grammatical features. While
                  character n-grams show nice performance for some types of texts, most notably
                  historic and poetic texts 
                  
                  , n-grams of words typically perform worse , as do grammatical features, e.g. POS tags 
                  , or lemmas. Given that the above studies seem to show
                  that, in contemporary settings, most frequent words perform best, I decided to use
                  them as features. Dismaying as such an approach may seem to the traditional
                  humanities scholar, empirical evidence supporting it is overwhelming. The
                  possibility of using such simple evidence for such large purposes rests upon the
                  fact that words do not function as discrete entities. Since they gain their full
                  meaning only through the different sorts of relationships they form with each
                  other, they can be seen as markers of those relationships and, accordingly, of
                  everything that those relationships entail .
            
            
               3.2.1 Conducted types of analysis
               The first and mainly exploratory test was hierarchical clustering, one of the
                  basic but most reliable algorithms of grouping similar texts, in its network
                  variant of bootstrap consensus analysis. This variant is based on conducting a
                  series of hierarchical clustering analyses with different counts of features and
                  comparing their inter-agreement with a set threshold, so that only the texts
                  classified as similar a set number of times are taken into account (e.g. for a
                  threshold of 0.5, i.e. 50% and four iterations, two texts need to be classified as
                  each other’s nearest neighbors in at least two iterations for the connection to be
                  considered valid). It presents a more objective and reliable view of the relations
                  in the dataset than regular cluster analysis, decreasing the risk of
                  cherry-picking by not relying on just one best outcome, and can be visualized in a
                  graphical form of a network, which facilitates interpretation of the results in
                  the case of large datasets, like the one in this study. 
               Network data produced by stylo was used in Gephi to create visualizations and to
                  conduct further analyses, e.g. community detection with the Louvain modularity
                  algorithm . Community detection is a method
                  facilitating identification of naturally occurring groups within networks, often
                  difficult to observe in detail with human eye, allowing for understanding their
                  large-scale structures. The method divides a network into groups of nodes sharing
                  strong connections between them. The Louvain algorithm is commonly used in many
                  disciplines and was found to be the most reliably performing community detection
                  in stylometric studies  as it is well adjusted to the
                  analysis of networks that may contain small structures, which can be expected also
                  in the case of TV dialogue data.
               In the contrastive analysis of Doctor regenerations I used the algorithm of
                  Craig's Zeta 
                  , which compares which features are used significantly
                  and consequently more often across works in each of the two examined sets. 
               For a more detailed study of authorial influence of showrunner supervising
                  scriptwriters I used Rolling Delta algorithm , a method
                  that looks for signals of different authors within a single collaborative
                  text. It conducts sequential classification of slices of such a text and
                  allows for a fairly precise identification of authorial takeovers within one work
                  (e.g. the case of Harper Lee in Choiński et al.
                     2019). 
            
            
               3.2.2. Identifying features to be used in the analysis
               Dialogues in television series differ from both literary texts to unscripted
                  spoken language. Awareness of this is crucial for proper performance and
                  interpretation of a quantitative analysis. Functions of dialogue in television
                  writing related to anchorage of the narrative, building continuity and helping
                  viewers remember characters’ names, locations etc.  make for a higher percentage of proper names both in the overall
                  show and in particular episodes. As observed in the frequency tables of word usage
                  in the corpus used in this study, at least in the case of Doctor Who, especially
                  episodes introducing new characters tend to repeat names more often, and, as
                  evidenced by the count of number of words uttered by companion characters in
                  Doctor Who, introductory episodes are usually also the ones in which respective
                  characters speak the most within the whole set of their appearances in the show. 
               This nature of TV language, combined with the thematic variety of episodes, calls
                  for implementing some sort of limit to the influence of features that may score
                  very high in individual texts (and this way also in the list of most frequent
                  words) but be rather non-important for the general stylistic profile of the
                  corpus. One such solution, commonly known as culling, has long been in use in
                  stylometry, although as of yet there are no studies determining exact conditions
                  of its use, thus enforcing special carefulness in its application. Culling is a
                  procedure of removing such features from the list of analyzed features that only
                  appear in a determined percentage of analyzed texts.
               In this study I chose to first conduct a leave-one-out cross-validation
                  classification test on the whole corpus (classifying each text using the rest of
                  the dataset as the training model) and discovered that culling of 20% increased
                  the performance of my chosen classifier (Support Vector Machine) performance for
                  all examined numbers of MFWs (100-500). While such procedure might be useful,
                  factors to be taken into consideration before adopting it to other studies are
                  size of the corpus, thematic variation of the texts, and their length. Finally,
                  one should remember that the use of culling heavily decreases the number of
                  features that can be used in the study (e.g. in case of texts composed solely of
                  lines spoken by the Doctor, only 395 shared words remain).
               As for other settings, I explored possibilities of using various distance measures
                  and found Cosine Delta , which was proven to be the most
                  reliable in a number of recent studies, to produce most stable results across
                  settings, with Burrows’s Classic Delta also providing fairly good results.
            
         

            4 Results
            
               4.1 Development of the show
               The first experiment was set to examine the direction of the development of the
                  show and see whether a division into Classic and New Who, or into the showrunner
                  eras, result in the change of the stylometric signals. For this test I used
                  all the texts in the corpora and considered two scenarios: first, examining the
                  whole texts; second, examining just the extracted lines of the Doctor part. For
                  each of the scenarios I conducted two analyses: with full text, and with sampling
                  (random sampling of four 1,000-word samples per text). The second solution was
                  adopted as an additional safety measure due to my concerns about the uneven length
                  of the texts: while New Who usually has 4,500-6,000 words per episode, some
                  Classic Who stories go up to 20,000 words. 
               
                  4.1.1 Episodes
                  
                     Whole episode perspective:
                     The primary finding, confirming intuitive expectations, was a strong
                        division between Classic and New Who series, and more: it is also clear at
                        first glance that New Who also bears a strong division line, as the texts
                        from the three respective eras form three distinct groups. As visible in
                        Figure 1, not only does the layout of the nodes confirm the separation, it
                        is also detected by the Louvain algorithm, with the communities it
                        discovered marked in different colors. Interestingly, some of the episodes
                        from Eleventh and Twelfth Doctor tenures (New Who, Moffat as showrunner) are
                        closely connected to groups of texts from Classic Who, which can be
                        explained by Moffat’s commonly expressed intention to draw more parallels to
                        the Classic series. Whereas Davies was hired to reinvent the show for the
                        21st century and to make it attractive for contemporary viewers, Moffat
                        seemed to have been given more artistic freedom when it comes to exploring
                        the roots of the show, as evidenced by his bringing back classic opponents
                        such as Ice Warriors, Mondasian Cybermen or Zygons, as well as more frequent
                        use of longer storylines developed over two episodes and stories overlapping
                        whole seasons.
                     The newest additions, ten episodes of the latest (2018) season created by a
                        new showrunner, Chris Chibnall, position themselves halfway between two
                        other New Who showrunners, and application of the Louvain algorithm reveals
                        them to be slightly more similar to the series supervised by Moffat. This
                        result may be somewhat surprising, given that Chibnall was one of the
                        writers employed at the time of Davis’s tenure and also collaborated with
                        him on the Doctor Who spin-off, Torchwood. However, as the amount of the data for
                        the Chibnall era is still small, these particular results should not be
                        taken as a definite marker of his preference towards the style of his
                        colleague.
                     The network does not seem to show clear chronological progression. While the
                        texts from particular Doctor regenerations exhibit strong internal
                        similarity (visualized by thick lines in the figure), they are not
                        determined to connect in the order of subsequent regenerations. While, as
                        visualized in Figure 2, there is a clear split into three (and with
                        increasing the resolution of Louvain algorithm, forcing greater
                        generalization, only two, see Figure 3) New Who eras, the Classic series
                        lack similar structure: the discovered communities are not tied to a
                        particular regeneration or writer, but are more genre/topic-oriented.
                     
                        Network analysis (bootstrap consensus tree with Cosine Delta 100-500
                           MFWs on all episodes. Colors indicate communities discovered by the
                           Louvain algorithm with modularity resolution of 1. On the left, Classic
                           Who series include four distinct communities, corresponding to genre and
                           topics rather than the particular regenerations or writers. On the right,
                           three communities, mostly grouping the texts from each of the three
                           showrunners.
                        
                     
                     
                        Network analysis (bootstrap consensus tree with Cosine Delta 100-500
                           MFWs on all episodes. Colors indicate communities discovered by the
                           Louvain algorithm with modularity resolution of 3. On the left, with this
                           level of generalization, Classic Who no longer has distinct inner groups;
                           on the right, episodes from Chibnall era are now clustered with a larger
                           Moffat community, Davies remains distinct.
                        
                     
                     
                        All episodes; colors indicate communities found by the Louvain
                           algorithm with modularity resolution of 4. This shows the highest level
                           of generalization, with Classic Who on the left, and New Who series on
                           the right.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Sampled perspective:
                     To verify that the obtained results were not skewed by varying lengths of
                        the texts, I conducted the same analysis using randomly selected samples of
                        the texts. I automatically selected four random samples of 1,000-word length
                        from each of the files in the corpus without replacement (ensuring that
                        various samples would not overlap in text). In this particular case I also
                        had to decrease the number of examined features to 300 in the last
                        iteration, as this was the rough number of words common for all the texts in
                        this setting. Applying the Louvain algorithm in this case showed that
                        resolution had to be increased to much higher values (e.g. 15 on Figure 4)
                        to reveal a smaller number of communities and a more generalized view. While
                        New Who episodes form strongly interconnected clusters of individual
                        episodes but have weak intra-connection edges, the Classic Who forms a
                        uniform massive community showing strong relations between the texts; still,
                        many episodes are mixed and do not recognize other samples from the same
                        text. 
                     Interestingly, some episodes are outliers from their own community. The New
                        Who 11x06 episode, for instance, a debut by Vinay Patel describing the
                        events around the Partition of India, appears among Classic Who episodes,
                        forming significant relations with the Seventh Doctor’s adventures that are
                        seemingly unsimilar in language and topic. In turn, some episodes of the
                        Seventh, and to a lesser extent of the Fourth and Sixth Doctors have
                        stronger affinities with the New Who.
                  
                  
                     Network visualization of sampled episodes, 4 samples of 1,000 words per
                        episode. Colors indicate communities discovered by the Louvain algorithm,
                        with modularity resolution of 15. On the right, Classic series form a strong
                        community with thick edges indicating strong relations. On the left, New Who
                        series form small strongly connected groups of samples relating to a given
                        episode, and while the Louvain algorithm distinguishes two groups, they do
                        not indicate a particular showrunner era or a new regeneration of the
                        Doctor.
                     
                  
               
               
                  4.1.2 Doctor
                  Even though the first set of tests already confirmed two basic divisions of the
                     show into Classic and New Who, and the Davies and Moffat/Chibnall eras within
                     the latter, no distinction was found regarding the influence of the Doctor
                     regeneration on the development of episodes. Therefore, since their lines on
                     average comprise 30 to 40% percent of the whole dialogue, I decided to look at
                     them without the noise of lines spoken by other characters, seeing also if the
                     writers succeeded – or, maybe, simply happened – to differentiate between
                     regenerations.
                  The results here are much more interesting. As presented in Figures 5-7,
                     Classic series show a clear distinction between Doctors and a trace of the
                     chronological signal: while the First Doctor is equally strongly connected to
                     his direct replacement and to later regenerations of the Fifth and Sixth
                     Doctors, the communities of the Second, Third and Fourth Doctors are both
                     distinct, and the fact that they have the strongest ties with their direct
                     predecessors and successors indicate a visible chronology. Strikingly, the
                     Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Doctors are all heavily intertwined together, which
                     may coincide with the decline in the popularity and perceived quality of the
                     show during their tenures; at this time, the series began to slowly but
                     gradually lose its appeal to viewers, resulting in lower broadcast numbers and
                     higher criticism of show development, leading to indefinite suspension in 1989. 
                  Interestingly, while an earlier version of this study not including the last
                     two series of Doctor Who alienated the First Doctor as the most distinct
                     regeneration in the course of the history of the show (previous unpublished
                     study of the author), the corpus used in this study distinguishes Second and
                     Third (together) and Fourth (on his own) Doctors as most unlike the other
                     Classic Who Doctors (see them form separate strong communities in the left
                     bottom corner of Figure 6).
                  As for New Who, particular regenerations do not seem to have their own voice
                     heard so much: the influence of the showrunners overshadows them, and this is
                     visible even with the lowest resolution of Louvain algorithm in Figure 5 (pink
                     for Moffat and green for Davies). One exception is the Thirteenth Doctor, who
                     seems to mostly remain detached from other New Who Doctors over the course of
                     increasing Modularity resolution. This could be the consequence of the new
                     showrunner, except that Chris Chibnall wrote a number of episodes for both
                     Davies and Moffat, the texts of which cluster with their respective eras, and
                     the whole texts of the episodes from his era showed his similarity to Moffat’s
                     era (Figures 1-3); another hypothesis might involve the gender switch. 
                  
                     Doctor lines, bootstrap consensus network, Cosine Delta, 100-500 MFW.
                        Colors indicate communities detected by the Louvain algorithm with
                        modularity resolution of 1. On the left, the large community of Classic Who
                        with five internal groups of First, Second, Third and Fourth Doctors
                        separately and Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth together (blue). On the
                        right, the community of New Who, divided further into three groups
                        corresponding to showrunners.
                     
                  
                  
                     Doctor lines, bootstrap consensus network, Cosine Delta, 100-500 MFW.
                        Colors indicate communities detected by the Louvain algorithm with
                        modularity resolution of 3. Within the Classic Who community the First
                        Doctor is now found to be more similar to the last four Doctors, and the
                        Second and Third are clustered together – only the Fourth Doctor has his own
                        group. Within the New Who community, all male Doctors, who also share being
                        written in Davies’s or Moffat’s eras, are considered as one group, the
                        Thirteenth Doctor forms her own group.
                     
                  
                  
                     Doctor lines, bootstrap consensus network, Cosine Delta, 100-500 MFW.
                        Colors indicate communities detected by the Louvain algorithm with
                        modularity resolution of 4. The division line now falls between the Classic
                        and the New series.
                     
                  
                  Overall, the break into Classic and New Who is the most important division, as
                     revealed by the Louvain algorithm. However, while Finer and Pearlman state that
                        story is character
                     , this does not seem to hold for Doctor Who:
                     the development of the main character is slightly different than that of the
                     whole show.
               
            
            
               4.2 Authorial influence
               For this part of study I focused on the New Who exclusively. I started with a
                  network analysis including only the whole texts from this time period, which was
                  enough to form a number of observations. The first basic one is the high
                  visibility of contributions of Steven Moffat. Most of his works cluster together,
                  be it the ones written under supervision of Davies or during his own era, with a
                  distinction of a few texts that cluster into other communities with a few other
                  writers he supervised, which could be hypothesized as his influence over them (see
                  Figure 8).
               The situation seems quite different for the other two showrunners. Episodes
                  written by Russell T Davies appear in all communities related to his tenure,
                  mixing with other writers and showing strong narrative connections (in Figure 8,
                  the group marked with light green connects mostly more dramatic two-part episodes
                  and finales, whereas the brown one gathers more regular episodes from the middles
                  of the seasons). Preliminary tests conducted for this study, not including the
                  last two seasons, showed this even more sharply, with separate clusters for
                  episodes opening and closing seasons: his writing and supervision seem to strictly
                  control the development of the show, and while some influence of topics (e.g.
                  episodes with traveling back in time) can be seen, the authorial control of a
                  showrunner over writers, exhibited by strong ties between them, seems to be the
                  main driving power behind the similarities shared by the texts. 
               Interestingly, as presented in Figure 9, the season created by Chris Chibnall
                  clusters not only with his previous works on the show in the eras of his
                  predecessors but also with the episodes written by usual scriptwriters
                  earlier on, mostly from the Moffat era. This can be interpreted in a number of
                  ways. Undoubtedly, Chibnall has a strong authorial presence, but the fact that
                  other writers who largely contributed to the show and also built their own
                  prominent careers such as Toby Whithouse (creator of Being
                     Human) and Matthew Graham (co-creator of Life on
                     Mars) cluster together with him could be interpreted as the community
                  of writers who grew up in the Doctor Who writing room now finding their own voice
                  (albeit somewhat similar when contrasted to Davies and Moffat).
               
                  Network of New Who episodes, bootstrap consensus tree, Cosine Delta, 100-500
                     MFW Colors indicate communities discovered by the Louvain algorithm with
                     modularity resolution of 1. On the left and in the lower central part visible
                     are three communities within the Moffat era. In the upper central part we find
                     the Chibnall era, on the right, three communities form the Davies era.
                  
               
               
                  Network of New Who episodes, bootstrap consensus tree, Cosine Delta, 100-500
                     MFW. Colors indicate communities discovered by the Louvain algorithm, with
                     modularity resolution of 3. Visible are three communities of respectively the
                     Moffat (red) and Davies (brown) eras, and the Chibnall era (blue) extended with
                     some of his previous works written earlier in the history of the show and
                     episodes written by a few other prominent writers.
                  
               
               
                  Detailed study of authorial influence: 
                  For a more detailed study of authorial influence, I examined selected episodes
                     of the show to compare Davies and Moffat in their roles as showrunners with
                     Rolling Classify , a method for sequential detection
                     of stylistic idiosyncrasies within a single text. When choosing the episodes I
                     followed some basic criteria: the credited author of the episode had to
                     contribute at least a few other texts for the show, and to be considered as
                     fairly independent according to available data on the working processes. 
                  One methodological concern for this type of study is that the exact scope of
                     the influence of the showrunner is unknown. Using episodes from the show as
                     training data carries the risk that all episodes written by a given person will
                     be tainted by heavy showrunner impact, thus skewing the results in his favor.
                     Doctor Who production does not report using Writers’ Room in the American
                     sense, although a version of it, based on meeting to read and discuss ready
                     scripts was mentioned to exist at least in Moffat’s time, as detailed in a
                     special interview on their writing process.
                        https://thescriptlab.com/features/screenwriting-101/10415-television-writing-wisdom-from-doctor-who-showrunner-and-script-editor/
                        [access: 07.05.2020] Instead, the show employs guest writers
                     who create their own stories fitting some basic arch vision provided by the
                     showrunner who also has the final say over the acceptance of their ideas and
                     shape of the scripts. In fact, Davies claims that he writes the final draft of almost all scripts – except Steven
                        Moffat's, Matthew Graham's, Chris Chibnall's and Stephen Greenhorn's – and
                        that draft becomes the Shooting Script
                     . Despite these concerns, I decided to
                     examine the situation, even if to offer doubtful findings to be further studied
                     and verified. I present just a few cases below, with all available at the
                     project website.
                  While in my study I also used Delta and Nearest Shrunken Centroid classifiers,
                     here I present results obtained with Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier,
                     which is largely considered the most reliable classifier in stylometry , and which also in this case offered most stable
                     results across various settings and for various datasets, as did using 100 MFW
                     as features (although wider ranges of features were also tested). As Rolling
                     Classify uses a sliding window to provide sequential classification of an
                     examined text, the texts were divided into 1,000 word samples, with 750 words
                     as overlap. The visualization graph produced by Rolling Classify shows two bars
                     of authorial influence, reflecting the percentage of probable authorship of a
                     given slice, with the lower bar showing the more likely impact.
                  No matter the method of classification, the outcomes revealed the major
                     influence of Davies authorial style in all examined works of his era. However,
                     whereas (e.g. Figure 11) Davies’s influence dominates only a part of the
                     episode written by Moffat, in case of the episodes Davies claimed in his memoir
                     to have largely re-written (Figures 10 and 12) his style dominates the whole
                     text, with the Rolling Delta algorithm recognizing him as their primary author.
                     Assuming the honesty of the showrunner, this in itself is an important finding,
                     showing that at least in the case of the texts clearly written by one
                     scriptwriter, both his own authorial signal and that of the showrunner are
                     easily detectable. The results for writers known to have been edited by the
                     showrunner are less easily interpretable and reliable: while thanks to Davies’s
                     memoir we know he corrected them in this, fourth, season, a question remains
                     whether the texts written by regular scriptwriters for earlier seasons were
                     just as heavily corrected. Since I used them as training data to teach the
                     model their style, positive answer to this question would mean that in the
                     examined season Davies’s impact was stronger than the combination of writers’
                     style and his editorial impact as evidenced in earlier seasons. In the event
                     that the earlier texts present pure style of particular authors, results such
                     as obtained would mean that in this season showrunner’s stylistic impact
                     completely overshadows most of the credited authors. The case of Moffat’s
                     episode, unedited by Davies but still showing his stylistic impact is
                     particularly interesting, giving grounds to raise the question how much of
                     showrunner’s stylistic fingerprint can be carried by others through imitation
                     or following set tone of the show? While we know imitation is still detectable
                     in literature despite best efforts (e.g. a case of translation by two people in
                        Rybicki and Heydel 2013), perhaps the more
                     controlled medium of TV series, or some of its features, like creating
                     character idiolects, allows for easier speaking in someone else’s voice?
                  
                     The Doctor’s Daughter (4x06) contrasted sequentially against R.T Davies
                        (red) and M. Gatiss (green); 100 most frequent words.
                     
                  
                  
                     Silence in the Library (4x08) contrasted sequentially against R.T Davies
                        (green) and S. Moffat red); 100 most frequent words.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Unicorn and the Wasp (4x07) contrasted sequentially against R.T
                        Davies (green) and G. Roberts (red); 100 most frequent words.
                     
                  
                  Insofar as Moffat has published no memoir describing his writing and
                     showrunning process and does not discuss the issue at length, with but
                     occasional mentions that he just sets the tone of the show, I decided to
                     examine episodes which co-credited him as an author, as well as some randomly
                     selected works from his era. As visible in Figures 13-14, his impact as a
                     showrunner was determined to be less visible, although still significant.
                     However, his impact when sharing authorial credits (Figure 15) seems to be
                     quite dominating, even if still far from the influence executed by Davies.
                  
                     The God Complex (6x11) contrasted sequentially against T. Whithouse
                        (green) and S. Moffat (red); 100 most frequent words.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Rebel Flesh (6x05) contrasted sequentially against S. Moffat (green)
                        and M. Graham (red); 100 most frequent words.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Caretaker (8x06) contrasted sequentially against S Moffat (green) and
                        G. Roberts (red); 100 most frequent words. This episode credits them both as
                        authors.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               4.3 Character features
               The analysis of sole lines of the Doctor revealed a level of distinction between
                  the Thirteenth and other New Who Doctors. The easiest hypothesis would be the
                  impact of gender – the new female Doctor versus all men – or distinct impact of
                  the showrunner. However, at least the Davies era episodes written by Chibnall show
                  the latter’s stylistic submission rather than his own vision of the Doctor. 
               To verify this, I conducted contrastive analysis with Craig’s Zeta  to compare the Thirteenth Doctor against her four direct
                  predecessors, considered together and separately. Additionally, I also ran another
                  test comparing Doctors created by Davies and by Moffat. Craig’s Zeta allows for
                  comparing two groups of texts to find words used consistently throughout texts in
                  one of the groups, and consistently avoided by the other, and vice versa.
                  Obviously, the most frequent words disappear, while content medium-frequency words
                  come to the surface; this is also the reason why this version of quantitative
                  analysis becomes (at least slightly) more similar to the traditional/qualitative
                  approach.
               As contrastive analysis was performed without culling, meaning that all words were
                  included as they were, one immediate feature of lists of words characteristic to
                  the particular regenerations is the high position of the proper names relating to
                  companions – which is caused by frequent addressing of the given character or
                  talking about them. This is true in most cases, but reveals various relations
                  between the Doctor and their sidekicks: the names of all companions of the Ninth
                  and Thirteenth Doctor are at the top of the list, but other Doctors show their
                  preference towards a particular companion, e.g. Tenth to Rose over Martha and
                  Donna, Eleventh to Amy over Rory and Clara. 
               On the first look, it would be easy to interpret the results as presenting a
                  gendered portrayal of characters – the new female Doctor says love,
                  woman,
                  together, and please more often than other Doctors. However, a
                  deeper analysis of preferred words of her and other Doctors shows that it is not
                  that simple. Love is more characteristic for the Eleventh Doctor, known for
                  his expressive and emotional attitude to the world, and while please is
                  high on the Thirteenth’s most used list, its only seems high in comparison to
                  Ninth and Twelfth Doctors, arguably more stereotypically male and harsher in
                  behavior than the other two male Doctors. Please is also a word preferred
                  by Moffat Doctors over Davies Doctors. 
               One characteristic feature of the language of the Thirteenth Doctor is a high
                  ratio of elliptic adverbs such as obviously,
                  presumably,
                  definitely,
                  possibly, as well as the adjective sure. Also, regenerations written
                  by Moffat use them more often than Davies, which may influence the pattern of
                  relative frequencies in the corpus enough to partly explain the fact that, in the
                  network studies presented above, Louvain Modularity recognizes Chibnall as closer
                  to Moffat than to Davies. When analyzed in context, this use of adverbs reveals an
                  interesting conclusion for the first female Doctor: compared to her predecessors
                  who were largely explaining the world to their companions, the Thirteenth Doctor
                  is more likely to engage in a discussion that may lead to her questioning
                  hypotheses of her team or confirming their intuition and reasoning. 
               This is where knowledge of the audiovisual material and the whole corpus is
                  helpful in the interpretation of the results: of the five New Who Doctors who
                  struggle with posttraumatic stress disorder  caused by
                  their regeneration, loss of home planet and subsequent companions, the Thirteenth
                  Doctor is the one who healed best and looks forward to a major change in her
                  attitude. In the past, through travels with various companions, the Doctor often
                  relied on their help, but at the end of the day the higher (intellectual) position
                  of the Doctor was always clear. The last season shows the Doctor who chooses to
                  engage into a team relationship rather than create a strong bond with an
                  individual or duo of characters, and to give them more space for their own agenda.
                  She takes on three companions (and only one of them is a young woman, which was a
                  given for her predecessors), and while at various points of her introductory
                  season some of them seem to be more important than others, overall they have about
                  the same number of lines per episode and (which was not measured quantitatively)
                  seem to have about the same amount of screen time. Altogether the companions speak
                  about 30% of all lines per episode, almost matching the part of the Doctor (~35%),
                  and this is the highest ratio of participation of the companions in the New Who,
                  the most talkative of whom rarely surpassed half of the lines of the Doctor during
                  the Davies era, and 25% under Moffat. 
               The keywords obtained in the analysis also show the Thirteenth Doctor to be quite
                  tech-savvy, even compared to the Tenth Doctor who was famous for his technobabble
                  such as This is my timey-wimey detector. It goes ding when
                     there's stuff (Blink, 3x10). She has readings,
                  signals, etc. Finally, her list includes kill,
                  killing, and weapons, and while fighting and killing
                  are characteristic for Davies when contrasted with Moffat, the Thirteenth Doctor
                  is the one whom these words distinguish the most. All Doctors are pacifist and
                  opposing violence, and the show generally avoids showing death of people, even
                  though the Doctor has to die to regenerate. Already the Moffat tenure showed some
                  relaxation of this rule (there is a recurring fan joke saying he was never able to
                  permanently kill off a character), frequently using death by sacrifice as a plot
                  development tool, only to later cancel it by introduction of a workaround. The
                  Thirteenth Doctor deals with death much more often – it concerns both major
                  characters and random people, and it is not justified by sacrifice; in fact, it
                  may seem almost accidental, as when a Tzim-Sha warrior kills an elderly security
                  guard peacefully doing his watch in 11x01. The most recent Doctor and her
                     gang fight with cruel creatures and people killing on a regular
                  basis. 
               Combined, observed differences between the most recent female and the earlier male
                  regenerations seem to be related more to the change of the mode from lone
                     genius to team leader rather than building the character according
                  to traditional gender roles. Considering social-emotional keywords, Thirteenth
                  Doctor seems to be most similar to Tenth and Eleventh. Interestingly, contrastive
                  analysis of Davies and Moffat Doctors also revealed that the former has a
                  preference towards social sphere of life (words such as mother,
                  family, but also alone,
                  human), while the latter is distinguished by more verbs (e.g. feel,
                  shut,
                  forget,
                  talking), and expressive interjections. 
            
         

            5. Conclusions
            This study allowed for automatic detection of creative forces that have a driving
               influence on the development of the Doctor Who TV show. It shows the basic
               distinction between Classic and New series and various modes of operation within
               them. The results of word frequency analyses show that the change the show underwent
               at the time of its reinvention in 2005 brought a major shift in its textual
               structure: while the Classic series seems to be more topic- or regeneration-oriented,
               the New series show a strong authorial signal of the showrunners, with the two
               longest-running ones being the most distinct. 
            The development of the show proceeds in a slightly different way when considering all
               dialogue lines rather than exclusively the lines of the protagonist. In the latter
               case, the Classic series exhibits well-defined communities for the first four
               regenerations, with this pattern breaking only for the last three Doctors, coinciding
               with a slow decline in the popularity of the show. In case of New Who, only
               Thirteenth Doctor clusters slightly apart, and the remaining four regenerations form
               two communities responding to showrunners creating respective regenerations. A closer
               analysis of the words distinguishing this first female Doctor from her male
               predecessors revealed that she is more of a team player who uses a higher ratio of
               words indicating dialogue involving exchange of opinions and cooperation. This
               strongly suggests that such a distinction has less to do with traditional gender
               perception of women and more with a more democratic attitude towards her
               companions.
            While so far stylometry has rarely been used for more detailed studies of television
               discourse, the conducted contrastive analysis with Craig’s Zeta produced results
               allowing for similar analysis as those obtained with Wordsmith by other scholars such
               as Bednarek, likely because they both also rely on algorithms of keyword detection.
               Furthermore, the obtained insight into authorial structures suggests that, at least
               in the case of some series, the television language may not be as heavily
               conventionalized as it is generally thought to be, and may bear quite significant
               stylistic markers of particular writers, which makes for an important point to
               consider while building a corpus for the purpose of examining general linguistic
               features of television language.
            It may seem that a quantitative analysis resulting mostly in confirmation of
               observations made in qualitative analysis is pointless. However, reaching the same
               conclusions with different means supports the usefulness and validity of such
               methods, making an argument for their employment to problems exceeding possibilities
               of close reading, such as studies of much larger series of whole television genres,
               and granting that observations deducted via somewhat more intuition-driven and human
               perception-based methods stand. The latter is especially important for studies
               related to popular culture, in the light of Tore Rye
                  Andersen's (2012) hypothesis (as adapted to television discourse by Jensen 2017) that scholars relying solely on
               qualitative analysis are at greater risk of being unwillingly influenced by extensive
               authorial paratexts and marketing materials accompanying highly promoted works.
            The use of stylometry for study of television dialogue requires carefulness and will
               certainly not be an attractive method in all kinds of studies. It should also be
               considered that, as explained, Doctor Who is fairly unique in many ways, which means
               that using similar methods with other data, and perhaps payng attention to other
               factors while doing so, will be needed to provide more final opinions. However, given
               that stylometry proved useful in various types of the analysis of Doctor Who, I dare
               express the hope that it can offer valid insight into stylistic relations inter and
               intra other works, and that hopefully with the further development of computer vision
               and speaker diarization methods it will soon be possible to compare the similarities
               between works on textual, visual and audio levels. 
         

            Acknowledgements
            I would like to thank the editorial team and the reviewers for their valueable
               feedback. My gratitude also goes to Jan Rybicki for his inspiring this study a few
               years back, and to him and Maciej Eder for consulting the project and the text of
               this paper. The study was conducted as part of the Large-Scale Text Analysis and
               Methodological Foundations of Computational Stylistics project (SONATA-BIS
               2017/26/E/HS2/01019) funded by the Polish National Science Center (NCN), for whose
               support I am very grateful. 
         
