Title:  Designing Data Mining Droplets: New Interface Objects for the Humanities
               Scholar
Volume:  003
Issue:  3
Date:  29 September 2009
Abstract:  
            In this paper, we describe the design of a number of alternative interface
                  droplets that are intended for use by humanities scholars interested in
               applying data mining and information visualization tools to the task of hypothesis
               formulation. The trained droplets provide several functions. Their primary purpose is
               to encapsulate the results of the software training phase. They can be saved for
               future re-use against other collections or combinations of collections. They can be
               modified by having the user accept or reject features identified by the data mining
               software. Finally, they can also contain choices for how to display and organize
               items in the collection. The opportunity to develop a new interface object presents
               the designer with the challenge of effectively communicating what the tool is good
               for and how it is used. This paper outlines the design process we followed in
               creating the visual representations of these interface objects, describes the
               communicative strengths and weaknesses of a number of alternative designs, and
               discusses the importance of the study of new interface objects as the means of
               providing the user with new interface affordances.
         
Full Body Text: 
Designing Data Mining Droplets: New Interface Objects for the Humanities
            Scholar

            Introduction
            The goal of this paper is to address some of the conceptual issues that arise in the
               design of a new kind of interface object for a specific domain — data mining for the
               humanities. In that context, we describe one component of our research: the design of
               a form of visual representation that would provide humanities scholars with some
               insight into the data mining process, while at the same time making the activity of
               data mining attractive and easy to carry out.
            
               An early sketch of the data mining environment (in this case for the NORA
                  project) shows someone using a droplet trained for identifying the erotic in a set
                  of poems from the Emily Dickinson collection in the Institute for Advanced
                  Technology in the Humanities (IATH) at the University of Virginia. Note that the
                  preliminary droplet design shown here (bottom right) has no specifically
                  communicative morphology.
               
               Screenshot of the data mining worksheet for step three.
            
            Our strategy in this interface was to provide the user with a variety of empty
                  droplets which would be filled with the results of the software training
               phase . Each droplet would contain or encapsulate an
               entire working state of the system, including the algorithmic consequences of a
               particular training exercise, combined with some parameters for organizing and
               selecting the form of the display. The choice of the proper word to identify the
               droplets is in itself a subject of design. Other terms that have been suggested
               include magnet,
               crystal,
               capsule,
               lens,
               charm,
               filter,
               system state,
               kernel, and the very Canadian hockey puck. Whatever these objects are
               eventually called, for the time being we are using the term droplet, which
               suggests to us a densely compressed item that can unpack in an organic way to
               influence the entire surroundings. Once a droplet has been trained for data mining,
               it can be saved and applied to the entire collection, or to a different collection. A
               droplet is applied to a collection by dragging and dropping it onto a display
               representing each item, after which the display organizes itself in a series of
                  oil and water effects. 
            Of vital significance to the success of this strategy is the design of the droplets.
               The droplets need to be able to represent the relevant information about the data
               mining process in a form that is readily interpretable by humanities scholars. The
               droplet serves in one sense like an icon — a person looking at it will hopefully
               remember what system state it contains. This iconic function should work at different
               scales, at least one of which is quite small. The droplets therefore need to be
               easily visually differentiable one from another, at every scale. Finally, the
               droplets need to be visually appealing. We describe here our initial attempts to
               design these interface objects, based on a set of metaphors to real-world items that
               combine complex visual appearance with a compact form.
         

            Background
            The online availability of a wide range of digital data has resulted in a
               corresponding increase in various kinds of tools for retrieving and manipulating the
               items in a collection . Interface design researchers have
               worked on systems intended to help users access digital images, work with electronic
               text files, and apply data mining algorithms to a variety of problems, both in the
               sciences and in the humanities.
            In the area of digital images,  describes a zoomable
               browser,  provides an experimental search tool that
               uses a colour wheel as its interface, and  discuss the
               use of maps in accessing a digital library. Other examples include , who studied the use of similarity clustering for browsing
               tasks, and , who developed a prototype image browser for
               pill identification.
            For tools related to text files,  describe a system for
               visualizing documents which allows the user to form dynamic groups.  developed a 3D prototype for text navigation, where the
               reader moved between columns of text from Shakespeare’s plays. A variety of
               researchers have worked in the area of data mining for text collections of various
               kinds. For example,  discuss early efforts in this area,
               and  provide a recent update on methods.
            Some researchers have pointed out that the potential for applying data mining tools
               to questions in the humanities lies largely in the capacity of such tools to
               contribute, not primarily to hypothesis testing, but instead to hypothesis
               formulation ; ; . The standard approach in humanities research is not to
               solve a problem by testing one hypothesis against another, but rather to enrich the
               object of study by repeated observation and reporting. Data mining tools and their
               accompanying visualizations, which facilitate pattern finding across a wide range of
               data, can definitely play a role in this process.
            With respect to the design of interfaces for data mining, it is important to remember
               that each new online tool represents a new opportunity for action, or affordance ; . For instance, in a more
               conventional approach to the interface for data mining, it would be possible to
               create a history palette that records previous states of the system. However, it is
               not necessarily straightforward to repurpose an item from that history to a new
               collection. By encapsulating the history states as droplets, we make the repurposing
               simpler.
            Another significant feature of the droplets is their role in interactivity. By
               providing the user with an item to drag and drop to trigger a series of dynamic
               responses from the system, the droplets help facilitate an instructional aspect: the
               user can see the steps carried out by system, which correspond to the steps
               associated with the droplet. While visually dynamic responses are not reliant on the
               presence of droplets as objects, their existence as part of the user interaction
               helps to suggest to the designer these various new forms of feedback, which are a
               kind of affordance.
            Studying these new affordances presents a challenge, in that the researcher by
               definition does not always have an existing object with a similar affordance —
               otherwise it would be a case of a redesign rather than a new tool . Though opinions vary, the current dominant perspective is
               that interface research requires a component of usability study , but that usability study alone is probably not enough.
               Attention should also be paid to other factors, such as aesthetics , effect , and sustained use
               over time .
         

            Methodology
            We began by identifying the kinds of information the user might want to know while
               working with the system. These included an overview of the process, suggestions about
               the kinds of tasks that could be performed using the system, reassurance at each
               point that the right things were happening, and assistance in interpreting the
               results of each stage and moving successfully to the next stage. With the droplets,
               we hoped to be able to communicate what had been done to create them, in order to
               suggest how they might be successfully deployed once they were created.
            To construct the droplets, we generated a candidate list of real-world items that
               have a sufficiently complex physical shape to serve as possible metaphors for the
               complexities of the data mining process. We determined early in the process that it
               would be difficult and probably not helpful to attempt to communicate for this
               demographic the actual algorithms involved, as for example by superimposing an
               equation on a geometric shape. Instead, we hoped to be able to visually express the
               following information:
            
               Is this a trained droplet or an empty one?
               For trained droplets, has the user accepted the features recommended by the
                  system or has the list of features been modified?
               What kinds of features were included?
               How many features were included?
               What options for display have been associated with the droplet?
               What choices for organizing the display have been applied?
            
            There are also other pieces of information that could be useful for understanding
               what has been happening. These items need to be communicated somehow but could be
               difficult to associate with the visual appearance of the droplets. These include:
            
               The name of the collection or collections used in training.
               The size of the collection.
               The size of the training set.
               The name and goals of the person responsible for training the droplet.
            
            Some strategies involving droplet morphology might include using the size of the
               droplet to indicate the size of the training set or of the collection the set was
               drawn from. Internal and external lines can also be thickened or lightened as a way
               of suggesting robustness of the training set. Finally, depending on the visual kind
               of droplet, it may be possible to nest one droplet inside another, as a way of
               indicating their use in combination.
            It may also be possible to associate this information with the droplets using
               strategies that do not involve the droplet morphology per se, but
               instead rely on the combination of text and image. Combining these methods is seen by
               some theorists as an important approach to the design of technical communications
                  . We will provide this connection in the case of the
               prototype by refreshing an information panel about the droplet details whenever the
               user selects a droplet. This panel will also provide the opportunity to adjust some
               of the settings stored by the droplet.
         

            Results


            Working from our original map of over a dozen potential metaphors (Figure 2), we selected the following short list for
               further investigation. We wanted to have a variety of items that were distinct from
               each other but were also visually complex in a way that could communicate the stages
               in droplet training. We thought we should include examples that covered points on a
               terrain that included the organic and the mechanical, with reference to several
               disciplines. Finally, we tried to choose examples that could be contained by a common
               perimeter. Our working list contained the following items:
            
               Ferns — configurations of individual organic pieces that form larger
                  items
               Snowflakes — a single solid unique configuration that relies on symmetry
               Solar system — individual items in relations suggested by a larger
                  structure
               Atoms — individual items connected in a more elaborate geometric
                  framework
               Cells — complex interiors composed of pieces that associate by
                  juxtaposition
               Clockwork — complex interiors consisting of structures that interconnect
               Lego™ — geometric shapes with complex surfaces that interconnect
            
            For each of these metaphors, we developed sketches for four different states of the
               droplet: untrained, trained, trained with multiple display options chosen, and
               trained with multiple display and two different organization options. Our goal in
               each case was to make the different states visually distinct at every level of
               magnification, and to make the number of display and organization options obvious at
               the largest size.
            
               Our concept map of possible droplet metaphors shows a wide range of candidate
                  real-world objects that combine visual complexity with a compact form.
               
               Concept map with the word 'droplets' in the center.
            
            We chose these various states because they represent significant choices made by the
               user. It would also be possible to consider visually representing choices the user
               makes about what collection to work with in the first place, which may be one of the
               most significant choices the user makes. However, visually representing collections
               is definitely a challenge, and it may be preferable to provide information about the
               collection in the form of text labels.

            
               Ferns
               A fern is a fractal, which means it repeats its morphology at increasing scales
                     (Figure 3). We might adopt this strategy for two
                  scales, where in the unfolding fern leaf, the individual leaflets represent
                  functions and the entire leaf represents the complete, organized droplet.
               We can use the stem to represent the software training, and the leaflets to
                  represent the other functions. This strategy has the benefit of looking minimal
                  when no display or organization functions are chosen, which may prompt the user to
                  want to choose more sophisticated configurations of options.
               If we also assume that the two sides of the stem represent two kinds of
                  organization, then having all the display items on one side of the stem would
                  indicate only one kind of sorting, while dividing display items on both sides of
                  the stem would indicate two kinds of sorting.
               
                  The placement of leaflets along the stem of the fern leaf allows us to
                     express the user choices starting with an empty droplet (left), then
                     sequentially adding training data, display choices, then organization in one
                     way and in two ways.
                  
                  Five yellow droplets with various types of leaves inside.
               
               Reading the sequence from left to right, we show first an untrained or empty
                  droplet. The next version shows a droplet that has been trained by the user.
                  Taking one of the demonstration projects as an example, this second droplet might
                  contain the results of training the system to recognize poems by Emily Dickinson
                  with an erotic charge, using a naïve Bayesian algorithm. The third version shows
                  this same trained droplet with seven items chosen for display. In the case of the
                  Dickinson collection, these items might include the poem’s title (often the first
                  line), the date of first publication, the place of publication, the name of the
                  publisher, the number of lines in the poem, the number of words in the poem, the
                  number of key features found in the poem related to eroticism, and the numeric
                  score assigned by the system for the poem in terms of its erotic charge. The
                  fourth version would represent the same information about each poem, but organize
                  the results in some way — perhaps by the numeric rating assigned by the system.
                  The fifth and final version would show the items arranged in two ways — first by
                  numeric rating, and chronologically within that.
               The organic nature of the fern droplet may lead to some difficulties for the user
                  in that a growth process for a fern is not the same as selection among various
                  options by a user defining a droplet. The use of this organic metaphor, however,
                  does suggest another possibility — would it be interesting to indicate how long it
                  has been since someone used a droplet? Do the droplets visibly age when they
                  aren’t used? Does new use refresh the appearance of the droplet? Would people be
                  encouraged to experiment with strange droplets because they are obviously drying
                  up or deteriorating?
            
            
               Snowflakes
               Ferns suggest quite a regular form of arrangement, which means there is little
                  meaningful variation possible between different droplets. Snowflakes also tend to
                  symmetry, but each is unique. They combine a complex silhouette with a compact
                  form (Figure 4). Variations in the details
                  comprising the silhouette could therefore be used to communicate a wide range of
                  functions. 
               However, the strong visual language of the snowflake may prove to be difficult to
                  repurpose as a meaningful channel of communication. The fact that each snowflake
                  is supposed to be unique also means that there is no basic, restricted vocabulary
                  of shapes to draw on in their construction.
               
                  Each snowflake is a unique visual object, which allows us to differentiate
                     one droplet from another, but introduces a difficulty in that there is no
                     simple method of re-using recognizable components.
                  
                  Five blue snowflakes with varying decorations inside.
               
               Our draft solution in this case is to treat the visual complexity of the interior
                  of the object as the measure of the state of the droplet. Unlike our other
                  designs, which involve composites of countable objects, the snowflake droplets
                  indicate each condition by filling in spaces that are otherwise unarticulated.
               
            
            
               Solar System
               Objects in the solar system create a composite object where the individual items
                  are in relation to one another but not in immediate contact (Figure 5). The central position of the sun also serves
                  to imply the centrality of the software training. A solar system without a sun is
                  clearly incomplete.
               
                  The solar system, with its objects in orbit, provides a structure that can
                     be progressively filled with planetary dots that represent choices of
                     representation, while location on the orbits is used to indicate
                     organization.
                  
                  Five sample solar system droplets with orbiting objects in different
                     locations.
               
               Another potential difficulty with several of the designs, including the solar
                  system, is that they may suggest a degree of order and regularity which may be
                  somewhat at odds with the experience of the scholar using data mining techniques.
                  Using a data mining system can actually involve an iterative and somewhat
                     messy experimentation with various options.
            
            
               Atomic
               Our starting point for the atomic droplets are the simple models that consist of
                  electrons in elliptical orbits around a nucleus (Figure
                     6). The nucleus is filled in during the training phase, while the
                  inclusion of electrons and their locations represent choices about item
                  representation and organization.
               
                  Atomic models provide a vocabulary for expressing the components of the
                     droplets, consisting of individual items connected to each other.
                  
                  Five sample atoms with particles in various locations.
               
            
            
               Cells
               A cell has an interior that is populated with a number of distinct individual
                  items and structures (Figure 7). Cells therefore
                  provide a compact metaphor based on the complexities of the interior of the
                  droplet. We also have available for future exploration the single-celled
                  organisms, such as the paramecium, which combine this interior complexity with an
                  exterior with some communicative potential.
               Cells also suggest an organic form, which may help to counterbalance the highly
                  technical profile of data mining in the humanities.
               
                  A cell is neither an aggregate nor does it have a complex silhouette. Its
                     communicative potential consists instead of a rich interior of organic shapes,
                     including individual items and structures that divide, enclose, and support
                     them.
                  
                  Five purple cells with varying arrangements of inner parts.
               
            
            
               Clockwork
               A clockwork is a complex interior like a cell, without the suggestion of the
                  organic (Figure 8). There is a high degree of
                  interconnection of the parts inside a clock, implying that all the parts are
                  necessary in order for it to work. This level of constraint on what is necessary
                  and what is optional might not be appropriate in the context of data mining, but
                  the operational nature of the clock and the implied association with the
                  mathematical operations underlying data mining may make it particularly
                  appropriate.
               The variety of interior components also provides a potentially rich visual
                  vocabulary for representing the different aspects of the droplets. Finally, we
                  have used an external outline suggestive of clock gears, in order to allow a
                  direct visual association to the mechanical, even for the untrained form of the
                  droplet.
               
                  Like a cell, a clockwork shows a rich internal landscape that can be used to
                     represent a variety of functions. Clockworks are mechanical rather than
                     organic, and therefore suggest interconnection, rather than isolation of the
                     functions.
                  
                  Five sample clock droplets with varying arrangements of gears.
               
            
            
               Lego™
               With Lego, there are a set number of individual shapes that are aggregated. With
                  this metaphor, we can use the external contour of the composite droplet (Figure 9). We can distinguish by size between more and
                  less important functions, so the central training can be indicated by large Lego
                  piece, while the display functions are secondary and the organization functions
                  tertiary.
               Lego also comes with the affordance of assembling the separate pieces into
                  different configurations. The user could distinguish between similar droplets by
                  taking advantage of different kinds of arrangement.
               
                  Lego™ suggests a method of combining separate items to create a new whole.
                     For our purposes, each individual piece of Lego would stand either for the
                     result of software training or for a choice of representation or
                     organization.
                  
                  Five sample Lego™ pieces built in different designs.
               
            
         

            Conclusions and Future Research
            Having identified a range of possibilities, our next step will be to present them to
               potential users in order to collect measures of performance and preference. By
               placing them in the interactive context of a prototype environment, we will be able
               to examine how humanities scholars respond to the various affordances. The goals of
               this phase will be to determine whether participants are able to make the necessary
               intuitive leaps to understand the intended communicative aspects of each of the
               droplet designs. Once we’ve established a smaller subset of droplets, we will proceed
               by expanding the visual positioning or skinning of each droplet type, in order to
               determine how humanities scholars respond to various semantic differentials such as
               glossy/rough, technological/natural, geometric/organic, and colour/grey scale. By
               determining how potential users of the data mining system perceive the design
               dimensions of the droplets, we will be able to decide to what extent this strategy
               can prove beneficial in removing barriers to them adopting the system. One
               possibility may consist of the use of a hybrid form of droplets, where different
               visual components are assembled in a kind of toolkit. Our eventual decisions with
               respect to the design of the droplets may also be usefully repurposed to inform the
               visual aspects of the design of the entire system.
         

            Acknowledgements
            The authors wish to thanks the many members of the NORA project research team for
               their contributions to this work. Their names can be found at http://www.noraproject.org/team.php. We would also like to acknowledge the
               generous support of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Social Sciences and
               Humanities Research Council of Canada, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council
               of Canada, and the Canadian Foundation for Innovation.
         
