Title:  As You Can See: Applying Visual Collaborative Filtering to Works of Art
Volume:  002
Issue:  1
Date:  21 June 2008
Abstract:  
            Art historically relevant visual knowledge can be deconstructed and the resulting
               components of this visual knowledge — visual discernments — lend themselves to be
               socially negotiated. Individual visual experts (like connoisseurs) do not share some
               grand and undividable cognitive cataloguing system; they are attentive to piecemeal
               visual discernments and the patterns in which these occur in reality. In conventional
               scholarly communication sophisticated tools to discuss perceptual patterns are
               lacking. This paper not only proposes a theoretical model of visual knowledge
               accumulation, but also describes a practical implementation, Art.Similarities, which is designed as a prototype of such a
               sophisticated tool. Using a custom-made interface it records visual behavior: the
               non-verbally expressed visual similarity judgments of distributed individuals. Users
               can be assigned to groups according to the qualities of their judgments. These
               qualities may be distilled from emerging similarity patterns. The implications of
               individual judgments in different user groups may vary considerably. Emerging
               patterns can be assessed both according to human analysis and statistical procedures.
               Most studies on art evaluation are attentive to either the characteristics of works,
               or the characteristics of observers. In this study both are considered as
               interdependent entities consistently. 
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Without being aware of the underlying technologies, our behavior is frequently
               recorded, assessed, and fed back to us via today's Web interfaces. Information
               systems are now far more advanced in mirroring preferences, curiosities, and yes,
                  knowledge, than they were, say, five years ago. The example which is
               familiar to us all is Amazon.com.Other interesting examples: Connotea, LibraryThing, MovieLens, Last.fm, Steve.museum. The list is
                  open-ended. The world's largest bookstore makes clever use of the newest
               collaborative filtering technology.
                  
                     Collaborative
                        filtering is the method of making automatic predictions (filtering) about
                        the interests of a user by collecting taste information from many users
                        (collaborating)
                     http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_filtering
                  . For more extensive reading, refer to ,  and .  From a
               complex database of recorded consumer behavior persuasive, personalized web pages are
               generated. The idea behind the process is that statistically combining traces of user
               behavior will yield knowledge about user interests. A question indicative of
                  ever shifting intellectual property concerns is whether surreptitious measurements
                  of user behavior should be considered a breach of copyright laws. That someone's
                  purchasing behavior is a creative act may be defendable. If you have ever
               ordered a book that was suggested to you by Amazon, that forms the best proof of the
               success of the collaborative filtering approach.
            Looking at the basic idea behind collaborative filtering systems, one may wonder
               whether this concept is applicable to the humanities, where the expression of value
               judgments (as against stating incontrovertible facts) is of such importance. Building
               a collaborative filtering tool involves first establishing what are supposed to be
               relevant data, and then modeling the way these data may be recorded and organized, in
               order to turn data into information, and perhaps collaborative knowledge.
                  The value of such an exercise could be in testing the methods of the field
                     under consideration. Advocates of humanities computing like John Unsworth have
                     stressed the fact that computational techniques may have the collateral benefit
                     of indicating where are methodological flaws in scholarly research: 
                        
                           The implementation of a spec
                              in a program appears as a kind of critique of the text of the
                              spec — which is to say, when you sketch what you think you
                           understand, and then try to turn that sketch into a series of
                           instructions a computer can execute, you find out where there are holes
                           in your sketch, where it breaks down. Similarly, when you design an
                           information structure and then try to fit the actual information into it,
                           you find out where the structure doesn’t fit. That’s the back and forth
                           between part and whole, rule and instance.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            This paper discusses a field test in collaboratively establishing visual
               similarities, a topic of concern in art history. Art.Similarities is the experimental application used to sample visual
               similarity judgments. For a comprehensive project on collaborative
                     verbal tagging (in the context of museum information systems),
                  refer to the Steve.museum project.
                  Cf.  and . See also  for contextual materials. A more general
                  verbal tagging application, much discussed, is Google Image
                     Labeler, based on the work of Luis von Ahn. Cf. . The experiment could be relevant for other
               disciplines than the history of art, both inside and outside the humanities. 
            The bulk of research in distributed cognition is text-based — as we shall see in the
               next paragraph. For this type of research in information science and cognitive
               psychology an example in the domain of visual cognition may be advantageous. In
               particular crossing off the intermediary function of verbal language, may encourage
               the development of scenarios for combining transactional data (partial observations
               of visual artifacts) to construct emergent knowledge (holistic representations). This
               is why I believe that in its consequences this field test could support
               cross-cultural comparisons in visual cognition.
            I also expect that the project may shine a new light on the relation between the
               cultural interpretation of images and words on one side, and the relation between
               such cultural interpretations and objective image data, e.g. as produced by
               content-based image retrieval technologies , on the other
               side. In other words: it could help tracing the line between objective visual facts
               (as captured for instance in a color histogram) and more interpretive truths. 
            In the practical sphere, because visual attention becomes partly measurable and
               comparable, the project may contribute to the development of educational
               applications, in which students learn to reflect on culture as a determinant of
               visual cognition. And because the interconnectedness of base distinctions and more
               evolved cultural knowledge is worked out computationally, it becomes conceivable that
               by means of technology subjects will be offered the tools to vary the compositional
               elements of a visual configuration, just as when you add or remove query strings
               based on intermediate search results, when searching large volumes of texts.
            I presume that the latent possibilities of the Art.Similarities experiment will only come to the fore when we do not
               discuss it in isolation. Therefore consider in advance that interesting alternatives
               may evolve when varying such dimensions as:
            
               the scale on which the application is used (small, maybe local communities
                  versus large, global crowds); 
               a focus on gathering coherent large scale data versus a focus on developing
                  various applications (to be populated with different sets of data); 
               the application in isolation versus the application as a building block in more
                  complicated dedicated software (e.g. as one of the options to organize visual
                  materials in image databases or image processing software).
            
            Such dimensions are important in assessing the usefulness of the experiment. Just to
               get an idea of the kind of problem addressed here, consider these two works of art,
               dating from the early 1930s:
            
               Georgia O'Keeffe, Black and White, 1930, oil on
                  canvas. Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. © c/o Pictoright Amsterdam
                  2008.
               
               A black and white painting composed of overlapping diagonal shapes
            
            
               Edward Weston, Sand Dunes, Oceano, 1934, gelatin
                  silver print. Center for Creative Photography, Tucson AZ. © c/o CCP Tucson AZ
                  2008
               
               A black and white photograph of a dune landscape with diagonal shapes of
                  light and shadow
            
            Both images show a striking overall similarity. Experienced observers seeing these
               works of art, may draw conclusions about artistic influences. And indeed, artists are
               observers by profession, adopting typical ways of expressing visual thoughts in new
               visual configurations. The history of art has documented innumerable instances of
               both explicit and implicit borrowing of formal traits and configurations. For a
                  classic study refer to . This is partly
               motivated by the common assumption that visual phenomena in cultural artifacts are
               indices of material, personal and social conditions during the time of creation.
            Establishing visual similarities is part of the groundwork in the field of art
               history, but making these similarity observations verifiable is precisely where the
               conventional systems of scholarly communication fail, since neither do we have an
               effective way of discussing visual similarities, nor do we have the means to trace
               observed similarities in large collections of images.Here the word
                     effective is used in the sense of being able to get at the record
                  , which is a modest objective. One of the rare attempts
                  to communicate in a systematic way about certain (compositional) features of works
                  of art is Erle Loran's controversial book on Cézanne's composition . Loran developed a diagrammatic language to point at
                  organizational principles in the paintings of Cézanne. His diagrams, however, are
                  fairly dependent on the oeuvre being studied. For the present experiment they are
                  not sufficiently simple. It is my aim to use more attenuated diagrammatic
                  images in order to communicate less specific image characteristics.
            
         

            Collaborative Knowledge
            In recent years we have seen several attempts at constructing frameworks for the
               study of collaborative knowledge. The subject was variously denoted with terms such
               as distributed cognition, social cognition, situated cognition,
               or group cognition. The urge to develop theory in this field has increased
               dramatically since the waves of hypertext enthusiasm in the late 1980s and early
               1990s, the subsequent rise of the world wide web and later semantic web, and the
               popularization, recently, of social software, of which the collaborative filtering
               systems mentioned earlier are an omnipresent example. In theories of collaborative
               knowledge the psychology of Lev Vygotsky, who may have been one of the first to
               envision a socially constructed mind, is frequently referred to. His Mind in Society dates back to 1930 . Gavriel Salomon stressed the importance of the
               complementary concepts of shared cognition (knowledge of the world which is
               continuously established through live interactions among individuals) and
                  off-loaded cognition (recording and processing cognitive facts and
               functions to realia, such as concept maps) . In 1995
               Edwin Hutchins published another influential book, Cognition in
                  the Wild, where the author uses the metaphor of ship navigation to
               pinpoint the cultural nature of cognition: no single individual from the ship's crew
               is capable of managing all the complex operations that are necessary to sail .
            Important building blocks of frameworks for collaborative knowledge are: thought
               processes, as distributed amongst a group of individuals, representations of these
               thought processes, as captured in external realia, and mediating processes (i.e.
               computer systems) that are capable of coordinating both internal and external
               representations and lifting the newly generated forms of knowledge above the level of
               consciousness of the individual. 
            A recent attempt to theorize in this field is Gerry Stahl’s book Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge
               . On the basis of a series of experiments, in which the
               promise of computer supported knowledge negotiation has been tested, Stahl analyses
               the mechanisms of collaborative knowledge building and ends by presenting a tentative
               theory of group cognition. In Stahl’s model the sphere of personal understanding is
               opposed to and merges with a cycle of social knowledge building. Individuals
               articulate – in public statements – personal perspectives, which in a process of
               argumentation and rationale are being assimilated with the perspectives of other
               individuals into collaborative knowledge. This collaborative knowledge is formalized
               and objectified in cultural artifacts that can be observed and known by individuals.
               Et cetera. Stahl’s model may help pointing out the stages of the process of knowledge
               construction and thus facilitate the design of specific forms of computer support
                  .
            Typical for Stahl’s approach is his focus on verbal discourse. Although in some of
               his experiments schematic representations of e.g. floor plans or network
               architectures are crucial to the tasks of his subjects, in most of the experiments he
               uses chat-like conversations and threaded discussions to unfold his theory. But the
               kind of knowledge being researched here is visual knowledge constructed by visual
               means. As yet I have found no models of distributed cognition covering this
               particular domain. In my model the visual discernments (personal focus) of
               individuals are expressed (off-loaded) in visual images, where the computer
               records and mediates (negotiation of perspectives).
         

            Basic Assumptions
            It is taken for granted in this study that the visual appearance of a cultural
               artifact, and thus its potential similarity to other artifacts, is resolvable into
               literally innumerable formal qualities. Two artifacts may share any number of formal
               qualities, and these are thought to somehow account for their similarity. Two
               (visually) identical (=maximally similar) artifacts share immense quantities of
               visual characteristics, whereas for two very dissimilar artifacts the number of
               shared visual traits is minimal. In between the extremes the rule would be that
                  the more two cultural artifacts share a set of singular formal/visual
                  attributes/traits, the more they are experienced as being similar to one
                  another.
               In a sense this is a loose generalization of what as early as 1950 was
                  concluded by Fred Attneave after a series of experiments using simple visual
                  stimuli . Attneave's findings initiated a prolific
                  line of research in the domain of cognitive psychology and computer vision.
               In other words: the actually perceived similarity is defined as the function of an
               unspecified number of trait-to-trait similarities. 
            In order to avoid endless image dissections, another assumption adopted here is that
               the overall visual appearance of a cultural artifact in fact approximates to the
               weighted sum of relatively few, but distinctive formal/visual
               attributes/traits. So I assume that culture is a decisive factor in subjects focusing
               on specific image characteristics: the threat of an infinite number of physical
               features is being balanced by cultural determinants.Some support for this
                  assumption I found in Jörgensen .
            
            Observers have a number of options to denote a visual concept . In most of these options abstract symbols (words, numbers,
               etc.) signify visual similarities. Two options, however, concern iconic references.
               One focuses on the simultaneous display of multiple instances of similar artifacts
               along one or several specific attribute(s). For instance, Santini, Gupta and Jain
               discuss an experimental interface in which the user is allowed 
                  to manipulate not only the individual
                     images, but also the relation between them
                  
               . An example of fairly successful content-based image retrieval is the system
               developed by D.P. Huijsmans et al. for the Leiden 19th-Century
                  Portrait Database (LCPD), a database of Dutch carte-de-visite studio
               portraits (1860-1914). One of the options for consulting the LCPD is a so-called
                  relevance feedback interface. After each retrieval action the user is
               presented a table of results. Feedback is given by just clicking the photographs that
               are close to what the user was looking for, whereupon the system — using
               pre-calculated image characteristics — offers a new set of images, ideally closer
               matching the user's preferences. Et cetera.  In the
               other type of iconic denotation, the one elaborated here, image similarities are
               indicated by simple images exemplifying a restricted set of formal
                  attributes.Russel A. Kirsch defined these as intermediate sources
                  . These simple images are thus conceived as
               visual denotats.A visual denotat is defined here as an actual
                  feature or formal characteristic of a visual artifact, which an observer regards
                  as meaningful and communicable, and which may be referred to by a visual
                  abstraction of that feature. It may be contrasted with the connotat,
                  which is any emotional or otherwise associative response to an artifact which,
                  though meaningful privately, cannot be meaningfully communicated in abstractable
                  visual form. So where Santini et al. avoid immediate deconstruction of
               holistic appearances, this paper will explicitly analyze similarities in
               considering iconic denotations.Consider this as a special type of
                  visual similarity, where one image is replete and the other
                     simple (or, as Goodman worded it, attenuated). The
                  relationship is unbalanced. The simple image might be said to
                     clarify one trait in the replete image, acting this way as a
                  visual denominator. Cf. . See note 14 in this article. In this way, problematic verbal
               denomination issues will be evaded. Present-day computers are perfectly suited to
               create systems for communicating pronouncements on matters of visual similarities
               through instant presentation of instances.It might be objected that even a
                  simple (iconic) image may be (visually) ambiguous, up to the point where the
                  nature of its similarity to a replete visual artifact becomes obscure. This
                  objection is refutable by proposing that whenever associations are ambiguous it is
                  the presentation context that will determine the probability of
                  specific readings. Compare this to the ambiguity of a word like Bank, where
                     Bank + of England <> Bank + under
                  water.
            
            Another assumption concerning the similarity of artifacts has to do with the quantity
               of common visual traits. Where two visual artifacts share a substantial number of
               different visual traits, we say that these artifacts manifest multi-trait
                  similarity. The notion of style may be akin to this concept. In the
               vocabulary of this article style could be defined as multi-trait similarity
                  occurring across multiple images.
            
            Apart from considering the number of visual traits two artifacts have in common, it
               is important to recognize that the relative weight of these visual
               traits is of interest: the more observers indicate they have discerned one particular
               trait, the more relevant this trait will be in any function defining the visual
               similarity of the artifact to any other artifact. Of course it should be kept in mind
               that relevance is dependent on the group these observers belong to. We
               are not considering facts. We need individual human observers to assess
               the visual qualities of artifacts. And assessments may either apply to the entire
               surface of a visual artifact or to only a segment of that surface. Once these
               assessments are recorded they can be analyzed. And the more individuals are involved
               in assessing visual qualities, the greater the cultural relevance of these
               assessments will be. Patterns in individual assessments, calculated for
               social groups, may reveal high order notions (such as — perhaps —
                  stylistic notions). That an individual observer giving individual
               assessments need not be conscious of these high order notions is a fascinating
               idea.
         

            Hypothesis
            The following hypothesis aims at focusing the points made so far: The social
               formation of opinions concerning the visual similarity of cultural artifacts amongst
               a group of motivated observers can be modeled and recorded without the
               application of verbal descriptors, using information technology (web technology,
               databases, statistics), in such a way as to make real use of archived records for
               purposes like: getting to know broad classes of image attributes; retrieving related
               images; and learning the preferences and perceptual biases of user classes and
               individual users.
         

            Experimental Setup
            In order to test the hypothesis an experimental application — Art.Similarities — had to be developed, offering access to a modest
               quantity of digital images. The application interface had to be constructed in such a
               way that it would be relatively easy for observers to link visual icons from a
               restricted but varied set to the digital objects in the collection. Every transaction
               involving the database would have to be recorded to be able to quantitatively compare
               the visual discernments of different observers.
            Here is an approximation of the processes the application should ideally support:
            
               Users identify themselves. New users may be asked to submit a
                     preprocessing user profile, containing data such as: name, age,
                  sex, professional affiliation, etc. Returning users just log in. 
               Novice users are assigned Level 1 privileges, meaning that they are allowed to
                  assess single trait similarities (artifact-icon associations; explained below). 
               A sequence of artifacts is being displayed, one by one, in random order. The
                  Level 1 user is invited to select an appealing work. 
               The selected artifact is presented together with a set of uniform, but visually
                  maximally diverse icons. 
               Level 1 users distinguish single trait similarities between the simple (
                     attenuated) images (icons) and
                     (replete) artifact reproductions, and fix these
                  similarities by means of icon-artifact attributions (one by one).
                     Replete is the word used by
                     Nelson Goodman to indicate that (in certain images, particularly works of art)
                     every namable trait is or may be decisive for the overall aesthetic effect. The
                     opposite of replete in
                     Goodman's vocabulary is attenuated
                     . The concept is used here to
                     distinguish full, rich, multi-trait artifacts from simple (attenuated) icons.
                     See also .
               
               Attribution data are recorded, together with user IDs, date stamps, etc. 
               The preceding steps (i.e. the attribution process) can be repeated, until the
                  user indicates he/she wishes to stop interactions. 
               Since the artifact similarity measures are precisely quantified, statistical
                  procedures may be applied to the records in the database. This will yield
                     artifact profiles. 
               Over time, artifact profiles will be generated/recorded, consisting of sets of
                  icon references related to individual images, together with user IDs. 
               Artifact profiles may be displayed. Repeated artifact-icon associations will
                  become apparent immediately. 
               Artifact similarity measures may be deduced from artifact profiles. These
                  similarities are either single trait (t=1) or multiple trait (t=N) similarities. 
               Based on similarity measures the system can retrieve and display artifacts
                     like the one the user started with (~similarity-groups; s-groups). 
               The profile (in terms icons referred to) of any one of the retrieved artifacts
                  can be inspected individually. This way the user will be able to examine multiple
                  formal perspectives relevant for a given artifact. 
               The user must be able to ask for recorded data concerning each and every
                  artifact-icon association.
               The more artifact-icon assignments a user makes, the more precise a post
                     processing user profile will freeze his visual cognition (behavior). 
               Following a preconceived algorithm the coherence of both preprocessing and post
                  processing user profiles may be analyzed. The outcome may be fed into a process of
                  user classification. 
               Either based on the preprocessing user profile only, or based on the analysis
                  just mentioned, some users may gain the status of Level 2 users (~superpeers). 
               Level 2 users assess high-order artifact qualifications (profiles), thus either
                  implicitly or explicitly approving both perceived inter-artifact similarities and
                  Level 1 user articulations. 
            
         

            Technical Elaboration
            
               Object Modeling and Database Design
               Although the combinatorial nature of calculating visual similarities may
                  eventually lead to a data explosion, the actual number of object classes in this
                  experiment is limited. There are users/observers, visual
                     artifacts, and votes, expressed by means of icons that are
                  indicative of perceived visual traits.Subsequent research may lead to
                     systems where another type of object is involved, viz. the textual
                        argumentation of individuals, worded ad hoc or in the manner of
                     familiar ontologies. For the object types in the experiment open
                  standards were adhered to wherever possible: 
               
                  Visual artifacts were catalogued using the CDWA metadata scheme
                        . Among the attributes in the database are creator
                     name, title, date, etc. In the class diagram below only a subset of the full
                     set has been incorporated. 
                  
                     Users/observers were classified according to common attributes
                     like name and other personal data such as address, gender, age, etc. Specific
                     attributes indicative of observer classes are: education, profession and
                        expertise.In future systems additional attributes can be added in
                        separate tables to record various kinds of performance
                        data.
                  
                  To keep it simple votes were initially recorded with only a
                     minimum of attributes: a key referring to one of the icons, references to the
                     table of users (user name) and artifacts (object id), and a date (and time)
                        stamp.Here are two examples of additional attributes of votes that
                        might or even should be incorporated in future versions of the system.
                        First, normalized picture coordinates: these might be stored to record
                        regions of interest in cases where outstanding features are distinctly
                        localized. And second, the kind of task involved: asking an observer to
                        indicate what is the most salient image characteristic will lead to a very
                        different significance of voting behavior results as compared to asking for
                        giving votes to some trivial or even any image feature.
                  
               
               The basic design of the database consisted of only three related tables. Two of
                  these (the artifacts and votes table, see below) were so
                  arranged as to be able to log all transactions. The third table (the
                     user table) serves the purpose of identifying specific users and —
                  in the next phase — recording the results of an analysis of performance
                     data.An exhaustive discussion of data dictionaries falls outside the
                     scope of this paper.
               
               Figure 3 shows a class diagram of the system:
               
                  
                  
                  A flowchart with three cells labeled Artefact, Vote and
                        User, respectively. An arrow from User to Vote is
                     labeled Gives and and arrow from Vote to Artefact is
                     labeled Typifies.
               
            
            
               Interface Design
               In this experimental pilot the interface was designed as straightforward as
                  possible, with a firm eye on both database design and the basic tasks the users of
                  the application should be able to perform. As to these tasks the decision has been
                  to keep two different activities clearly separated: editing and
                  browsing/searching. These activities were reflected in two different interface
                  modes: editing mode and serendipity mode. The design of
                  these modes was based on slightly different principles. Switching from one mode to
                  the other, however, had to be self-explanatory. Within each of the modes media
                  objects, metadata, and interaction controls were placed within one and the same
                  screen (no overlapping windows). Still in both modes a clear balance was sought
                  between the object/artifact of the user's present focus/attention and images for
                  comparison, whether these would be simple icons or replete (thumbnails of)
                  artifacts.
               Textual data were kept to a minimum. For navigation of the data collection the
                  decision was to rely on either random presentations (e.g. on starting
                  an interactive session) or pointing and clicking. Although the
                  underlying database of artifacts did in fact enable it, no textual search options
                  were offered. Since throughout a session the identity of the user should be known,
                  the first step of working with the program was authentication.
               Here are two screendumps from Art.Similarities:
               
                  Editing mode: Together with a selected work of art, a collection of icons is
                     on display. The task at hand is to check out the icon representing the most
                     outstanding visual trait of the artifact, by simply clicking one of the icons.
                     The association of artifact and icon is stored in the database.
                  
                  Interface showing a Cezanne landscape in the upper left with a dashboard
                     of icons along the bottom
               
               
                  Serendipity mode: By clicking any of the icons assigned to a particular
                     artifact (left) the application will display an overview of other artifacts to
                     which this particular icon has been attributed. In this example the listing is
                     sorted according to one of the values of the descriptive metadata. An
                     alternative would be sorting according to the number of times a particular icon
                     has been assigned to the individual entities.
                  
                  Interface showing a Cezanne landscape with icons selected on the left and
                     thumbnail images of other artworks on the right
               
            
            
               Implementation
               For the population of the artifact file a collection of about 400 reproductions of
                  2D artifacts and matching descriptive metadata was imported into the database.
                  This special purpose data set was compiled to have a research collection, with a
                  variety of provenances, media types, and formal characteristics. The controlled
                  addition of test pairs of similar images was considered, but to avoid complexity
                  it was decided to elaborate on this line of thought in a follow-up. The
                     inclusion of choice pairs of replete images sharing some apparent visual
                     configuration was considered, e.g. two highly symmetrical images, two images
                     pronounced to be similar according to a widely respected art historian, or even
                     two copies of the same work. The only testers actually included are a
                     pair of almost identical artifact reproductions — a painting by Seurat (Bathers at Asnières, 1883) and a preparatory sketch of
                     the same piece (Final Study for Bathers at Asnières
                     , 1883), and two similar images from a textbook on pictorial concepts
                        . It is a quick-and-dirty setup to see
                     if these image pairs would be indexed in a predictable manner. They
                     were.
               
               For pragmatic reasons in the experimental setup a more or less justifiable set of
                  icons was used. Students produced icons in dedicated assignments; others were
                  created by the author or were found on the Internet. Undoubtedly this will bring
                  some bias to the experiment. I will come back to the selection of indexing items
                  in the final section.
               The number and size of icons had to be decided upon as well. Since for some time
                  to come the major impediment to rich visual comparisons will be the size and
                  resolution of display devices the use of large sets of icons of considerable pixel
                  dimensions, would go at the expense of the space available for the presentation of
                  the artifact under consideration. Since the simultaneous display of both icons and
                  artifact was considered desirable, the provisional layout was fixed at 1 artifact
                  and 100 icons.
            
            
               Use
               In five subsequent years (2003-2007) BA students in the history of art tested the
                     Art.Similarities application. Students could
                  approach the system from any PC connected to the Internet. Some 4000 interactions
                  (icon-artifact pairs) on a total of about 200 users were logged, so the average
                  number of indexing results per user in this pilot is about 20. Since the design
                  philosophy was to make the application as simple as possible, no help function was
                  offered. And indeed, students had no difficulties in using the program. The
                  analysis below is based on the database logs of this pilot. Some evidence comes
                  from an additional paper survey. 
            
         

            An Analysis of Results
            Since the experiment considers three object types — observers, artifacts, icons — and
               since these object types are systematically interrelated — observers assign icons to
               works of art — the analysis may extend into at least three fields of semantic
               relevance. The primary concern is with how artifacts will be typified or defined as
               being more or less similar to one another. But an analysis of patterns in observer
               behavior and the covariance of icon-image assignments can equally yield interesting
               results.
            Before we turn to an inspection of the collected data, however, a few words must be
               added on the representativeness of the sample. The following analysis of data is
               explorative. In comparison with today’s large-scale commercial data warehouses the
               couple of thousand of records in my transaction database is very small. In the real
               world data mining techniques will not be used on data sets of this size. Add to this
               that data were not collected systematically: subjects were not asked to visually tag
               a fixed number of artifacts; they were free to start or stop tagging any time, and
               artifacts were presented at random. The only choice the subjects had was to skip an
               artifact and go on with the next object displayed. As a result the choice of
               artifacts and the distribution of visual tags across the objects represented in the
               database cannot be fully representative. Still it was decided not to normalize data
               routinely. The meaning of differing tagging frequencies could be relevant. Below the
               results of the Art.Similarities experiment will mostly
               be explored on the basis of raw data, especially where the similarity of artifacts is
               under consideration.
            The setup of the test application is fairly simple. Nevertheless an analysis of
               database logs already requires substantial pre-processing and the application of
               sophisticated algorithms to extract measures of central tendency from the rapidly
               growing files. Just to compare one artifact and its related icons with all other
               artifacts, one needs to know both how many icons any pair of artifacts has in common,
               and the number of times any shared icon has been assigned to both artifacts. Below
               are some indications of what lies hidden in these database tables. My approach is a
               combination of searching for patterns in the data and doing empirical checks, in
               particular in the form of a visual assessment of artifacts and icons. Other methods
               of relating data and reality could be asking subjects (experts) to assess the results
               of manipulating transaction data, or even in some cases using content-based image
               retrieval technology to evaluate matches of artifacts.
            
               Artifact Characterizations
               To control for bias caused by low numbers, most of the analyses of image
                  similarity was done on the top 100 artifacts according to tagging frequencies.
                  This subset provided for 1834 (out of 3917) tags, so the average number of tags
                  per artifact was about 18. The co-occurrences for this dataset were computed
                  (n=28100). Starting from the table of co-occurrences a number of measures could be
                  extracted, the most immediate being the absolute number of co-occurrences per pair
                  of artifacts. This was taken as a rough measure of artifact similarity.
               
                  Similarity Based on Absolute Numbers
                  An empirical (visual) inspection of the top 25 of similar pairs according to
                     the absolute number of co-occurrences yielded no surprising results. The visual
                     characteristics corresponding to computed similarities were quite obvious:
                     strong primary colors (red, yellow, etc.), peculiar shapes (whirls, extreme
                     converging and/or parallel lines), or overall organizational configurations
                     (rectangular subdivisions, compositions balanced around two or three main
                     compositional elements). As stated above the subjects in this experiment were
                     free to skip artifacts in the process of tagging, so they probably preferred
                     obvious image characteristics. Frequencies of tag scores — number of tags,
                     number of co-occurrences, and number of associated artifacts — seem to support
                     that interpretation. Below I will have a closer look at this.
                  The relative importance of vortex-like shapes was remarkable. Two
                     post-impressionist paintings — the Starry Night by
                     Vincent van Gogh (1889) and Portrait of Felix
                        Feneon by Paul Signac (1890-91), both in the Museum of Modern Art,
                     New York, co-occurred as much as 270 times. These works appeared in the top of
                     the list in association with another rather non-ambiguous whirly image:
                     a picture by fractal artist Forest Kenton Musgrave (aka Doc Mojo):
                        Fractal Berry 01 (1997). The Van Gogh painting
                     also appeared in the top of the list related to a photograph of a platoon of
                     cyclists, driving along a winding road in the Alps, and to another painting by
                     Van Gogh, Cornfield (with cypresses) (1889), now
                     in the Bürle Collection, Zürich. Maybe vortex-like configurations are eye-catching,
                        Eye-catching, to put it plainly, implies a response of contemporary
                        observers. The historicity of my approach will be discussed in a separate
                        publication. though an alternative explanation could be that the
                     vocabulary in use (i.e. the set of 100 icons) was particularly suited to tag
                     vortex-like shapes. A possible vocabulary bias must be taken into
                     account.
                  Here is an example of two visually similar artifacts, according to the
                     raw database logs:
                  
                     Raphael (Raffaello Sanzio), School of
                        Athens, between 1509-1511, fresco. Vatican (Stanza della Segnatura),
                        Rome.
                     
                     Semicircular painting of a large group of people wearing togas in a
                        large arched hall
                  
                  
                     Marcel Molle, Dean Hamer (rechts) en Steven Rose in
                           Amsterdam, 1999, photograph (De Volkskrant, June 12, 1999). ©
                        Marcel Molle Amsterdam.
                     
                     Two people in suits standing outside in front of a wire arch
                  
                  The number of icon-artifact associations for this pair was distributed like
                     this:
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                     
                     
                        Raphael, School of Athens
                        
                        8
                        5
                        1
                        1
                        0
                        1
                        1
                        1
                        18
                     
                     
                        Molle, Dean Hammer
                        
                        7
                        2
                        2
                        1
                        1
                        0
                        0
                        0
                        13
                     
                     
                        
                        15
                        7
                        3
                        2
                        1
                        1
                        1
                        1
                        31
                     
                  
                  The number of co-occurrences computed for these artifacts was 69. The
                     distribution of icons shows that the Raphael painting has been tagged more
                     often. Normalization would have given a different ranking for this pair of
                     artifacts.
               
               
                  Similarity Based on Weighted Co-occurrences
                  For the top 100 sample data a number of weighted co-occurrences were computed,
                     in essence by multiplying each icon-artifact combination by a factor based on
                     the number of tags assigned to that artifact. Here is an example of two
                     artifacts that rose on the list of calculated similarities as compared to the
                     unweighted data:
                  
                      Peter Jenny, 
                           Die minimalen farblichen Abweichungen (...) werden in der formalen
                              Reduktion zum bildbestimmenden Thema
                        . In Bildkonzepte: das wohlgeordnete
                           Durcheinander. Mainz: Verlag Hermann Schmidt, 2000.
                     
                     Vertical bars in varying shades of brown on a white background. The
                        bottom half is tinted light blue.
                  
                  
                     Sol Lewitt, Four Basic Colors and all their
                           Combinations, 1984, indian ink. Private collection (Sol LeWitt)
                        USA. © c/o Pictoright Amsterdam 2008. 
                     
                     Repeating stripes of yellow, red, and gray ranging from pure color on
                        the left to dark shades on the right
                  
                  The number of icon-artifact associations, after weighting, was
                     distributed like this: 
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                     
                     
                        Jenny, Untitled
                        
                        15
                        2
                        4
                        2
                        2
                        0
                        1
                        1
                        1
                        28
                     
                     
                        Lewitt, Four Basic Colors
                        
                        33
                        3
                        0
                        0
                        0
                        3
                        0
                        0
                        0
                        39
                     
                     
                        
                        48
                        5
                        4
                        2
                        2
                        3
                        1
                        1
                        1
                        67
                     
                  
                  What is most striking in this table is the high frequency of one particular
                     icon shared by both artifacts and the relatively large number of
                     icons indicating a difference in the images they refer to. The Jenny picture
                     has an unmistakably horizontal articulation, which is lacking in the Lewitt
                     piece. The tagging behavior of subjects in the experiment appears to be
                     visually sound, but our crude computational procedures do not fully reflect
                     that.
                  The number of co-occurrences for the Lewitt and Jenny artifacts was 501 (167 if
                     the raw data were used). A remarkable shift of this pair of artifacts in the
                     weighted charts was caused by the relative distance between the frequencies of
                     assigned icons: 28 versus 13. Broadly speaking however, in the subset chosen
                     here the differences in approach did rarely result in spectacular shifts. More
                     research is needed to refine the still rudimentary similarity measures.
               
               
                  One Artifact and its Neighbors
                  Another approach to the inspection of the transaction database is to take one
                     artifact and calculate what in Last.fm terms would be referred to as its
                        neighbors.Cf. http://www.last.fm/help/faq/.  We did just that for the
                     Raphael painting presented above (tag frequency: 18). Keeping one value in the
                     comparison constant understandably reduces the effect of weighting. In the top
                     rankings calculated only two pairs of artifacts changed position after
                     weighting.
                  Again our sample resulted in rather obvious combinations of artifacts. The look
                     of the Raphael painting is strongly determined by the arch across the full
                     width of the painting, which is reflected in a succession of smaller arches in
                     the axis of the picture plane. More than half of the neighbors displayed such
                     arch-like shapes. Another salient feature of the calculated neighbors is
                     precisely this repetitive quality of shapes containing shapes. Here is an
                     illustrative example of an artifact that co-occurred with the School of
                     Athens:
                  
                      Victor Vasarely, Vonal-Ksz., 1968 vinyl.
                        Private collection. © c/o Pictoright Amsterdam 2008.
                     
                     Nested squares of blue, black, and brown creating the illusion of
                        space receding into the distance
                  
                  This association may at first surprise us, but nevertheless the diagrammatic
                     similarity is apparent. If we look up the corresponding distribution of
                     icon-artifact associations it appears that the high similarity score is
                     completely dependent on the shared icon of two congruent rectangles, connected
                     at the corners by four straight converging lines.
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        …
                        
                     
                     
                        Raphael, School of Athens
                        
                        5
                        
                        18
                     
                     
                        Vasarely, Vonal-Ksz.
                        
                        8
                        …
                        33
                     
                     
                        
                        13
                        …
                        51
                     
                  
                  Please note that the Vasarely painting has been denoted by a relatively large
                     number of icons not shared by the Raphael piece. Somehow the icons
                     any two artifacts do not share should be weighed in a formal
                     definition of similarity. In the next paragraph I will momentarily alter the
                     focus of my analysis and discuss an equation in which both the number and
                     distribution of shared icons and the icons not shared are
                     considered.
               
               
                  A Formula Describing a Similarity Measure for Pairs of Artifacts
                  The discussion above was based on an overall analysis of a co-occurrence table
                     and crude distance measures taking the number of shared icons into account.
                     Another approach to similarity measurement is taking any pair of artifacts to
                     compare the corresponding patterns of icon-artifact assignments. If two
                     artifacts share an icon this must add to the overall similarity value. The more
                     icons two artifacts have in common, the more the similarity value should
                     increase. Conversely icons not shared (but used for one of the artifacts in the
                     comparison) should diminish the overall similarity measure. Furthermore the
                     ratio of co-occurrences must also be taken into account. This amounts to
                     weighting the straightforward numbers: if both artifacts in a comparison have
                     an equal number of one particular icon in common, the weight of the
                     corresponding part in the equation could be multiplied by 1 (n:n); if one of
                     the artifacts has been tagged twice as much, the equation could be multiplied
                     by 1/2 (n:2n) and so on. (Of course the numbers must be weighted to optimize
                     results. See below.) So the similarity (ο) might be expressed in the following
                     descriptive formula: $$o=(( \sum_{1}^{n}
                        (\theta _n/N*s/l)- \sum_{1}^{m} \alpha_m/N)+1)/2$$
                  
                  

                   Here n is the number of shared icons, θ is (per icon shared by both artifacts)
                     the total number of occurrences, s is the minimum and l is the maximum number
                     of occurrences for each icon. The number of icons not shared (per artifact) is
                     m. The number (per icon) of icons not shared by both artifacts is α. N is the
                     sum total of occurrences of icons assigned to both artifacts. As a result of
                     this: if two artifacts do not share any icon, the similarity equals to 0. 
                  Applying the formula to the (non-normalized) data for the artifacts of figures
                     6 and 7 this is the outcome: $$o =
                        ((15/31*7/8+7/31*2/5+3/31*1/2+2/31*1/1-4/31)+1)/2 = 0.7488$$
                  

                  For the artifacts in figures 8 and 9 before normalization o would
                     become: $$o =
                        ((26/41*11/15+3/41*1/2-12/41)+1)/2 = 0.6045$$
                  
                  Because in the formula s/l is the ratio of the smallest and largest number (per
                     pair of artifacts) the effect of applying the formula to non-normalized data
                     will lead to a pronounced bias. Obviously normalization is a necessary step in
                     preprocessing the raw data if we use the formula.Following this adaption
                        the similarity measure for figures 6 and 7 would become: 0.7319 (a slight
                        decrease in value). For figures 8 and 9 o after normalization would be:
                        0.5832 (also a slight decrease).
                  
               
               
                  Fake Similarities
                  Up to now we have focused on similarity measures that become understandable if
                     we empirically compare the associated icons and artifacts. In the sample data
                     however there are indications of problems caused by the ambiguity of visual
                     tags (icons). Here is an extract of the (normalized) artifact x artifact
                     co-occurrence table, showing only 5 artifacts that were tagged exactly 24
                     times. 
                  
                     
                        
                        S18500
                        S23715
                        S75116
                        S75122
                        S75308
                        
                     
                     
                        S18500
                        137
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        137
                     
                     
                        S23715
                        
                        25
                        48
                        10
                        
                        83
                     
                     
                        S75116
                        
                        
                        64
                        1
                        
                        65
                     
                     
                        S75122
                        
                        
                        
                        41
                        
                        41
                     
                     
                        S75308
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        92
                        92
                     
                     
                         
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        418
                     
                  
                  In the row and column headings we have the IDs of the five artifacts, while in
                     the table cells there are eight co-occurrence values, five of them being values
                     indicating the number of times an artifact co-occurred with itself. (We will
                     get back to this in the next paragraph.) The three remaining values express
                     co-occurrences of different artifacts. E.g. S75116 and S23715
                     refer to waterscape paintings by Claude Monet. The association (n=48) visually
                     makes sense. The other values seem to suggest a similarity between another
                     artifact (S75122) and the two Monet paintings. On closer consideration,
                     however, the icon responsible for the co-occurrence scores appears to have been
                     selected for its bluish appearance in case of the Monet waterscapes, and for
                     its sophisticated color gradients and peculiar configuration of rectilinear
                     lines in case of the other artifact: a painting from the series Homage to the Square: Apparition (1959), by Josef
                     Albers. In fact the co-occurrence is an artifact of the
                        method. Here is the icon responsible for the confusion: 
                  
                     
                     A dark blue square with a dark green outline and a lighter blue
                        center.
                  
                  This must be taken as a warning. Apart from the vocabulary bias
                     mentioned earlier, ambiguities in the vocabulary in use — our 100 icons — may
                     cause fake similarities. I will refer to this as vocabulary
                        ambiguity. (In a section below the inverse of this problem will be
                     discussed, viz. the confusion caused by partly redundant visual tags.)
               
               
                  Measures Qualifying Individual Artifacts and/or Visual Tags
                  Doubts about the appropriateness of the particular set of icons used in the
                     experiment forced me to take a closer look at the numbers associated with
                     individual artifacts. Again the objective is to verify empirically what numbers
                     in the co-occurrence tables stand for. And again the analysis was done on the
                     top 100 subset in terms of co-occurrences. This time however the values in the
                     pivot table were normalized. Artifacts were ordered according to the total
                     number of co-occurrences, the number of self co-occurrences (a multiple
                     of the number of times an artifact was tagged with one or more icons — see
                     above), and the number of co-occurring artifacts (per artifact). Maximum and
                     minimum values, and average, mode and median were also computed. 
                  Data point out that the number of co-occurrences roughly co-varies with the
                     number of self co-occurrences. The same is true if we first subtract the number
                     of self co-occurrences from the number of co-occurrences. But unfortunately
                     this finding will not bring us near a paradigm shift. 
                  More interesting was the outcome that the number of self co-occurrences for a
                     particular artifact negatively co-varied with the number of artifacts
                     associated with that artifact (correlation coefficient: -0.6753)Compare
                        this to the correlation coefficient for the sum of non-self
                        co-occurrences and the number of associated artifacts, which is
                        -0.1504.. In other words: the more often an icon (or small set of
                     icons) was assigned to an artifact (in relative terms) the less often that
                     particular artifact could be related to other artifacts. All the same the
                     number of co-occurrences with these few artifacts tended to be high. Another
                     paraphrase of this could be: the smaller the number of partial similarities,
                     the more an artifact approaches to one of the icons used. It is clear
                     that this qualifies both artifact and icon (set). The implication of these
                     findings would be that a mere (automatic) analysis of transaction data can be
                     used to improve the set of icons. (See below.) 
                  If we have a look at the top 10 of artifacts scoring high on self
                        co-occurrence, we might discern two broad classes of objects: artifacts
                     that are schematic (or: diagrammatic) in appearance, and rich
                     (non-schematic) artifacts that have one conspicuous formal feature. Because
                     subjects were asked to check out the icon that you think matches any
                           singular outstanding visual characteristic of the piece most of
                        all available icons the conspicuous traits must have been magnified.
                  Given the present set of icons this appeared to be a painting difficult to
                        describe unambiguously:
                  
                     Paul Gauguin, The Sacred Mountain (Parahi Te
                           Marae), 1892, oil on canvas. Philadelphia Museum of Art: Gift of
                        Mr. and Mrs. Rodolphe Meyer de Schauensee, 1980
                     
                     A landscape of hills with a fence and a bush in the
                        foreground.
                  
                  Several icons seem to have been chosen to indicate the colorfulness of the
                     painting: both the variety of colors and the striking yellow and purple image
                     regions. Others presumably refer to the composition of the picture in three
                     horizontal planes and/or the use of diagonals, the irregular size and shape of
                     color regions. Still others, according to my interpretation, are intended to
                     denote the complementary color contrasts and the painterliness of the
                     surface. Anyway it is evident that subjects in the Art.Similarities experiment were not unanimous in using the visual
                     diagrams offered to tag the Gauguin painting. 
                  The interpretation of data so far suggests looking at a few other summaries.
                     From the full artifacts x icons table were extracted (per icon) the maximum
                     number of times it was assigned to any artifact. If we divide this maximum
                     value by the grand total for a specific icon, we might have a rough measure of
                     the efficacy of the icon. Values ranged from 0.05 (low efficacy) to 0.5 (high
                     efficacy). According to this approach the most and least problematic
                     icons in the set (if we skip very low grand totals — say below 25) are these: 
                  
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        where n=43; efficacy score=0.05
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        where n=40; efficacy score=0.48
                     
                  
                  Of course such numbers should be handled with care: maximum values could be
                     outliers. Perhaps other measures of central tendency (average, median) give
                     better results or could be used to arrive at conclusions that are more firm.
                  
               
               
                  Falsifications
                  The empirical verification of similarity measures — number of co-occurrences,
                     similarity measure (o) — also made clear that some unmistakably similar
                     artifacts were not recognized as such. Here is a telling example:
                  
                     Keith Carter, Silhouette, 1994, photograph.
                        San Jose Museum of Art: Partial and promised gift of Arthur J. Goodwin. ©
                        Keith Carter 2008.
                     
                     A person with outstretched arms silhouetted behind a cloth in black
                        and white
                  
                  
                     Tracy Boychuk (design), Andrew Eccles (photography), Christopher
                        Austopchuk (art direction), youssou n'dour, the
                              guide (wommat)
                        , 1994, CD Sleeve design. ©1994 Sony BMG.
                     
                     A person with outstretched arms, blurred by motion, in amber
                        monochrome.
                  
                  The similarity of both images is striking, but they co-occurred only once. Why
                     is that so? If we review the available tags it appears that there is no single
                     icon fit to express the cross-shaped configuration that according to many is
                     the primary similarity feature here. One of the icons seems to be a candidate —
                     and it has indeed been related to the Carter photograph twice; it is a
                     representational black-and-white icon, displaying an umbrella depicted in
                     silhouette:
                  
                     
                     An open black umbrella.
                  
                  Perhaps the conceptual distance between an umbrella and a human figure
                     disqualified this icon.Time and again I found that as soon as pictures
                        could be perceived as depictions, the objective of tagging formal image
                        characteristics was not fulfilled. The fact that the Carter
                     photograph is a grayscale image, on the other hand, may have diminished this
                     conceptual distance. Other empirical findings seem to support the importance of
                     color in visual tagging. Half of the icons associated with the Boychuk picture
                     were dominantly orange colored; the color palette of eight out of ten was very
                     similar to the palette of the photograph.I compared histogram values of
                        the Boychuk picture and all of the associated icons taken together: mean and
                        median for the hue channel were exactly the same: mean=23, median=22.
                  
                  Apart from the (cross-shaped) compositional features that both images have in
                     common, and the dominant color characteristics that — perhaps as a second most
                     conspicuous feature — set them apart, both artifacts apparently share another
                     formal trait, one that — in iconographical terms — may be described as a
                        silhouette. In the visual vocabulary of Art.Similarities there are quite a few icons that could be used to
                     denote this image characteristic, but most of these are in black-and-white and
                     show sharp outlines. That could be an explanation for the missing match in this
                     case. Both images show vague outlines (conspicuous similarity feature number
                     four). In fact there is one icon with the representation of a human figure,
                     which could be qualified as a silhouette, and it was used to tag the Boychuk
                     artifact. But it has an orangish background, which apparently disqualifies it
                     for the Carter photograph.
                  My rather lengthy discussion of this one falsification casus is intended to
                     introduce a few speculations about the promises of using visual tags. It makes
                     clear that successful tagging is dependent on a balanced set of visual tags
                     (icons). The size and the number of these visual tags are clearly decisive for
                     effective tagging. Furthermore the following principles should be taken into
                     account: 
                  
                     Color phenomena may have a strong impact on efficient tagging. 
                     The presence of basic compositional features in the tag set is decisive. 
                     Representational elements may interfere with the tagging of formal
                        artifact characteristics. 
                  
                  And finally: 
                  
                     Refined overall local features, as in the qualification vagueness
                        (of contour), will be hard to express unambiguously.
                  
               
            
            
               Observer Behavior
               Even in the simple prototype application discussed here, it is possible to
                  retrieve all the image-icon assignments of one particular person. It is
                  fascinating to inspect the recorded visual discernments of individuals, because
                  they seem to give away observer habits. A sound follow-up procedure would be to
                  compare central tendencies in the discernments of several observers. The outcomes
                  can be stored in the database as performance data. If two observers
                  have made similar image-icon associations, then possibly they resemble one another
                  in the way their mental processes organize the visual world. What if one of these
                  individuals is recognized as an authority? Would that somehow qualify the other?
                  And if two qualified art historians agree on what is typical of a series of
                  artifacts, would that be the beginning of proof?
               I made the point earlier, and I shall make it again, that the random presentation
                  of artifacts in this experiment must have affected similarity scores. Another
                  restriction is that subjects (n=204) were free to tag images. The top tagger
                  assigned icons 141 times and 19 subjects only tagged once. Obviously absolute
                  pronouncements based on these figures cannot be made. This is all the more true
                  where as to the dimension of subject characteristics — prior knowledge,
                  professional merits, age, race, etc. — an empirical verification of analysis
                  outcomes would have implied a more extensive survey. This was beyond the ambitions
                  of the current experiment. 
               So the dataset in this experiment is too restricted to justify a thorough analysis
                  of the behavior of subjects. With 400 artifacts and 100 icons we have 40.000
                  possible combinations. In the database only 2242 combinations occurred on a total
                  of 3918 records, giving an average of less than 2 hits per combination. It is
                  clear that few co-occurrence scores can be computed from these numbers. After the
                  grouping of observers by artifact-icon combinations I calculated 5317
                  co-occurrences for all subjects, the highest number being 15. In principle such
                  numbers can be used to compute similar observers, but given the restricted data I
                  will not elaborate on these data now.
               Inspecting the voter x voter pivot table I noticed one peculiar phenomenon: the
                  rows and columns of some subjects displayed a striking low number of co-occurrence
                  scores. This appeared to be independent of the number of tags assigned by these
                  subjects. What could be the cause of these outliers? One explanation is that the
                  outliers correspond to subjects noticing visual subtleties that remain hidden for
                  other observers. Another, I think more plausible explanation is that the outliers
                  were caused by clumsy individuals, unable to make up their mind about the
                  most outstanding visual characteristics of the artifacts on display,
                  or even worse maybe, by subjects unable to understand the task at hand. 
               One might expect a correlation between the number of co-occurrences and the number
                  of unique icon-artifact assignments. For a sample of 10 subjects in the middle
                  range of tag frequencies (n=41–63) I computed for each individual in the
                  transaction table the ratio of the number of tags assigned and the number of
                  unique icon-artifact assignments. For obvious reasons there was a strong
                  correlation with the ratio of the sum of all co-occurrence values and the number
                  of co-occurrence values (r=0.94). 
               A quick-and-dirty reality check pointed out that my outliers were caused by
                  students with rather feeble study results, whereas — conversely — a highly
                  successful student was responsible for the top score. Especially the latter
                  finding seems to suggest that a good student in art history is able to discern
                  visual features that are in conformity with the discernments of his or her peers.
                  Of course we must be very careful with generalizations of this kind. It would be
                  more profitable to search for correlations related to an individual's preferences
                  on dimensions like: time period, geographical location, or even iconographical
                  subjects.
            
            
               Icon Covariance
               In my experiment the selection of icons was non-arbitrary.Starting from the
                     premise that the actual manipulation of indexing terms would take
                     a meaningful form, reflecting visual habits/knowledge in the observer group,
                     the initial plan was to supply the community with a set of random
                     visual signs. From an analysis of the icon use logs, after a substantial amount
                     of time, would emerge traces of visual thinking. The whole process might be
                     made evolutionary. Some icons might be used too often, reducing informational
                     value; some might never be used at all; some icons might tend to appear
                     together in most of the cases. There might be pairs of icons co-appearing with
                     another icon, where the latter one could be taken as a merge (component) icon
                     of both the others, and so on. The initial set of icons might be restricted or
                     extended based upon results from the analysis. This way the effectiveness of
                     the visual vocabulary in use would be improved, while the relevant visual
                     notions could surface. In fact a priori visual knowledge was used to
                  compile an effective (i.e. varied) set of icons, starting from a base collection
                  of about 500 diagrams. There is a drawback to this non-evolutionary approach. The
                  process may become biased. I may have unknowingly excluded options for expressing
                  specific visual concepts. And indeed, the discussion of falsifications in the
                  previous section gave an example of such a probable omission. I will now consider
                  the opposite phenomenon, viz. vocabulary redundancy, which is here
                  defined as a lack of efficacy in the icon set due to the existence of icons that
                  are apparently used to denote same or almost same visual concepts.
                     Vocabulary bias and vocabulary ambiguity were
                     considered in an earlier section of this paper.
               
               The assumption is that icons appropriate to refer to a specific visual feature
                  will co-occur more often than may be expected in the case of purely disjointed
                  icons. Of course there is the risk that the set of artifacts used in this
                  experiment displays a few real world conjunctions — as a matter of fact I
                  have an example of that below. Therefore I repeat that my data analysis can only
                  be indicative. Nevertheless I think that from the results of the present
                  experiment some generalizations can be made. 
               This time in the original transaction table I grouped the icons that had been
                  assigned to each individual artifact. For the resulting subsets of icons
                  co-occurrences were computed. The sum of all possible pairs is (1002+100)/2=5050, since we have 100 icons and since
                  co-occurrences of same icons are relevant as well. In the transaction database
                  3137 unique combinations occurred. Only 7 icons were never assigned more than once
                  to a particular artifact. Notwithstanding the fact that our sample is
                     modest, I assume that a relatively low number of self co-occurrences may also
                     count as a crude measure of icon efficacy. Compare this to the earlier
                     paragraph on icon efficacy. If we take the ratio of the number of times an icon
                     co-occurred with itself and the frequency of that same icon as a measure of
                     efficacy, the icons in our earlier example become 0.16 (for the golden
                        glow icon) and 4.45 (for the low horizon icon) on a scale ranging
                     from 0.07 to 6.86. The sum total of icon pairs in our database was
                  24.826. So the average number of co-occurrences — if we skip the zero-values — is
                  about 8. Here is the top 5 of pairs of icons in terms of co-occurrences: 
               
                  
                     Icon pairs
                     Co-occurrences
                  
                  
                     
                         and 
                     
                     204
                  
                  
                     
                         and 
                     
                     136
                  
                  
                     
                         and 
                     
                     119
                  
                  
                     
                         and 
                     
                     116
                  
                  
                     
                         and 
                     
                     114
                  
               
               This way of visualizing co-occurrences may create the impression that redundancies
                  in our vocabulary indeed exist. The fact that mere numbers seem to indicate an
                  overlap in the visual features of a set of schematic images is captivating. None
                  of our subjects ever alleged this! So could the manipulation of visual things by
                  individuals amount to some sort of collaborative visual knowledge, a knowledge
                  that emerges from our transaction database? 
               Just to check on this I zoomed in on co-occurrences for the pair of icons for
                  which n=114. Here are the results: 
               
                  
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     119
                     114
                     89
                     46
                     29
                     26
                     20
                     19
                     18
                     16
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     114
                     84
                     29
                     23
                     21
                     17
                     13
                     13
                     13
                     12
                  
               
               In this particular experiment we must be cautious: the relatively small number of
                  objects in the database could affect the number of co-occurrences computed. As a
                  matter of fact there are two possible causes of high frequencies for
                  co-occurrences: 
               
                  Icons in the tag set are visually similar. (I would suggest they are
                     redundant.)
                  A particular combination of visual characteristics is prevailing in the
                     artifacts considered.
               
               It is tempting to forget about the reality these icons refer to, and to read each
                  table as a summary of the alternative interpretations of the icons on the left. On
                  the other hand, the more the co-occurring icons classify the icon on the left, the
                  more redundancy we presumably have in the set. Furthermore I expect that the
                  similarity between the icon being analyzed and the co-occurring icons diminishes
                  from left to right. In the table just above the first icon in the row — the one
                  with the spokes — is ostensibly similar to the icon of our focus. The appearance
                  of a green-and-blue icon however is less obvious in an immediate comparison. An
                  empirical check gives away that the co-occurrence value here is caused by pictures
                  of landscapes with an easily tractable vanishing point and guidelines.
               Unfortunately I have no data at hand to support this line of thought. Still I
                  think it is safe to say that the mere number of co-occurrences with other icons in
                  the tagging set suggests that the icons are partly redundant indeed.The
                        differences in both sets of co-occurring icons on the other
                     hand are informative as well. The vortex-like shape having a high co-occurrence
                     value in the upper table does not show up in the lower table, and in the lower
                     table we have a checker board which would be visually unsound in the upper
                     table. These differences are immediate qualifications of the icons being
                     compared.  Knowledge of this kind can be used to improve the (initial)
                  set of icons. What than could be a rule for detecting redundancies in the set of
                  icons? I think such a rule should both consider the number of co-occurrences and
                  the number and distribution of other icons in the neighborhood of the icons
                  compared, e.g.: 
               
                  If two icons are in the top n of co-occurrences, and the top n of
                     co-occurrences for these icons is composed of the same icons, than the icons
                     are at least partly redundant and a merge operation to get rid of the
                     redundancy is justified.
               
               The challenge for future research is to make such rules for an automated analysis
                  explicit.
            
         

            Conclusions
            As was contended in the Introduction, advocates of humanities computing stressed the
               fact that computational techniques may have the collateral benefit of indicating
               where in the domain of scholarly research 
                  there are holes in your sketch, [and]
                     where it breaks down
                  
               . Add to this that in the humanities the process of fine tuning personal
               interests and cognitive schemata is paramount. There are few if any final answers as
               to meaning in the visual arts: 
                  the process is often at least as
                     important as the product, and the process itself produces new knowledge and
                     understanding
                  
               . That is exactly why I have good hopes that applications like Art.Similarities will be beneficial in art/art history
               education. More in general I think that the experiment has demonstrated that Web 2.0
               technologies can offer new opportunities in humanities research.
            From the analysis section we learned: 
                  that meaningful perspectives on visual artifacts can be pointed out by
                     visual means; 
                  that useful similarity measures can be derived from multiple (simple)
                     similarity expressions;
                  that the composition of efficient visual vocabularies may benefit from
                     visual tagging.
               
            
            Stock-taking here was primarily aimed at indicating the essential possibilities of a
               visual labeling and harvesting paradigm for art historically relevant visual traits.
               But our field test also indicated some limitations of visual labeling. Color is
               problematic; the size of our displays units is (still) limiting; the power to
               differentiate between stylistically similar works of art is still indeterminate; we
               have no sharp idea of what an ideal set of visual denotats may look like; we don't
               know in what degree such a set could be universal. Nevertheless Art.Similarities also suggested possible directions for future
               research.
            One drawback of collaborative filtering systems is their tendency not to cover the
               extreme cases , . This issue also
               came up with the visual voting system proposed here. How can we direct the system to
               encode the significance of valuable exceptions to the rule, and how can we make it
               ignore cheating, trivialities and clichés? Some data mining protocol for judging
               automatically traced deviant votes (outliers) and blowing up or playing down their
               relative importance would be a valuable extension to Art.Similarities. For Art.Similarities
                  work in progress is focused on detecting Level 2 observers and approval
                  recording. Refer to steps 16–18 from the experimental setup. See also Luis von
                  Ahn's games with a purpose
                  .
            
            Another extension would be the coordination of different solutions to the retrieval
               of information about same object types. This paper offered rough sketches of a method
               of classifying visual artifacts independently of other classifying options. But the
               interdependency of different classification systems is worth considering.
               Iconographical descriptions (aboutness) and descriptions of visual qualities
                  (offness) belong to separate notational spheres , , , . Still there is an apparent covariance of these
               description options: if two artifacts are depictions of a particular theme, chances
               are that both artifacts share a considerable number of visual characteristics. Such
               partial description parallels also exist for other types of metadata. For example:
               once an object has been classified as an engraving (qua technique), it is
               usually redundant to file the artifact as a grayscale picture, or as a picture
                  having linear qualities. So we could fine tune the current approach by
               introducing restrictions: if images are in grayscale, don't offer colored icons, and
               vice versa. Eventually this may lead to the use of exchangeable icon sets, and the
               related question of how to select these sets of visual icons.
            Conventional scholarly communication in art history amounts to a textual exchange of
               information in perhaps 95% of the cases. With that in mind the idea might come up
               that somehow the results of visual voting actions should be translated back into
               textual arguments. Now how will we ever get back to words? Since today's information
               technology is truly interactive in nature, conclusions based on coordinated visual
               discernments can be immediately communicated back to the communities involved in the
               process. One group of observers could be involved in visual voting, while the results
               from this subroutine may be fed back to another part — say the Next
                  Level users — of the population. If the second group uses some sort of verbal
               labeling interface, like the one developed by the Steve.museum initiative , promising cross-fertilizations become possible. With the
               adoption of appropriate standards, an integration of textual annotations, reviews, or
               the discussion of remarkable patterns in visual behavior becomes possible. In a way
               the collaborative visual filtering system enables noticing, labeling and re-labeling
               phenomena, thus giving shape to an augmented social construction of knowledge . The role of a scholar in designing these filtering
               systems will not be the role of an author of scholarly articles or monographs, but
               the role of a broker in art historical knowledge, the director of an intricate
               process of knowledge mediation . 
            If it is assumed that there is no reason to strive for a one-fits-all collection of
               visual denotats, extended research might be focused on the matching of specific
               collections of visual artifacts and appropriate sets of icons. Such research efforts
               could start from the assumption that when the medium of expression is fixed,
               observers (experts and/or lay people) will just express themselves in the reference
               materials at hand, focusing in these denotats on what are their peculiar points for
               attention. This actually simplifies research, since developers need not be explicit
               about suitable reference options. A myriad of further extensions to the basic visual
               voting model is now conceivable. Observers from particular user groups, for instance,
               might be enabled to work with sets of dedicated icons (private
                  alphabets). We predict that as a matter of course these series will be
               composed according to common sense principles, like maximum diversity, sufficient
               coverage, etc.
            Extensions of the voting system may include additional functionalities. One might be
               the possibility to define subsets of artifacts, based on singular or multiple
               corresponding artifact-icon associations; these subsets would thus be true
               collaborative products. Based on an analysis of patterns in voting behavior (or,
               alternatively, explicit observer profiles), the system could also gradually evolve
               into a system displaying only the preferences (both artifacts and/or votes) of a
               particular user group. Finally, since somehow artifacts co-organize icons, the labels
               (icons) in the interface may be grouped (i.e. organized) by their co-occurence
               patterns; perhaps these may be taken as so-called emergent semantics
               . 
            Hopefully this orientation has made clear that the social formation of opinions
               concerning the visual similarity of cultural artifacts amongst a group of motivated
               observers can with the use of information technology be modeled and
               recorded without the application of verbal descriptors, and that
               interesting data processing options exist for collaboratively and visually
               characterized artifacts. This offers many starting points for further research.
         
