Title:  Introduction: Reading Code in the Age of AI
Volume:  019
Issue:  4
Date:  02 March 2026
Abstract:  
            This article introduces the second Digital Humanities Quarterly special issue on Critical Code Studies. It provides an overview of the contributions to the issue while situating them within recent transformations in programming and code reading brought about by generative AI and LLM-based coding assistants. Against narratives that suggest automation diminishes the cultural significance of source code, the essay argues that code remains a meaningful cultural text even when generated or mediated by AI systems and that critical reading is therefore more urgent, not less, in the age of coding assistants. Serving as a state-of-the-field report since the first special issue, the article also surveys recent and forthcoming work in Critical Code Studies, including Alan Blackwell’s Moral Codes, Daniel Temkin’s 44 Esolangs, Nick Montfort’s Narcissystem, Tom Boellstorff and Braxton Soderman’s Intellivision, and the forthcoming Inventing ELIZA by Sarah Ciston et al.
         
Full Body Text: 

            The State of Code Reading
            If critical code studies calls for the exploration of the interpretation of the extra-functional significance of computer source code , if the code is not written by humans or cannot be accessed by them, can it still have meaning? Our short answer is yes.
            
            Since the publication of ourfirst special issue on critical code studies, the world of coding has gone through another tectonic shift. Whereas critical code studies has been helping people to see that code is read by more than just machines, the advent of Copilot, Cursor, and other generative AI platforms has appeared to move people away from code or at least the need to know how to write it. The reality may prove just the opposite as programmers need to spend more time trying to understand code they did not author directly and as those who might never have thought to interact with code find themselves generating whole programs. Letting the hype waves roll in and back out again, we take this spread of generative AI as all the more reason to encourage the critical examination of computer source code.
            
            Although Large Language Models (LLMs) were already in use in the digital humanities, 2022 saw the arrival of ChatGPT, bringing the technology to the attention of the broader public, not least of all to the world of coding. Actually, Microsoft had already added Copilot to Github in 2021 () and then in 2023 released Copilot X, which brought the ability to chat about code to the Visual Studio Code sidebar . Whether in standalone projects like Cursor or in plugins to IDEs or even just in the code features of Claude, these LLMs changed the way programmers and nonprogrammers alike were interacting with code. When Andrej Karpathy (2025) coined the phrase “Vibe coding” in a post on X, he named a now widespread practice of coding through prompting.
            
            At the same time, LLMs offer unprecedented access to code. Though by no means perfect, LLMs offer readers a chance to explore code with the assistance of a tool that can produce explanations for some of the functioning of the code. Also, since LLMs can be prompted with the language of critical code studies, they can also generate suggestions for code readings.  has published some initial reflections on rapidly coding through an LLM in an article on “AI Sprints.”  has experimented with using LLMs to perform a critical code studies reading on code from the Apple Lisa with the assistance of LLMs. Testing out this method on the Apollo Lunar Lander code, we, Jeremy and Mark, have discovered a great potential for helping illuminate the code but also various limits of this approach. Through these experiments, one thing becomes clear: since LLMs can process both code and natural language, it is not bound by the conceptual divisions that often inhibit human readers from bringing these worlds together. Perhaps that freedom of a machine that does not have human understanding, will inspire code readers who do.
            
            The danger is that the transition to machine learning and neural networks will leave software in a new black box, or cloistered as  argues. In her talk she traces the rise in critical attention on software and code followed by a period where it is practically impossible to see where the object comes from materially speaking , an obscurity that only attentive critical archaeology and analysis can overcome . In the Humanities and Critical Code Studies Lab, we continue the work of applying Critical Code Studies methods to the study of AI as we did in the article Can Open-Source Fix Predictive Policing? Anti-Racist Critical Code Studies Approach to Contemporary AI Policing Software . Though LLMs tend to move code into an area of obscurity, the close reading techniques (either with the assistance of machines or merely creative methods of approach) offer a way to keep this code, and those who generate it, accountable for its effects.
            
            The Critical Code Studies Working Groups continue to develop and explore the possible methodologies. Recent Working Groups have explored Queering Code as well as Teaching Critical Code studies. The latest Working Group (CCSWG26) “Where is the ‘critical’ in critical code studies?”, reflecting on the fields’ emphasis on interpretation, analysis, inflected by philosophical hermeneutics and other forms of critical theory. CCSWG26 will also explore the UNESCO special exhibit of source code, sponsored by the Software Heritage Foundation (now celebrating its 10th year), which pays tribute to influential code around the world . The exhibition is organized by Mathilde Fichen, Titaÿna Kauffmann, and Camille Picard. The exhibition committee includes representatives of museums that promote software archaeology and the preservation of code, including David C. Brock of the Computer History Museum, Mountain View, California; Pierre Depaz of Staatliche Hochschule für Gestaltung Karlsruhe; Valérie Schafer of University of Luxembourg; Bostjan Spetic of the Slovenian computer museum; Artemis Yagou of Deutsches Museum; and Stefano Penge of Codexpo.org, “the first source code museum" . We name these institutions and scholars by way of emphasizing the growing number of institutions and curators interested in preserving computer source code in recognition  of its historical cultural significance.
            
            Archaeological explorations of code continue to draw scholars from disparate disciplines and interests. Maybe the most substantive code reading to emerge from the working groups is a collaborative close reading of the source code of ELIZA, the first chatbot. The DOCTOR script, published in 1966, has been the center of several discussions of the working group, but in 2021, a group secured the source code to ELIZA itself, the system on which the DOCTOR script runs . Analyzing that code launched a four-year collaborative reading of the source code by an eclectic group of scholars, artists, philosophers, and programmers (and various combinations of those). That project has also extended into an effort to reanimate the code, using the original MAD-SLIP source material as the basis, a new pathway of code archaeological study .
            
            A few recent interventions invite conversations about the way code operates in culture and across languages. Alan F. Blackwell’s Moral Codes: Designing Alternatives to AI  (2024) calls for better programming languages for the flourishing of human culture. Equally idealistic is Wikimedia’s project to make a function repository and platform that is more language independent. The project is called Wikilamda, and Michael Falk offers a thoughtful critique through the methods of critical code studies. The work to theorize code is not complete either. Brian Lennon’s book Programming Language Cultures (2024) in framing computer languages as a means of automation rather than a mode of communication, attempts to theorize code, to make code better for culture, or even to democratize programming show how computer source code continues to be a productive site for the theorization of the digital, for ideological discourse, and for the struggle to contest oppression and achieve social ideals.
            
            Artists continue to contribute insights to critical code studies through their making. , for example, who contributed The Less Humble Programmer to our first issue, has since published a book of 44 Esolangs  (2025) offers the titular number of original esoteric programming languages.  has also applied a critical code studies approach with decolonial theory to read  Prāsa, an esoteric programming language based on the Telugu poetic system of chandassu. Other artists of code, like , continue to write and publish experiments in code poetics. His Narcissystem describes itself in 1s and 0s. Montfort explains the process, “Go through each line, describing each token. For each, describe the ASCII characters that constitute it. For each, enumerate the eight bits that are used to represent it.”  Other artists such as Winnie Soon and Mez Breeze continue to iterate on their long-standing practice of making and manipulating code and code-like languages. These artists working in code both perform and identify the creative possibilities of making in the medium.
            
            Other scholars have found new places to apply critical code studies. For example,  apply critical code studies to data journalism.  has been exploring ways of responding to the violence algorithms bring against trans bodies. Looking at the way we personify algorithms in contemporary life,  has been exploring “algorithmic folklore.”
            
            Scholars continue to include code in their studies of other objects.  have published an extensive study of Intellivision in a book subtitled How a Videogame System Battled Atari and Almost Bankrupted Barbie®. That book includes code from the system, once again showing how interdependent platform and code studies are. 
            
            Into the current research on the meaning of code and culture, we offer this second special issue of work in critical code studies, a collection that will certainly shape the ways in which code is discussed and interpreted. The essays show the continuing creativity and critical insight that human and humanities-driven exploration of code, at times augmented with software tools. These essays challenge foundational divisions between hardware and software, they reassert the centrality of state, and they explore the complexities of natural language in code. Their methods draw upon media archaeology, rhetoric, history, and more technical methods of science and technology studies.  Their approaches introduce new processes of approaching code from defactoring to reading the code aloud. Collected together they offer inspiration and provocations, corrections and new directions for future explorations.
         

            In This Issue
            This special issue builds on and expands the scope of the work from special issue 1. Whether in their object of study or methodology, each essay offers a new model for how to perform critical code studies. 
            
            Because critical code studies pays special attention to the signs of code, readings often explore the proximity of those signs to natural language. Kevin Brock offers a foundational discussion of Naming in Code, arguing that the practice of using natural language, whether in keywords, functions, or variable names grows out of procedural habit to achieve specific rhetorical goals. However, the presence of natural language false cognates, or misleading homonyms, can lead to misunderstandings.  In Polysemicolon; Novice Programmers and Java Keywords, Brianna Bettin discusses the challenges of “false cognates” in programming, keywords or reserved words that mislead newcomers to a programming language. In these two readings, natural language complements and complicates the reading of code.
            
            Central to these readings is archaeological work, examining the evolution of code in its historical context. Returning to the earliest conception of computers, Zachary Mann employs critical code studies to examine the work of Ada Lovelace. Exploring the more recent past, Zachary Horton and Levi Burner explore coding on the Magnavox Odyssey game console, emphasizing the interconnectedness of code, context, and console. In their reading, further complicating the program-plaform division, the console hardware becomes a means of programming. Both of these essays lavish their attention on the details and documentation of these material histories while also attending their social implications.
            
            Critical code studies aims to reveal what has become obscured. Evan Buswell makes a compelling argument that in representing knowledge as process, code represses or obscures the fundamental role of state. Buswell’s work redresses this fundamental “epistemic inadequacy” in a foundational gesture that affects all critical code studies. Exploring the mechanisms of sentiment analysis in TextBlob, Jeffrey Moro traces its roots to argue that the software does not reveal affect but instead creates it. His work challenges the naturalization of computational judgement, unsettling an algorithmic assessment of the kind that holds so much sway in data-centered discourse.
            
            How we read code, how we access it, is just as pivotal to how we interpret it. This issue introduces new methods of performing critical code studies. Matt Burton and Joris Van Zundert present “Defactoring” as a method, demonstrating the critical affordances of using a code notebook for exploring an extensive body of code, while Mace Ojala demonstrates the practice of reading code aloud. While Defactoring attempts to render the code more legible by reorganizing it into a narrative structure, reading code aloud listens for the evocations of the sound of the code.
            
            Each of these articles offers methods and conceptualisms as models for performing code readings and frameworks for new explorations. They offer foundational gestures as well as provocative new directions which we expect will have lasting impact on the next wave of scholarship in this field.
            
            We continue to feel gratitude not just for the many scholars who continue to develop this field that if not nascent is still only in its toddling days, finding its footing, learning how to navigate both ground and obstacles even as it shifts. And a great deal of that gratitude goes to Digital Humanities Quarterly, its editors and production team and especially Julia Flanders who has made DHQ a home for CCS. We look forward to the future work in critical code studies that scholars will publish under its banner.
            
            
               Brianna Bettin, “Polysemicolon; Novice Programmers and Java Keywords”
               
               Kevin Brock, “Naming in Code as Rhetorical Strategies”
               
               Matt Burton and Joris Van Zundert, “Defactoring the Pace of Change”
               
               Evan Buswell, “The Epistemology of Code”
               
               Zachary Horton and Levi Burner, “Playing the Gap”
               
               Zachary Mann, “Reading Note G: Ada Lovelace and the Clerical Labor of Codework”
               
               Jeffrey Moro, “Counting Feeling: Affect Theory and Sentiment Analysis in TextBlob”
               
               Mace Ojala, “Reading Code Aloud”
               
            
            
         
