Title:  A Review of 
Volume:  015
Issue:  1
Date:  5 March 2021
Abstract:  
            
            Zeynep Tufekci’s book Twitter and Tear Gas (Yale University Press; 2017) speaks to
               high-profile, anti-authoritarian networked protests. She engages with street protests
               and online movements to bring new perspectives and dialogues on the need for
               reconfiguration of digitally networked online spaces, and the trajectories of these
               social movements online. Her work contributes to scholarship in digital activism, and
               digital humanities in the context of networked movements.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Zeynep Tufekci’s book Twitter and Tear Gas, even within its
               title, attempts a relativization and comparison of high profile, horizontalist, and
               anti-authoritarian street protests with its integration of a reconfigured public sphere that now incorporates digital technologies as
                  well
               . Her study eloquently engages with street
               protest movements like the Encuentro Zapatista, Podemos in Spain, Occupy Wall Street
               in Washington, Gezi Park in Turkey, and the Arab Spring in Egypt, and functions to
               systematically enable newer perspectives and dialogues on the need for a
               reconfiguration of digitally networked online spaces and the trajectories of social
               movements online.
         

            Positionality
            As a social scientist, activist, programmer and faculty member in the Sociology
               Department at the University of North Carolina, Tufekci is uniquely positioned to
               underscore the metamorphosis that digital affordances have enabled in social
               mechanisms of protest. As a scholar of social movements and surveillance, Tufekci’s
               work explores digital protest at the interstices of technology, society, effects of
               big data on politics and the public sphere. With her background in Computer Science,
               she is able to offer a counter-discourse to Silicon Valley’s techno-utopianism, and
               her work disrupts the view that social media and tech companies have built over the
               years – that they are neutral, passive or even positive platforms affecting change in
               society. At this juncture, she locates the rise of Facebook, Twitter, and Google in
               relation to contemporary social movements. Her research could potentially be
               considered a repository of protest movements across the globe, and a comparativist
               analysis could engender the strengths they could draw from each other. Owing to
               versatility of her own disciplines, her research can be made available to a wide
               range of audiences and can function as a textbook or an academic resource within the
               university and beyond. 
         

            Attention over Information
            In Twitter and Tear Gas, Tufekci argues for both strengths and weaknesses;
               affordances and constraints of social media in organized digital protests, as she
               quotes historian Melvin Kranzberg from 1985, Technology is
                  neither good nor bad; nor is it neutral
               . Social media movements, in short, can both
               empower and keep protests from attaining their capacities. Her work speaks volumes on
               the technological affordances that accompany modern protest cultures to accomplish a
                  coming together of a large networked public in the overthrow of
               anti-authoritarian institutions and power structures. In tandem, Tufekci contends a
               fundamental fragility of leaderless networked movements that function ad hoc,
               providing flexibility to anyone who wishes to join and their debilitating lack of
               organization, authority and negotiation, when required. The ability to grow rapidly
               encompasses a lack of organization, a phenomenon she terms tactical freeze or
               an inability to enable tactical maneuvering. Moreover, as a techno-sociologist,
               Tufekci aptly identifies new media challenges of attention over information and new
               non-traditional forms of gatekeeping. According to the author, the new networked
               public sphere enables the amplification and abundance of false and unverified
               information  to distract
                  the audience, dilute attention, and sow fear and doubt in their minds
               . Tufekci highlights the importance of attention as a key resource for social media movements,
               and underscores how Facebook, Google and Twitter monetize
                  attention in ways that may or may not be conducive to the success of protest
                  movements online
               . In short, our move to digital technologies
               has enabled a trend where attention is manufactured as part of an emerging economy,
               and social media choreographs it as a tool to control and manipulate the masses. The
               book deftly maneuvers between the success of attention building in online activism
               and its challenges in the form of algorithmic control through bully bots and
               censorship by denial of attention, implemented by governments or private companies
               that seek to distract and exhaust both user and participant from partaking in the
               movement. 
         

            Social Media Platforms
            Pragmatically, Tufekci explores the role of policies of larger social media platforms
               like Facebook, Google and Twitter that contribute aptly to the discussion on the
               softer biopolitics of algorithmic control. For example, Facebook’s real name policy
               that effectively disrupts protester experience and Twitter’s mention policy that
               generates attention across the platform are two mechanisms of algorithmic ebb and
               flow that create and disrupt success of protest movements online. Furthermore,
               protests, here, are an example of a signal that corresponds to one of several
               underlying capacities: narrative, disruptive and electoral capacities that are, in
               essence, muscles that need to be always prepared, and will enable a movement to scale
               enough to fight anti-authoritarian institutions.
            The non-chronological order of the discussions of power and fragility of protest
               movements online unnerves and oftentimes exhausts the reader. Nevertheless, there
               remains an effective freshness to the argument of technological non-neutrality that
               Tufekci constructs. She plays to her strengths as both a social scientist and
               ethnographer engaged in protest fieldwork across the world, and a programmer who
               studies algorithmic affordances, in the construction of a dialogue surrounding both
               online and offline protests. 
         

            At the Intersection of Social Justice and Digital Humanities
            Tufekci’s project undertakes a broad investigation of digital activism, uncovers key
               players that influence the relationship between technology and contemporary social
               protest, and reflects on the power of attention over information in the age of New
               Media. Her work reconceptualizes social media movements in a new light, and applies
               rigorous empirical social science research to demonstrate the future of protest in
               digital media. She connects her discourse at the intersection of social justice,
               digital activism, and Digital Humanities. Although social science research in
               activism and Digital Humanities carries an important distinction, Digital Humanities
               scholar Roopika Risam argues that Digital Humanities methods can
                  be effective tools for calling attention to, and enabling social activism,
                  particularly for marginalized communities
               . According to Risam, Digital
                  Humanities makes activism possible, offering hope for re-appropriating knowledge
                  production
               . Digital humanists are poised to contribute to studies of
               social media activism through research, teaching, and community outreach and
               engagement. Digital Humanities envisions social media as a positive tool for
               transformative social change in digital activism, and for highlighting the scope and
               content of a humanistic inquiry. Although Tufekci’s Twitter and
                  Tear Gas lacks the humanistic perspective in its study of protest
               movements online that other scholars in Digital Humanities like Elizabeth Losh , Moya Bailey, Sarah Jackson, Brooke Foucault Welles 
               , and Nishant Shah  tackle, it
               successfully builds a counter-narrative to techno-utopianism and left-leaning
               anti-authoritarianism in an effort to reframe knowledge production in the Humanities.
               Tufekci, in essence, grapples with critical questions in Digital Humanities about who
               creates, engages with, and controls digital spaces. This book is in a constant flux
               between the strengths and weaknesses of functioning and navigating within media
               spaces. It is an invaluable resource for anyone interested in how social activism
               constructs itself online and a must-read for all that have scholarly aims in the
               field of digital activism.
         
