Title:  Bridging the Gap of Exhibition Design, Instructional Design, and the Learning Sciences 
               for the Future of Black Digital Humanities
Volume:  018
Issue:  4
Date:  6 December 2024
Abstract:  
           This article examines the connection between Black digital humanities and fields such as the learning sciences, 
              instructional design, and exhibition design. Focusing on key elements of these fields, this paper shows their 
              relevance to Black digital humanities, arguing that the future of this emerging field lies in its intersections with 
              other disciplines.
           
         
Full Body Text: 

          Introduction
            Black digital humanities (Black DH) is an emerging field that centers Black people in digital humanities. This field 
               does not yet have established traditions regarding methods or research practices. This youthfulness allows Black DH to 
               be interdisciplinary and inclusive in relation to its methods, theoretical frameworks, and research settings 
               . As a field that draws on Black studies and Black scholarship, Black DH has the 
               potential to forge new paths as [it] examines, constructs, and reimagines innovative communities 
               and people [across space and time] . Drawing on the limitless and 
               interdisciplinary nature of Black DH, I discuss connections between Black DH and the fields of exhibition design, 
               instructional design, and the learning sciences, reflecting on what Black DH can offer practitioners of various 
               backgrounds and how this emerging field can further its reach. I speak from my own background working at the 
               intersection of these fields, as a scholar with a degree in the learning sciences who has designed analog and digital 
               exhibitions drawing on instructional design to create learning experiences. While I lead with caution that some of what 
               I have to say here is derived from my experiences and is thus inherently incomplete, I believe that Black DH will prove 
               to be an important tool through which to address urgent issues of power and identity in these academic communities.
            
        

          Defining Black DH
            It is important at this junction to define Black DH. Black DH is an emerging field conceived as the process or practice 
               of engaging with the experiences and history of Black people through digital humanities methodologies. Black DH 
               addresses the intersection of Black lives, Black cultural and social experiences, and Black humanity with digital 
               technologies. As a field negotiating both Blackness and the digital, Black DH is an endeavor to help restore the 
               humanity of Black people through the use of digital platforms and tools . As Kim 
               Gallon writes, in advocating for a group whose identity has historically been questioned and denied, Black DH 
               troubles the very core of what we have come to know as the humanities by recovering 
               alternate constructions of humanity that have been historically excluded from that concept 
               . Scholars of Black DH think critically about the issue of power; consider seriously 
               the digital processes and tools used to study humanity; and combine historical and contemporary perspectives of 
               Black experiences to inform research and shape practices in the field.
            
            Black DH is also the process or practice of recognizing that Black history and experience is defined by the intersection 
               of policy, economics, race, technology, and gender. By using technologies and other emerging tools to empower and 
               enact respect for Black lives, practitioners simultaneously transform Black experiences in society. In transforming 
               the experiences of Black people, Black DH can in turn inform other fields instructional design and exhibition design, 
               in their shared pursuit of creating inclusive learning environments for all students, as well as the learning sciences, 
               which is about understanding the complexities of learning across contexts to devise new approaches 
               . Black DH lends itself well to this work by providing historical context for the complexities 
               of learning for Black learners. In the text that follows, I discuss the fundamentals of each field and illustrate how 
               these fields can learn from each other. Interdisciplinary collaboration will advance Black DH, facilitating the 
               transportation of ideas into new fields and contexts for greater impact on the real world.
            
        

          Contextualizing Exhibition Design
            Exhibition design is the art or process of putting together artifacts using available technologies and tools to share 
               a narrative around a topic. Exhibition design has consistently shifted over the years from a curator-centered to an 
               audience-centered approach . Though gallery space, collection content, and 
               audience are fundamental elements of exhibition design, audience considerations are increasingly becoming influential 
               in the design of exhibitions . This shift to a user- or audience-centered design 
               is related to the integration of concepts such as user- or human-centered design in the broader discipline 
                . The field of exhibition design is interdisciplinary 
               as it draws on an iterative relationship between narrative, storytelling, architectural space, communication media, 
               and an understanding of the audience . It includes the fields of graphic, industrial, 
               architectural, interaction, and organization design . A combination of experience 
               design through multimedia technology, lighting, audio, and creative performance helps create a comprehensive narrative 
               around a topic. Indeed, Locker argues that there is no magic recipe for exhibition design because there 
               are a variety of different approaches that have evolved with each generation of designers. However, Derda provides a 
               contemporary definition of exhibition design: Exhibition design is a process that uses visual 
               storytelling and environment to convey information. It focuses on the content of the artworks or artefacts to be 
               presented and is concerned with their arrangement so that they may be understood in connection to one another and in 
               conversation with the viewing environment's conditions. 
            
            Exhibition design requires a variety of design skills applied differently based on the context 
               . It's a method of information presentation that aims at engaging the audience through the 
               exhibition organization and the delivery of the information. As Urry and Larsen explain, the 
               main goals of exhibition design are a) to connect the educational and culturally important aspects of the content; and 
               b) to attract a wider audience to create an environment that will both foster learning and act as entertainment. 
               Embedded in the exhibition design process is the desire to create and be learning environments, thus the relevance of 
               and connection with instructional design processes, further discussed below.
            
            
              Racial Issues in Exhibition Design
                As learning spaces, exhibitions have historically been designed to perpetuate colonial and racist views of 
                   marginalized groups. For instance, when objects looted from former colonies or objects that were created during 
                   the eras of chattel slavery or Jim Crow are exhibited without proper contextualization in the design of the 
                   exhibition, they tend to reinforce racist and imperialist tropes. For the past four years, conversations about race 
                   have increasingly been supported in the design world by the white designers, curators, and editors who have 
                   dominated the field. However, the end goal of this dialogue has yet to be clarified, as racist tropes and practices 
                   are still perpetuated by exhibition design . At a 2023 exhibition created by prominent 
                   designers and curators during Italian Design Week, figurines of the 1920s portraying racist caricatures of Black, 
                   Asian, Middle Eastern, and Indigenous people as subhuman were displayed without any context 
                   . Yet, only a few designers, such as the Asian-Australian multi-disciplinary designer 
                   Jenny Nguyen and the Black American designer and professor of architecture Stephen Burks 
                   openly criticized the exhibition as offensive . Designers involved in the exhibition 
                   denied racist intent, apologizing for hurting certain communities and calling for dialogue. Writing about this event, 
                   Camille Okhio wonders when the field will move past the endless and fruitless cycle of dialogue 
                   to concrete change .
                
                Exhibition designers are still influenced by the colonial imagination, and their design choices reflect these 
                   imperialist ambitions, which subvert efforts to design a sense of inclusion for visitors and staff 
                   . Hence, to design exhibition spaces that reject colonial framing of others, to 
                   decolonize exhibition design, Adrienne Lalli Hills and Margaret Middleton propose creating 
                   exhibition environments anchored in Indigenous creativity, values, and aesthetics systems — a 
                   stark departure from design conventions that often feel colonial .
                
                The field of exhibition design has the power to help disadvantaged groups, to raise self-esteem 
                   and even to challenge racism by progressing learning . Decolonial, 
                   postcolonial, and Black feminist theory have been proposed as lenses through which to counter the tendency to 
                   portray Black people and other marginalized groups as less than humans. For instance, Hill and 
                   Middleton recommend that designers avoid the decontextualized display of objects behind glass panes 
                   because such displays reflect colonial aesthetics in design. In fact, the encapsulation of objects in oak cases, 
                   organized according to neat taxonomies, reduces the cultural materials to mere curiosities, thereby exoticizing 
                   non-Western, non-white cultures . Likewise, the design of visitor experiences is often 
                   shaped by the colonial imagination in that visitors are expected to only explore and interact with exhibitions in 
                   certain ways. Those who do not conform to these unspoken expectations are not considered good (code for 
                   white, middle-class) visitors . This colonial perspective on visitors' experience 
                   explains recent incidents at the Metropolitan Museum, where a Cambodian artist was kicked out for 
                   performing a dance prayer to her ancestral gods in an exhibition of looted religious statues and a Black artist 
                   was expelled from an exhibition about Black Rest for asking white visitors to honor the space 
                    . There is no question that even now, in the 21st 
                   century, the field of exhibition design is still struggling with racial issues.
                
            
        

          Creating Meaningful Learning Experiences
            As an interdisciplinary field, instructional design places a great emphasis on the design of meaningful learning 
               experiences . More specifically, instructional design focuses on the creation of 
               instructional materials that meet the needs of all students. The instructional designer's goal is to 
               create something that enables a person or group of people to learn about a particular topic or 
               develop or improve a set of skills or encourage the learner to conduct further study 
               . Instructional design is connected to exhibition design in that both disciplines 
               strive to create meaningful learning experiences, facilitating the public's understanding of various topics through 
               the organization and presentation of information. Interestingly, both fields also aim to prompt the learner or visitor 
               to search for further information .
            
            The field of instructional design is concerned with the process of systematically designing instructional events and 
               situations. This encompasses iterative processes centering on human learning such as: a) planning the learning 
               outcomes; b) identifying strategies for learning and teaching; c) choosing appropriate technologies; d) selecting 
               educational media; and e) assessing the learner's performance . John Sweller 
               notes that instructional design processes include the following major activities: 
               
                 Analysis of the setting and learner needs
                 Design of a set of specifications for an effective, efficient, and relevant learner environment
                 Development of all learner and management materials
                 Implementation of instructional strategies
                 Evaluation of the results of the development
               
               These activities have resulted in different instructional models, which are applied according according to a particular 
               context to help the designer visualize, direct, and manage teaching and learning situations or materials.
            
            
              Race and Identity in Instructional Design
                It is worth noting that instructional design scholarship is increasingly concerned with issues of race and equity 
                   in the field. Ryan Ikeda et al. recognize that the educational system has been designed to create 
                   inequity and to contribute to the design of instructional materials that serve as tools for the white supremacist and 
                   settler colonial project in the United States. In other words, instructional design models are shaped 
                   by racist and colonialist perspectives that need to be dismantled to create a learning model 
                   that quickly responds to the slippery machinations of racism . 
                   Applying anti-racist pedagogy to design implies approaching instructional design as a collective activity by 
                   integrating different stakeholders from various fields, including the humanities and STEM, and being accountable to 
                   BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, and people of color) . Anti-racism design also includes 
                   designing with awareness of situational factors that can impact student learning; being cognizant of one's 
                   positionality through one's various identities, biases, and commitments; and representing that awareness in the 
                   design process by examining the role of power in design .
                
                Instructional design makes essential an in-depth understanding of learners, which includes an analysis of the 
                   learners' skills, prior knowledge, attitudes toward content, cultural background, and more 
                    . However, as Liangyue Lu and 
                   Jianping Xu discuss, little attention has been afforded to learners' racial identities and power 
                   dynamics among learners, particularly minoritized learners. Yet, by integrating critical race theory (CRT) into an 
                   instructional design model, Lu and Xu propose the Motivational Framework for Culturally 
                   Responsive Teaching (MFCRT) as a means of attending to learners' racial identities. Indeed, this model centers on 
                   developing race awareness, unpacking white privilege, and paying attention to silenced students 
                   . Similarly, Michael K. Thomas and Marco A. Columbus suggest 
                   integrating culture and identity, particularly African American identity, in instructional design work. Their theory 
                   of primary cultural instructional design states that instructional designers must interact with culture and 
                   identity by designing relevant and meaningful learning environments that take into consideration communities such 
                   as African American learners . Addressing the question of culture in instructional 
                   design, Patricia A. Young developed the culture-based model (CBM), an intercultural instructional 
                   design framework to guide designers through the design, management, development, and evaluation process 
                   . Culture is an integral part of one's identity, with this model, Young points 
                   to the fact that minoritized or otherwise unrepresented cultural groups have not been taken into consideration in 
                   previous instructional design models. There is no doubt that the growing interest in issues of equity and race 
                   within the field of instructional design demonstrates a need to reckon with previous practices that have ignored 
                   or neglected certain communities.
                
            
        

          Designing Learning Situations through Exhibitions
            As previously stated, exhibition design is an interdisciplinary field that draws from a variety of design fields. 
               Exhibition design plays a critical role in teaching about the past, present, and the future. Yet, its interactions 
               with the field of instructional design are still limited, or rather not explicit. Libraries, museums, and cultural 
               heritage institutions often use exhibitions to democratize access to their collections and educate the public about and 
               around a topic or theme. The act of choosing the exhibition theme and designing its contents cannot be completed without 
               the input of curators, who are often subject matter experts with sufficient knowledge to help the exhibition designer 
               create meaningful exhibition experiences for the visitors.
            
            Like instructional design, exhibition design is a creative process that involves a variety of design approaches or 
               processes that change with each new generation of designers  . 
               Zoi Popoli and Izabela Derda explain that exhibition design now requires 
               the combined efforts of multiple specialists throughout most of the creative process 
               . Given that exhibition design draws on a variety of skills to inform and teach a 
               diverse audience , exhibition design should also utilize instructional design processes to create 
               a better visitor experience. For instance, understanding how people learn and how this affects the design of learning 
               environments or events can inform the design of an exhibition.
            
        

          Getting Into the Learning Sciences
            The field of learning sciences is difficult to define , but scholars agree that it is 
               interdisciplinary. Victor R. Lee explains that the learning sciences aims to understand 
               the surprising complexity of real-world learning within and across sociotechnical contexts; to actively use new 
               understandings to design learning environments; and to establish novel approaches for using technology (when it is 
               appropriate) to support learning . Indigo Esmonde and Angela N. 
               Booker add that the field is focused on investigating learning and teaching in a variety of contexts. Using 
               approaches from psychology, cognitive science, neuroscience, education, anthropology, and sociology, the learning 
               sciences provide different perspectives on how to define learning and how learning occurs. This includes examining 
               what people should learn, how we know when they have learned it, and 
               which teaching methods, in which contexts, are most likely to make learning happen 
               . Scholarship in the fields  of constructivism, cognitive science, educational 
               technology, and sociocultural studies has served as an early influence for the learning sciences 
               . Hence, the learning sciences also places a great emphasis on the design of learning spaces 
               in different contexts and on the use of technology to support learning .
            
            The field is further influenced by psychology, sociology, computer science, education and cognitive science, and it 
               contributes various approaches to better understand teaching and learning processes . 
               Daniel Sommerhoff et al. define the learning sciences as the analysis and facilitation 
               of real-world learning in formal and informal contexts, with technology being key in helping and scaffolding 
               learners to participate in constructive learning activities. In effect, cognition, metacognition 
               and dialog are the primary foci for analysis with respect to learning activities and processes, and the learning 
               environment is considered to be fundamental to the facilitation of learning 
               . Hence, the field seeks to provide learning opportunities for any learner 
               in any setting . It is therefore not surprising that Shayan Douroudi argues 
               that the learning sciences is an interdisciplinary field that came out of a desire to understand learning in humans and 
               machines, which includes artificial intelligence and machine learning. Interestingly, there is an increased interest in 
               understanding how power participates in the design of learning settings and experiences, as well as how any harm caused 
               by these power dynamics can be mitigated . For instance, Betsy DiSalvo et al. 
               explore how designed learning environments can facilitate learners' construction of racial, ethnic, and gendered 
               identities . Designing learning environments that empower groups that have historically 
               been marginalized in the context of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) can help these learners 
               develop identities with disciplinary agency and support learners navigate the complexities of learning 
                . Yet, as Esmonde and Booker 
               note, the learning sciences have not yet substantively addressed racial issues . In 
               effect, When we look more closely, we discover that wherever we find social relations, variability of 
               experience and practice, or evaluation of knowledge and learning, we also find dynamics of power. The learning sciences, 
               therefore, must necessarily centre conceptions of equity, diverse experience, and the dynamics of power and privilege 
               expressed in and through learning environments. 
            
            
              Questions of Power in the Learning Sciences
                The learning sciences is increasingly showing interest in the issues of power, identity, and culture. Scholars are 
                   exploring the power dynamics in learning environments , and more researchers are recognizing 
                   that the learning sciences should focus on issues of justice and entitlement in and through learning environments 
                   . Talia Leibovitz et al. also call for further commitment to racial 
                   justice and urgent and vigorous participation in the racial justice initiative. For the authors, this includes 
                   learning about social justice through the framework of pedagogies of witnessing . 
                   However, the learning sciences possesses limited theoretical underpinnings that make the 
                   relationship between power and learning visible, even as the field strives to speak across both a situated, 
                   sociocultural tradition and a more individualistic psychological tradition . 
                   Consequently, the limited theoretical grounding may explore the limited research on racial issues. For this reason, 
                   I assert that Black DH can provide the learning sciences with the theoretical underpinning needed to contend with 
                   issues of race.
                
                Research in the learning sciences that explores ways to support learning in settings such as exhibitions is limited 
                   . Yet, the existing research has already shown that strategies and technologies such 
                   as artificial intelligence and games can be used to ensure that learning happens during exhibition visits 
                    . The learning sciences and instructional design 
                   can both can inform exhibition design. Expectations, theoretical commitments, and final products in the learning 
                   sciences, instructional design, and exhibition design are different yet all three fields are interested in 
                   improving and supporting practices and environments that enhance the learning experiences of all, especially 
                   underrepresented communities.
                
            
        

          Bringing Black DH into the Conversation
            Black DH brings to the fore questions of race and racialized systems that have affected and still affect Black people. 
               The field tells the story of a people, working to restore their humanity by using digital tools. Given their interest 
               in organizing information to reach a diverse audience, the fields of exhibition design, instructional design, and 
               learning sciences can be informed by the Black DH. In Making a Case for Black Digital 
               Humanities, Kim Gallon, drawing from Kirschenbaum, states the following:
               Black digital humanities reflects less an actual thing and more of a 
               constructed space to consider the intersections between the digital and blackness… Like race, gender, class, and 
               sexuality — all social constructs, if you will — the digital humanities increasingly hold real meaning and significance 
               in the academic universe.  I draw on Gallon's argument to contend that 
               race, gender, class, sexuality, and all social constructs increasingly hold real meaning in the learning sciences, 
               exhibition design, and instructional design.
            
            As such, these fields can benefit from the insights of Black DH practitioners into the intersection of technology and 
               Blackness. Yet, these fields can also bring to Black DH their perspectives on learning and design. The lens of Black DH 
               is critical in examining, analyzing, and providing perspectives on technology and Blackness. I contend that being able 
               to communicate, inform, and even learn about these complex interactions and intersections requires the scholars in the 
               field to think about a) learning; b) exhibition; and c) instructional design implications and applications. In other 
               words, when creating an exhibition, designers should assume the habits of instructional designers by thinking of 
               exhibitions as the process of designing learning spaces with instructional goals and objectives. As Bedford 
               states, regardless of how broad, problematic, select, or beneficial, exhibitions were designed to 
               educate . However, their pedagogies… are neither 
               straightforward nor always comfortable, but rather, multifarious — as troubling and conflicting as they are exciting 
               and inspiring . To summarize, exhibitions are learning spaces 
               . Thus, exhibition design can also be perceived as the process of developing spaces 
               that can facilitate learning. Thinking about exhibitions as learning spaces will help exhibition designers integrate 
               visitors (i.e., learners) into the entire design process and support exhibition design with learning theories that can 
               help exhibitions achieve the goal of education. The learning sciences also allows for exhibition designers to find ways 
               to support exhibition visitors' learning, such as by integrating relevant technologies.
            
            It is true that Black DH has been essential in the development of the digital humanities, and the work of Black DH 
               practitioners to recover the joy and pleasure of Blackness through digital technologies is ongoing 
               . Yet, I add that Black DH is also a means of creating spaces to learn, talk, and tell 
               stories about Black experiences in a digital world with digital tools. The strategies, technologies, spaces, and ways 
               employed to tell or teach these Black experiences vary in this emerging field. The expansion of Black DH also resides in 
               its conversations and interactions with other disciplines such as those discussed in this paper. The 
               more critical [Black DH] practices segue into these spaces [e.g., instructional design, exhibition 
               design, and learning sciences] the greater the ability to shape [Black DH and these fields] into places of encounter for 
               [learning], critique, intellectual growth, creative inspiration, and even activism 
               .
            
            According to Alexander Weheliye, Black DH interrogates the sociopolitical relations that have racialized 
               and informed the literature, philosophy, and texts we use . Gallon goes further 
               to say: The Black digital humanities reveal how methodological approaches for studying and thinking 
               about the category of blackness may come to bear on and transform the digital processes and tools used to study humanity…. 
               [The field] helps to unmask the racialized systems of power at work in how we understand the digital humanities as a 
               field and utilize its associated techniques. 
            
            Following Gallon, I argue that Black DH can inform exhibition design, instructional design, and the learning 
               sciences. It can help these fields examine the methodological approaches used to design, investigate, and understand 
               learning as it relates to and situates Blackness. It may also transform the processes and tools used to design and 
               analyze learning in these fields. Embedded in Black DH approaches and practices is the critical lens applied to examine 
               and think about Black experiences and Blackness in relation to other concepts, technologies, and practices. For instance, 
               the critical lens of Black DH can help the fields of instructional design, exhibition design, and learning sciences 
               critically engage with technologies employed to design; critically interrogate the means utilized to support learning; 
               and critically examine the concept of power when it comes to design and learning. Through Black DH, we can better 
               explore questions about learning processes and technology use, as well as who has the power to define learning and 
               learning spaces in relation to Black experiences.
            
            The intersection of Black DH with other fields will create new avenues for research and expand research methods and 
               practices for these fields. Black DH lends itself well to instructional design by providing resources and information 
               about the Black experience that instructional design can rely on to create instructional materials that meet the needs 
               of Black students. I contend that Black DH can serve as a critical lens that helps challenge racism embedded in 
               exhibition design and achieve concrete change. Black DH can also act as a source that will ground exhibition design in 
               new practices, design principles, and counter the cannibalistic 
               tendency to trap the other behind our glass case displays and 
               frame their knowledge according to western criteria . Hence, Black DH can 
               be a source of information for exhibition designers to narrate Black experiences.
            
            Black DH can further lead these fields to critically examine power in a historical context to make sense of it 
               contemporarily. Such analysis can highlight voices that have often been left out or ignored, as well as the different 
               forms of knowledge and ways of learning and doing that have historically and may still today be considered irrelevant 
               or unimportant. Bridging with these fields creates an opportunity for further questions and findings. Since the 
               emerging field of Black DH is about improving the Black experiences in different contexts, our work should include 
               learning spaces and what it means to empower Black people using various tools, including technology, to tell their 
               stories. In this regard, Black DH can engage in a conversation with these fields, breaking the apparent barriers to 
               transform the Black experience in any setting. As interdisciplinary fields interested in inclusion, design, and 
               learning, they can build upon Black DH knowledge to make greater collective progress to understand, support, and design 
               learning for all. Building on Lina Markauskaite et al.'s perspective on the learning sciences, it is my 
               understanding that the Black DH community has a body of empirical research and prior knowledge to contribute, as well 
               as expertise to advance research on learning in exhibition design, instructional design, and the learning sciences. 
               Simultaneously, Black DH will benefit from these interactions and make progress in its endeavor to positively affect the 
               xperiences of Black people in any context or situation.
            
        

          Conclusion
            Black DH connects and informs Black studies with its practices and the critical lenses it applies to examine methods, 
               digital platforms, and tool applications to Blackness and Black experiences. Through emerging and expanding the digital 
               humanities through other disciplines, such as the learning sciences, exhibition design, and instructional design, will 
               further advance Black DH. Black DH interrogates the relationship between Blackness and the digital as power. Scholars 
               in the fields of learning sciences, exhibition design, and instructional design, can build on this work to question how 
               Blackness is shaped, portrayed, submerged, or even erased through the tools or methodological approaches employed in the 
               study of learning and in the design of instructional materials and exhibitions. Drawing from Lee's writing 
               about how different fields can speak to each other, I argue that scholars from these fields need to connect and initiate 
               collaborations. In other words, Black DH practitioners should start conversations with scholars of the learning sciences, 
               instructional design, and exhibition design, and vice-versa. This will allow parties to get excited 
               about ideas that other parties are also currently thinking about, and … have dialogue 
               . My argument is that such exchange of ideas could generate new methods and frameworks to address 
               issues of inclusion, design, and learning for all.
            
        
