Title:  Academics Retire
					and Servers Die: Adventures in the Hosting and Storage of Digital Humanities
					Projects
Volume:  017
Issue:  1
Date:  26 May 2023
Abstract:  
				
				 This article examines the technical development and afterlives of two projects,
						the CURSUS project (2000-2003) and the William
							Godwin’s Diary project (2007-2010) to undertake case
					studies in problems relating to hosting and storage of digital humanities
					projects. In both cases a combination of outside events or project decisions
					negatively impacted the project. This was discussed as part of a symposium for
					the Endings Principles for Digital Longevity and reflects on whether following
					these principles would have benefited these projects. Overall, the case is made
					that we should always be planning for events that could affect the
					sustainability of digital research projects. 
			
Full Body Text: 

				Introduction
				This article looks back at the technical development of two projects, The CURSUS project (2000-2003) and the William Godwin’s Diary project (2007-2010), as case
					studies in which outside events or internal decisions negatively impacted the
						project. The article started as a brief video and then symposium talk
						for The Endings Project
							Symposium and the slides initially used are available at https://slides.com/jamescummings/endingsproject2021/. Although
						there is substantial discussion of TEI Markup that is useful in recording
						for posterity the nature of the projects, in the end it is this portable
						markup that helps in their preservation. I hope those unfamiliar with TEI
						markup will bear with those parts in reading this article. While it is
						necessary to give the detailed background for those readers who are
						interested in these TEI aspects, the lessons learnt are also equally
						applicable to non-TEI projects. The CURSUS project is a collection of XML editions of medieval
					liturgical texts, and The William Godwin’s Diary project makes available 32
					volumes of Godwin’s diaries covering 1788 to 1836. Although both websites are
					still available, they have had difficult histories and both should be considered
					at risk of disappearing from the web at any moment. The CURSUS project faced challenges partly because the principal
					investigator passed away. The William Godwin’s
						Diary project suffered because the people maintaining the project
					were not given the resources to do so, and because all stakeholders left the
					institution. As the main technical developer for both of these projects, I have
					direct insight into the technical background and general lessons learned, which
					are useful to examine as case studies for each project before contrasting them
					with the Endings Principles for Digital Longevity (; hereafter Endings Principles).
					Although the projects pre-date these Principles, they are worth comparing to each other given that both of these projects are TEI-based editions
					and relate directly to the issues the Principles
					tackle. It is easy, of course, to criticize the technical decisions of a project
					decades afterwards; seeing in hindsight how the digital landscape has evolved in
					the meantime gives us an immediate sense that we would certainly have done
					things differently and definitely have made different choices. In these cases,
					since I was the developer and technical consultant on these projects, I do not
					need to guess. While I would like to think I would make better decisions now, I
					know that I would not unless I were time-traveling back with my current
					knowledge and experience. These two projects are useful proxies for examining
					many issues of the longevity of our research outputs.
				Part of the overall argument I am making through these case studies is that we
					should always plan for events that affect the sustainability of digital research
					projects. Some of these events are obviously unpredictable, while others are of
					our own making. While we pay lip service to doing so in funding applications,
					once a project is under way, unexpected challenges present themselves and our
					solutions to them should adhere to an underlying set of principles. We need to
					plan for failure, plan for the project being cut short, plan for staff
					disappearing, and plan for all kinds of threats to the project by adopting and
					following principles such as those recommended by the Endings Project in the
						Endings Principles. 
			

				
					CURSUS: An Online Resource of Medieval Liturgical
					Texts
				From 2000-2003 I was fortunate enough to be employed by the AHRB-funded CURSUS project as a postdoctoral research associate.
					This project was the brainchild of Professor David Chadd of the School of Music
					at University of East Anglia (UEA) and sought to produce editions of medieval
					Benedictine Latin liturgical texts online, and experimentally to explore the use
					of XML publication for such materials. The main purpose was to enable
					investigation of the order of antiphons, responds, and prayers in these
					liturgical manuscripts. The project proposed that this order of service in many
					ways gives a fingerprint of the liturgy in different places in England. We edited these liturgical items with the utmost care, but for other aspects
					such as the biblical readings transcribed only the first few and last few words,
					since the point of the project was not to spend time making a critical edition
					of the Latin Vulgate Bible. 
				In the end, the project produced editions of twelve main texts and a number of
					ancillary works. These included an XML conversion of the Latin Vulgate Bible,
					derived lists of individual incipits, and a repository of liturgical items
					(antiphons, responds, and prayers) based on the Corpus
						Antiphonalium Officii (CAO). The approach the project used was not
					merely to edit a liturgical item in its context in the edition of a particular
					manuscript, but also to create a textual-critical apparatus in a repository with
					all the other textual variants from CAO and any other manuscripts edited by the
					project. In this way each liturgical item in the edition of a manuscript,
					instead of existing in the source file for that manuscript edition, is in
					reality a pointer to a specific antiphon, respond, or prayer in the project’s
					CAO repository file. Pointers are not a URI-based system in TEI P4, so
					extraction involves looking up the correct reading for that manuscript to
					display and importing it to this point through an XSLT stylesheet. This makes
					for a dense CAO repository file but for very light editions where most of the
					file is filled with pointers. 
				
					CURSUS Technical Background
					A worked example, looking at one antiphon to which the CURSUS project gave the ID ‘c5111’ and how this and references
						to it are encoded, will help to explain some of the technical details of the
							project. For additional material on the CURSUS project technical decisions see Cummings,
							2006. The c5111 antiphon appears, among other places, in the
						Peterborough Antiphoner
							 The Peterborough Antiphoner. Cambridge,
							Magdalene College Ms F.4.10. An Antiphoner of the fourteenth century
							from the Benedictine Abbey of St Peter, St Paul and St Andrew,
							Peterborough, Northamptonshire. during the Vespers
							service for Maunday Thursday. Most manuscripts have a different
						date for this antiphon; all the other manuscripts edited on the project, for
						whatever reason, use it on the Tuesday or Wednesday of the medieval
						Christian Holy Week. In the underlying XML of the manuscript the pointer to
						this specific antiphon is encoded as in Figure 1 below. 


					
						An xpointer to the CURSUS project
							antiphon c5111.
						
						Screenshot of a xptr XML tag with href equal to Antiphons and type
							equal to abody
					





					What becomes instantly obvious (to those familiar with XML markup standards
						at least) is that this does not follow the current TEI P5 Guidelines.
						Indeed, the CURSUS project predates TEI P5,
						which was not released until 2007, and uses a project-specific extension of
						TEI P4 XML for its markup. For the now deprecated TEI P4 Guidelines
							see https://tei-c.org/Vault/P4/doc/html/index.html
							. In Figure 1 a TEI P4
							<xptr/> element points to the ID ‘c5111’ in the CAO
						repository of antiphons, responds, and prayers, and the markup instructs the
						processing to retrieve the content of the <aBody> element
						there (denoted by the value of the type attribute). A mere examination of
						the form of this <xptr/> in isolation does not explain
						much, but looking at it in progressively greater context shows more of the
						liturgy-specific elements that the project had added to its use of the TEI.
						The (custom) <antiphon> element that surrounds it is seen
						in Figure 2.


					
						An <antiphon> element from the CURSUS project.
						
						screenshot of XML code with antiphon and rubric tags
					



					In Figure 2 the mixture of TEI P4 elements (such as add,
						hi,
						supplied, and xptr) and the project’s own additions (such as
						antiphon and rubric) are evident. Once the project’s
						principal investigator learned of the extensibility of the TEI as a system,
						he preferred discipline-specific terminology for important aspects of the
						text. Although there are differences between this markup and what one might
						see today in TEI P5, the general intentions and interpretations of the
						markup are still relatively clear.



					
						The entire CURSUS project encoding of the
							Vespers service that contains antiphon c5111.
						
						screenshot of xml code with tags such as antiphon, incipit, and
							rubric
					

					Even in the full context (Figure 3) of the entire Vespers service that
						contains antiphon c5111, there are only a few additional non-TEI P4 elements
						(such as Day,
						service, and incipit). What starts to become evident through
						these examples, at least to those familiar with TEI P4 markup, is that this
						project took full advantage of a TEI DTD-based feature allowing the creation
						of custom DTD entities for repeated formulaic text, punctuation, and markup
						that are very common in the highly repetitive liturgical documents. This
						means that the encoders did not need to include repetitive portions of
						markup, and merely used a smaller entity to stand in for that markup.
						Even in the context shown through the markup in Figure 2, the use of the
						entity &AE; at the beginning of the
								<antiphon> element demonstrates this
						exploitation of a technical method of providing formulaic text and markup.
						The cursus.ent file listing the project’s DTD entities expands this as seen
						in Figure 4. 

					
						The CURSUS project DTD entities file
							showing the A and AE entities.
						
						screenshot of XML with the A and AE elements
					



					In this file the AE entity is shown to be expanded to a string of
						textual markup showing the rubricated text In Evangelio. Moreover,
						this formulaic text itself recursively includes an additional custom entity
							A which is replaced with the rubricated label Ant. While
						there are a number of drawbacks to such a system that mean it would not be
						recommended today, it was an imaginative exploitation of the ability of
						DTD-linked documents to provide re-used bits of text and markup. The
							amount the CURSUS project used this feature
							of DTD-based document processing to include any repetitive portions of
							text should not be underestimated. Not only rubricated labels such as
							‘Ant.’ but accents, unusual punctuation, character abbreviation markers,
							books of the Bible, portions of the <teiHeader>, and
							manuscript witness information were also included. The use is more akin
							to how one might use XInclude or similar these days. For the full horror
							see https://github.com/jamescummings/cursus/blob/master/dtd/cursus.ent.
						 However, this approach does introduce a significant fragility based
						on all files’ dependence on the DTD and entities file being present and
						accessible at the time of processing. If the files were to be normalized to
						TEI P5 XML, then a conversion process would have to begin with a basic
						identity transform which would expand all of these entities into their
						non-entity form. 
					This discussion explains what the encoding of the xpointer only for antiphon
						c5111 looks like solely in the context of one of the manuscript edition
						files, but the content of the antiphon is stored with all its textual
						variants in the CAO repository file. Figure 5 gives an example of this
						file.


					
						The CURSUS CAO repository file antiphon
							entry for c5111
						
						screenshot of an encoded repo with many app tags
					


					New elements that the project introduced here (including ant, header, usage,
						and aBody), like most of the additions made by the project, could have been
						modeled in other ways with TEI elements. For example, the
							<ant> element could have used a TEI
							<ab> (anonymous block) element. However, in
						customizing the TEI, the project used element names that made sense for its
						encoding needs. The bespoke markup and TEI P4 XML of this project could,
						should there ever be a need, be converted to TEI P5 XML to be used in a
						modern production environment. Indeed, it is because of the adoption of the
						open international standard of the TEI that the markup would be
						straightforward to convert, even in the case of this extensive
						customization. The entries in the header are given as standardized numerical
						codes for all days of the medieval liturgical calendar created by the CANTUS project and are used to generate the links
						into the manuscript editions. See http://cantusindex.org/ for
							more information about CANTUS and related
							projects.  Similarly, the website generated version of the files
						automatically adds in the IDs of the previous and next liturgical items to
						the enriched form of the antiphon during the process of extraction by XSLT
						stylesheets into individual files. These are pieces of convenience data to
						enable easier processing of the underlying XML for online browsing. 
					Figure 6 shows the HTML view of this CAO repository entry – the entries are
						all browseable online and are dynamically transformed to HTML pages on the
						fly. The textual variants are laid out in parallel boxes showing their
						mutual differences with the witness sigils discreetly present, mimicking the
						underlying TEI parallel segmentation markup. In modern websites, these
						variants would likely be presented in a very different manner – the
						interface certainly shows its age, having been created in 2002. 


					
						A CURSUS antiphon web page for antiphon
							c5111.
						
						screenshot of the critical edition of antiphon webpage. The title
							of the page is at the top in green and the repo form figure five is
							displayed below
					


					This form of interlinking between manuscript edition and repository entries,
						which then link through to all the other places this antiphon is used,
						promotes a circular and generally beneficial form of user experience in
						the navigation. While the XML files store most of the intellectual output of
						the project, preserving only the XML files would mean that we would lose the
						argument presented by the interface for how we should interact with such
						editions. The aspects of interface as edition might be lost if we look only at the underlying files; the edition itself is a publication that includes
						not only the underlying data but the manner in which it was presented. The
						output of projects is not only the data they produce but the way in which
						those products are presented to the end user — when research is published in
						print, the book is the product, not the research notes or data that underlie
						it; in other words, the interface is the means of preservation. However, as
						with many digital resources, perhaps in a demonstration of an appreciation
						of the much vaunted but seldom realized re-use of materials, we concentrate
						on the underlying data as the primary output to the detriment of other
						aspects of the outputs. As a historical artifact representing digital
						editions from this period of our development in thinking about how to
						present such editions online, the CURSUS interface deserves preservation or
						conservation, in the same way one might argue the primary source documents
						do.
				
				
					
						CURSUS Project Afterlife
					By 2003 the main CURSUS project was completed.
						Professor David Chadd and I had edited more manuscripts and produced more
						additional outputs than promised in the AHRB funding bid — but my contract
						came to an end, so I left UEA for a post at the Oxford Text Archive,
						University of Oxford. However, Professor Chadd continued work and did not
						really consider the project concluded, only its funded portion. He
						occasionally continued to update the website, and, in order to simplify some
						of the underlying publication technology and assist with technical aspects
						generally, he later employed Dr Richard Lewis (then a departmental
							postgrad). Dr Lewis replaced very early experiments using eXist-db
							1.0b1 to index and search with Swish-E, and created a replacement for
							the Apache Cocoon system that we used for pipelining the dynamic
							conversions with a tool called Pycoon (because it was written in
							python). See https://github.com/ironchicken/pycoon for more information
							about Pycoon.  This ongoing work meant that the project never
						reached a point at which Professor Chadd felt that working files could be
						canonicalized in their final form.
					 Sadly, in late 2006 Professor Chadd died after a short illness. Although his
						passing did not immediately affect the website, it did truly bring the
						project to a close. Professor Chadd had continued to edit manuscripts as and
						when he could up until his death, but, because he was not using a version control
						system or frequently uploading these to the website, his final work has been
						lost. c.f. Endings Principles, 1.2: Data is
								subject to version control (Subversion, Git).
						 But even death was not the most impactful event in the CURSUS project afterlife.
					More dramatically, an event totally unrelated to the CURSUS project in November 2009 had a severe detrimental impact
						upon it: a hacker illegally obtained over 1,000 emails spanning 13 years,
						along with 3,000 other documents, from the Climate Research Unit at UEA. A
						combination of ignorance and willful misunderstanding meant that even any
						unprofessional or confusing comments in them were used by climate change
						deniers to spread misinformation. This event became known as
							ClimateGate and as a result UEA temporarily closed all off-campus
						access to its servers. This hack was partly responsible for
							catapulting climate change denialism into the public consciousness . For more information on ClimateGate, the
							Wikipedia article contains a fairly in-depth explanation https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climatic_Research_Unit_email_controversy.
							Fact Check (a project of the Annenberg Public Policy Center that focuses
							on debunking political misinformation) also has a good summary https://www.factcheck.org/2009/12/climategate/.
					
					Originally, we had set up one of the project’s desktop
							machines as a Debian Linux server
						 but shortly before leaving I suggested it
						might be best to make it more official, and in my mind more stable, on a
						departmental server. Throughout all the tumultuous events above, even though
						the PI of the project had passed away, the CURSUS website continued to run unproblematically on the School
						of Music departmental server. The site had begun to be cited in journal
						articles, and not just by those directly concerned with musicology or
						digital publishing .
					However, sometime in 2010 a software upgrade on that server caused the
						website to go down, and it needed a configuration change and a restart. With
						the continuing ban on off-campus access and the fact that neither Dr Lewis
						nor I were in Norwich or had worked for the university for a few years, we
						had no easy way to restart the server. By this point the School of Music had
						little IT support, and UEA’s central IT had no ability to take on these
						extra duties. Indeed, later in 2010 the School also replaced their
						departmental server with a new one – having no local champions or even
						people who knew much about this legacy site, the CURSUS website at the University of East Anglia finally
							disappeared. Fortunately, it did have several snapshots taken by
							the Wayback Machine of the Internet Archive. See for example https://web.archive.org/web/20061012165859/http://www.cursus.uea.ac.uk/ed/c5111
							for antiphon c5111 from October 2006 shortly before Professor Chadd’s
							death. Until we reinstated the CURSUS
							website at http://cursus.org.uk/, we directed people to the Wayback
							Machine instead.
					
					We had backed up the latest version of the data on the server shortly after
						Professor Chadd’s death, of course, and it was around this time that I first
						contacted UEA to discuss getting the rights to put the website up again or
						hosting it elsewhere. Starting with the School of Music, who disavowed any
						responsibility for the site, I was eventually put in touch with UEA’s
						Commercialisation Manager from Research and Enterprise Services. A slow
						process of back-and-forth explanations resulted in 2016 in a Creative Commons
						Attribution Non-Commercial license for the intellectual property – after six years of negotiation – for a project that always had
						intended its data to be open but hadn’t explicitly licensed it as
						such. c.f. Endings Principles, 2.2: All
								rights and intellectual property issues should be clearly
								documented. Where possible the Data and Products should be released
								under open licenses (Creative Commons, GNU, BSD,
							MPL). Indeed, UEA had eventually closed its School of
						Music in 2014, after hard-fought campaigns to keep it, so even the academic
						department that had created and hosted this project was now gone 
						. The closure of the department caused additional
						confusion as it was unclear to the university who in authority might give
						permission to license this data. But perhaps we did not even need
						permission: UEA as an institution did not even know it owned this data and
						the project’s intention was always to release it openly. An alternative,
						more assertive approach, would have been to put the site up while
						simultaneously pursuing the permission to do so. As the pioneer of
							early computer science Rear Admiral Grace Hopper has been quoted as
							saying: It is easier to ask forgiveness than
								permission. The CURSUS Creative
							Commons licensing discussions certainly reinforce that lesson. Under the
							intellectual property policy of UEA at this date, the institution and
							not the individual academic owned the IPR. The AHRB encouraged the
							production of open access outputs but did not mandate it at this point.
							In preparation for the Endings Project Symposium Martin Holmes queried
							the small amount of risk that putting the site up would have entailed,
							and while it crossed our minds, we were also busy with other projects.
						 While the website is still up, the problems noted above concerning
						sustainability of such resources indicate that even to preserve the project
						as a working resource has an inherent fragility. If it is not practical or
						feasible to preserve such resources, recording a screencast video using the
						website might be one solution at the very least to document the ephemerality
						of user experience and interaction for the future. The idea of
							recording interactive sessions with digital editions to preserve a sense
							of their functionality came up in discussion during the Endings Project
							Symposium. Of course, having videos helps but the full interactive user
							experience is lost, and any video will need to be preserved with the
							resource in a standard accessible format.
					
					Since 2016, the site has been hosted on a small personal VPS run by Dr Lewis
						and the cursus.org.uk domain name
						(paid for by me), and the underlying data and code stored in GitHub.
							The original URL, http://cursus.uea.ac.uk/, ceased to function in 2010.
							The http://cursus.org.uk site
							holds a legacy copy of what was on that site at the time.  This
						arrangement is contingent and precarious; Dr Lewis might decide to stop hosting
						the site or I might not continue to pay the domain name registration fee.
						Although people still do use the site and the data, it raises the question
						of when and how to retire websites and merely preserve the data in case
						someone wishes to re-use it at a later date. Part of our reason for hosting
						it is a feeling that the main constituency of users would find the data hard
						to use in its underlying format. A compromise would be to undertake
						a project to flatten the website, removing any need for server-side
						processing and make this available online in a variety of forms. As the
						website was mostly static (only the XML to HTML transformations being
						dynamic), it would be easy to flatten it. The XSLT stylesheets and an HTML
						copy of the website as currently served (with relative links) was added to
						maintain a coherent version in the zip archive uploaded to Zenodo. As
							part of writing this paper, a copy of the data and code, stored in GitHub
							at https://github.com/jamescummings/cursus, was archived and put
							into the international open repository Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5090613 ensure its
							survival. Updating the data to be more usable, for example
						converting to TEI P5 XML, is not a large project but would take a bit more
						work to rationalize the bespoke elements (only lightly documented in the DTD
						— these days we would document these extensions fully with a TEI ODD).
							 TEI ODD is the machine-readable meta-schema documentation and
							customisation format for the TEI Framework that most projects employing
							TEI should use to record their project’s schema and encoding
							guidelines.
					
				
				
					Lessons from the CURSUS Project
					Numerous red flags and warning signs indicated that the CURSUS project was at-risk and not properly preserved. Two
						decades on, it would be gratifying to be able to say that digital humanities
						projects no longer do such things. Alas, we cannot. However, there have been
						significant changes that make the preservation of project outputs more
						likely. For example, instead of keeping the master copy of data on the PI’s
						laptop, digital humanities projects now use GitHub routinely to store both
						versioned code and data while enabling collaboration. c.f. Endings
							Principles, 1.2: Data is subject to version control
								(Subversion, Git).
						 Instead of using departmental servers stored under someone’s desk to
						host funded research projects, we now use institutional or virtual machines
						hosted in the cloud. Major institutional and international data repositories
						now exist for depositing copies of research outputs but did not at the
						time.
					The majority of problems in the project’s afterlife are those that we did not
						reflect upon at all while the project was running. For example, we never
						considered the so-called Bus Factor – the minimum number of people
						who have to vanish from a project before it completely stalls due to the
						lack of necessary knowledge to sustain it. In this case it was Professor
						Chadd’s sudden death and the fact that legacy planning for the project site
						had not been undertaken. Since no other project staff were still employed by
						UEA, the intellectual content of the project could easily have slipped away.
						It is only because Dr Lewis and I wanted to preserve it, partly as a tribute
						to Professor Chadd’s legacy, that it survives at all. We should also
						recognize the CURSUS project’s strengths – in
						being fairly simple TEI-based XML with XSLT 1.0 conversion to HTML (albeit
						dynamic) without any JavaScript or additional libraries, it could easily be
						migrated and preserved. It is, I would argue, the relative simplicity of the
						site that has enabled its preservation. Just as a physical object in good
						condition might be preserved by benign neglect, this website’s minimal
						footprint, structured text-only content, and generally uncomplicated needs,
						enabled it to survive relatively well despite being subject to benign
						digital neglect. More active interventions and conservation might have
						resulted in the use of more advanced frameworks, features, or libraries, as
						these became popular, causing more long-term harm for its sustainability
						than otherwise (see Holmes and Takeda in this issue).
					One of the reasons for describing the technical background of this project,
						and giving the detailed explanation of their use of the TEI Guidelines, is
						that it demonstrates the kind of complexity that could be achieved within
						the Endings Principles. To be clear, the CURSUS project does not meet those requirements
						since, in its current form, it still requires bespoke dynamic pipelined
						conversion of the underlying XML to HTML. While the experimental DTD-based
						markup entities were interesting, the fragility they introduce means such an
						approach should have been used only for the development of materials, not
						the publication copies. It would have been better to expand all the custom
						entities in all the files (as well as normalize the markup vocabulary) for a
						publication version, but with the ongoing nature of the project as Professor
						Chadd worked towards his (sadly unachieved) retirement, the curse of the
						perpetual beta meant that it never quite seemed finished. It would
						have been better if regular fixed releases were made, where the production
						system files (as opposed to the development version) were always in their
						final canonicalized forms. The server-side dynamic transformation does not
						add much that, with hindsight, could not have been accomplished with
						pre-generated flat files. The project was experimenting with various methods
						of digital publication of TEI-based XML and relished the idea of being
							able to have virtual URLs, allowing our users to
							create dynamically-assembled pages from a variety of XML source
							files
						. It would have been better to pre-generate
						output files with massive redundancy of every possible view as the Endings Principles suggest.
					A lesson for encoding and technical expectation management might be drawn
						from the number of new custom entities and bespoke elements the project
						created. Once Professor Chadd discovered the ease with which we could create
						new bespoke elements, his default approach when a new textual
						phenomenon or encoding problem was encountered was to create a bespoke element. Taking the easiest approach
						in any digital project always results in trade-offs and compromises for longevity.
						This approach sometimes meant that we were encoding things with new
						project-specific elements rather than looking slightly harder in the
						community for standardized approaches and solutions. While the CURSUS project was groundbreaking in some of its
						experiments in the publication of digital medieval resources, hindsight
						reveals some problems which should have been foreseen at the time.
				
			

				William Godwin’s Diary
				A similar story is that of the William Godwin’s
						Diary project at the University of Oxford, which ran several years
					after the CURSUS project. Funded by the Leverhulme
					Trust from 2007-2010, this project coincided with the Bodleian Libraries’
					receipt of funding from the National Heritage Memorial Fund and various
					donations to buy the Abinger Collection which, among many other things, includes
					William Godwin’s diary. Godwin was the founding father of
						philosophical anarchism and was also a major novelist, although he is
						perhaps better known today as the husband of Mary Wollstonecraft and the
						father of Mary Shelley
					. His diary contains 48 years of records in 32 octavo
					notebooks, written in often highly abbreviated entries that the project had to
					decipher and disambiguate. People’s names are often given only as initials and
					there is little detail concerning the substance of any meetings and the meaning thereof can be hard to decipher. For more information
						about the diary of William Godwin see Mark Philp’s William Godwin (and his
						diary) https://www.digitens.org/en/notices/william-godwin-and-his-diary.html.
					 Initial transcriptions provided as MS Word documents were converted to
					TEI P5 XML.


				
					William Godwin’s diary entries including that of 30 August 1797 where he,
						concisely, notes the birth of his daughter Mary (later Mary Shelley) at
						11:20pm.
					
					Image of a manuscript page from the eighteenth century. The page
						includes life events like births.
				

				The project was interested in highlighting relationships between Godwin and other
					people and extracting datasets of information from the diaries. To do this, I
					trained a team consisting of the PI (Professor Mark Philp), a postdoctoral
					research associate (Dr David O’Shaughnessy), and two DPhil students (Kathryn
					Barush and James Grande) in a project-specific TEI P5 customisation that was
					very reduced and used renamed elements to make encoding these entries
						easier. These were the project members with whom I interacted, but I
						should also note the involvement of the co-editor Dr Victoria Myers from
						Pepperdine University who provided many of the initial draft transcriptions
						as Word documents before their conversion to TEI P5 XML. For a full
						acknowledgements list see http://godwindiary.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/team.html. The XML
					they were hand-encoding in successive passes consisted of fewer than 20 separate
					elements in total but was automatically expanded to full TEI on the website each
					evening. So while the project might encode using a non-TEI
						<dMeal> (diary meal) element, the renamed element was
					converted to a pure TEI <seg type="dMeal"> element in the
					production XML . Similarly, the project workflow
					meant checking work into an institutional Subversion version control system;
					unlike the CURSUS project, the real risk of data
					loss, while never zero, was minimal. The overall training took just over a day,
					but the project benefited by having me as their on-call technical support when
					they needed it.
				
					
						William Godwin’s Diary Technical
						Background
					The website was built on top of an early version of eXist-db (a native XML
						database) that at the time used Apache Cocoon for URL-based pipelined
						conversions, with which I was familiar from the CURSUS project. I had experimented with eXist-db during the
							CURSUS project; an XML database was desired
						because of the nature of the queries to be done — again on the fly — against
						a fairly complicated XML dataset. At the time, the popular idea that it
							may not be possible to achieve one input — all outputs, but surely one input — many
							outputs is an entirely practical goal
						 was brought from the CURSUS project and taken to heart. The project leads viewed it
						as not only feasible but also desirable to generate many of the project
						outputs from a single or at least small number of input datasets. Indeed,
						the project tried to create a network of interlinked inputs that generated a
						network of intertwined outputs that would decentralize any starting point
						and thus be open to exploration. The William Godwin’s
							Diary site, a finely engineered
							architecture of XML tagging[,] allows the user to trace acquaintances
							across the decades, books through his library catalogues, and the author
							himself through the streets of the metropolis
						.
					The project methodology of working in phases (first adding structural markup,
						then adding markup recording meetings, then recording and eventually
						identifying people, places, and events) meant the encoders always moved on
						to a new year of the diary they had not seen before. This iterative but
						distributed process meant that fresh eyes saw each entry several times, thus
						acting as additional proofreaders to reduce human error. From the point of
						view of the Endings Principles, this
						methodology ensured that after each phase the content was coherent and
						complete (as far as it went).c.f. Endings Principles, 5.2: A release should only be made when the entire product
								set is coherent, consistent, and complete (passing all validation
								and diagnostic tests). This methodological approach
						is something that many DH projects use to ensure a phased production of
						output work. The encoders also had diagnostics using a local XSLT stylesheet
						to transform their work into a debugging proofreader’s view that
						allowed them to spot mistakes through formatting realized in a manner that
						could never be acceptable in a user-oriented front end. This view
						highlighted any elements that should have had content but didn’t, and
						coloured things in a way to emphasize aspects that had not yet been
						completed.
					The website infrastructure was fed directly from the Subversion repository
						and automatically produced a number of views on the website when updated
						each evening. The nightly jobs would transform any updated (but well-formed
						and valid) files into pure TEI P5 XML, load these into the eXist-db database
						and regenerate a wide variety of tables of information. These included not
						only lists of plays Godwin went to or books he was reading/writing, but also
						detailed tables of meals he had (and whether he was dining with the person
						or the person was dining with him), and other forms of meetings. These were
						displayed using the external jQuery library DataTables plug-in to provide a
						filterable, pageable, sortable view of the data that would certainly be
						against the Endings Principles if they had
						existed at the time.For more information about DataTables see https://datatables.net/.
							Using DataTables would contravene the Endings
								Principles 4.3: No dependence on
								external libraries or services: no JQuery, no AngularJS, no
								Bootstrap, no Google Search.
						 The level of detail of the encoding and cross-references throughout
						are what enable the site to provide detail to researchers using it. As one
						reviewer wrote, What makes the site an amazing research
							tool is the level to which Godwin’s meticulous (but brief) notes are
							cross-referenced against one another, creating a vast web of information
							that not only fleshes out the skeleton of the author’s life, but also
							provides a wealth of information about Romantic-era social networks and
							day-to-day life in the London of the period. 
					
						DataTable of meetings where Godwin was calling on a person
						
						Image of the William Godwin’s Diary
							project web page. The page includes a table of meetings with dates and
							diary entries
					
					As one might expect, the diary data itself is organized chronologically. Each
						diary day is represented by a TEI <ab> element with a
						@type attribute of dDay and is required to have an @xml:id attribute
						based on the date. Each diary entry is required to have a
							<date> element with a @when attribute provided in W3C
						format, but the element will have transcribed text content here only if it
						existed in the diary. The production server markup uses only standard TEI
						elements, with arbitrary segments denoting meals, meetings, or similar
						concerns of the project using the <seg> element.
					
						The William Godwin’s Diary XML entry for
							1 August 1797.
						
						Screenshot of encoding for the William
								Godwin’s Diary project. Some of the tags includes are
							persName and placeName
					
					One of the major intellectual contributions of this encoding work — and a
						significant demonstration that good text encoding really is research in
						itself — is the identification and deduplication of 50,000 of the 64,413
						instances of names in the diary.For more general numerical statistics
							of the diary content see http://godwindiary.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/stats.html. In
						Figure 9, they are mostly given as their surnames, but even A A is
						identified and points directly to the website’s ALD02.html file where
						information about Amelia (Opie) Alderson and her 119 appearances in the
						diary is provided. Arguably, the data should have pointed to the underlying
						XML file (ALD02.xml) but this file URI was provided as part of the
						transformation to pure TEI for the website as a processing convenience.
						Similarly, the decision was taken early on that when a person’s name was
						mentioned as a venue where a meeting took place, the encoders would denote
						this distinction for various project needs, by embedding a
							<placeName> of @type
						venue inside the <persName> content. While this
						might have made more sense the other way around (a place name which had a
						personal name as its content rather than a personal name that had a place
						name as its content), this method was chosen for consistency with other
						decisions on the project.
					
						The William Godwin’s Diary website
							showing the beginning of August 1797.
						
						Screenshot of the William Godwin’s
								Diary project website. The page includes diary entries for
							the month of August
					
					The display of the diary entries themselves is as running text based on
						calendar entries. One can view a single day, a particular month (as in
						Figure 10), or a whole year at a time, all extracted dynamically from the
						underlying XML year file. Clicking on the year, month, or day in the
						accompanying calendar provides an easy form of date-based navigation for
						users. All of the transformations are done dynamically, converting
						underlying XML with XSLT to HTML for display. However, in some cases the
						query to discover, extract, and then convert the XML took so long that
						pre-cached static copies of the XML were created. An example of this
							is in the source XML for the DataTables of information for both
							identified and unidentified people. Either the query was composed in an
							inefficient manner, or the XML poorly indexed, but the result took
							several seconds to retrieve, even locally. So the decision was made to
							pre-generate the results of the query and merely transform this to HTML
							when required. This approach is halfway along the route to the creation
							of a fully static website that would be more compatible with the Endings Principles. As one can tell
						from Figure 10, almost all the content of the diary entries links to more
						information. Any mention of people, places, meals, meetings, texts Godwin
						was reading or writing, topics discussed, or events links to more
						information about that named entity. In the display of the website, jQuery
						is used to toggle on/off highlighting of these to enable people to discover
						them more easily. If one toggles on highlighting of people, for example,
						then all the names of people are highlighted with a light pink box.If
							one toggles on all of this named-entity formatting, the site becomes an
							unreadable fruit salad of inaccessibility. The PI was challenged several
							times on his insistence for this feature. Using colours to denote
							semantics is usually a poor choice for reasons of accessibility.
						If one clicks on a name — for example, in Figure 10, the name
							Johnson’s in the Dine at Johnson’s in the entry for the 1
						August 1797 — the name links to a page assembling not only the
						project-provided biographical details, editorial notes, and bibliography
						concerning the identified Joseph Johnson, but also an
						automatically-generated chart and details of all of his appearances in the
						diary that can be used to navigate back through the diary (Figure 11). This
						page includes some basic statistics, here that he was mentioned 413 times,
						not at home when Godwin called in 23 times, and listed as a venue 324 times.
						The statistics clearly indicate that Godwin called on Johnson much more than
						the reverse and that he also liked to host gatherings of all sorts that many
						attended – the data providing rich views of their interactions over the
						course of Godwin‘s life. Through such techniques, the site navigation still
						creates a richly encoded endless loop of exploration for researchers over a
						decade later, as noted by Thomas: Part of the intent
							behind the site’s extensive interlinking is to allow readers to navigate
							the diary in any order that they choose, permitting a type of
							exploration that facilitates serendipitous insights (and, for
							enthusiasts, affords the simple amusement of searching for whatever the
							author was doing on any given day). 
					
						The William Godwin’s Diary person page
							for Joseph Johnson.
						
						screenshot from the William Godwin’s
								Diary project showing entries mentioning Joseph
							Johnson
					
					Another direction of travel from the diary pages is to click on the thumbnail
						for that week’s page image. As part of the agreement in receiving funding to
						purchase the Abinger Collection, the Bodleian Library imaged all of Godwin’s
						diary. The project PI decided strongly against the facing-page Text/Image
						that is common in many digital scholarly editions. Instead, he wished to
						privilege the edited text, only providing links to the images as thumbnail
						images that are placed alongside each page of text as a way of making these
						linked resources available. However, linking through to these images has
						proved very useful to those undertaking Godwin studies who now routinely
						include snippets of them in their slides and articles.
					
						The William Godwin’s Diary pan/zoom
							Google Maps-driven image viewer.
						
						Screenshot of William Godwin’s Diary
							website with a manuscript page in the middle zoomed in to show only a
							few letters.
					
					The images were taken and tiled, and a pan/zoom image viewer was built using
						the Google Maps API, long before collaborations such as IIIF were available
						(Figure 12). Today, a project would simply embed a IIIF viewer for the
						digitized images that the Bodleian makes available on its Digital Bodleian
						website, even though doing so introduces a dependence on an external
						service. Indeed, one of the reasons the images proved so popular with
						researchers was not the easy interface, but the fact that we provided a link
						to the full high-resolution image and had (after much effort) convinced the
						Bodleian to license the images with a Creative Commons Attribution license.
						With this full image, researchers could crop the portions they were
						discussing and use them in their conference presentation slides. However,
						the necessity of having both the full high-resolution image and
						pre-generated tiles for each of the page images at each level of
						magnification added significantly to the size of the virtual machine to be
						requested, which in turn may be partly why it was only reluctantly hosted by
						the Bodleian Library. For a project following the Endings Principles, there is a calculation to be done
						concerning any additional storage costs for hosting its images locally
						versus the fragility of pointing to an external institutional image
						server.
				
				
					Project Afterlife
					The project ran successfully and completed on time and budget in 2010, and in
						2012 won an award for Digital Resources from the British Society for
						Eighteenth-Century Studies.See https://www.politics.ox.ac.uk/news/william-godwins-diary-wins-award.html
							for information about this award. Shortly afterwards, the DPhil
						student assistants completed their theses, and the postdoctoral research
						associate moved on to another university, and within a few years the PI of
						the project moved on to the University of Warwick. The project Twitter account
						continued to tweet out diary entries every few hours (until a Twitter
						authentication change meant the script started to fail).
						Nevertheless, although the project was over, the website continued to
						function, relatively unproblematically. And yet, one of the aspects of
						hosting that was problematic with the William Godwin’s Diary project was the question of where institutionally the
						website was to be hosted. As the Bodleian Libraries did not yet have a
						centralized media server (now https://digital.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/), and the images were hosted
						locally on the virtual machine (VM) that housed the website, the VM would
						need to survive with all it needed, but this need meant a fairly large (for the
						time) VM. The availability of resources always affects projects’
						afterlives.
					One of the reasons for mentioning (above) the sources of funding for the
						Bodleian’s purchase of the rest of these (and other) materials of the
						Abinger Collection was that as part of the purchase agreement the library
						had promised that web hosting for this project, like the imaging, would be
						provided pro bono. At the beginning I brought together representatives of
						the project with those from Bodleian Digital Library Systems and Services,
						who agreed to provide a suitable VM inside the Bodleian Libraries’
						infrastructure. When it came to it, however, since I was the sole technical
						developer on the website and happened to work for the Oxford University
						Computing Services (OUCS), the Bodleian decided that I should just set up a
						VM in Computing Services, and that they would transfer it over to their
						infrastructure at the end of the project. At the conclusion of the project,
						the Bodleian then made the argument that the OUCS VM was working well, and
						so even though it had a Bodleian URL there was no pressing reason to move
						the underlying VM to their infrastructure. It was only several years later,
						when the Computing Services (by then IT Services) and Bodleian Library were
						both having major upgrades to their VM infrastructure, that I finally
						convinced them that the VM should be moved under the Bodleian Library’s
						care. The operating system itself was updated to the latest long-term
						support version, but as I had only limited time to donate to the project,
						the version of eXist-db (now quite ancient) was not upgraded and just copied
						across. Even so, the VM remains one of those VMs on an older infrastructure
						on the outskirts of the purview of Bodleian’s overworked infrastructure
							team.Those whose institutions have entirely centralized IT
							provision may find such parochial outlooks and redundant duplication
							inside a highly collegiate university confusing; so do many who have
							worked there. As it is, the website occasionally needs a
						restart; when the VM is rebooted, the website does not automatically start,
						and occasionally a small partition fills up with log files.In a
							moment of deep irony, on the weekend during which I initially wrote
							these precise paragraphs the website was down. Given its legacy
							position, out-of-date software, and operating system, it should be
							considered at-risk, and yet is still frequently consulted and cited by
							those studying Godwin who likely have little sense of its precarity.
							Scholars may reasonably expect that a site hosted by the Bodleian
							Libraries is stable. But this expectation places additional maintenance
							burdens on their technical support teams. Both of these are
						problems that would have been addressable while I had access to the server,
						but in an immediately post-project setting, it never seemed important enough
						to ensure such access. While I would restart the website maybe once or twice
						a year while working there, I
						have had no local access to the server since I left the University of Oxford in 2017; as there is no one connected to the
						original project left at the institution, restarting falls to the busy
						infrastructure team of the Bodleian Library. This need to care for legacy
						websites and their compounding maintenance burden will become only more
						pressing as we continue to produce digital projects that are deemed too
						important to just turn off after a discrete period.
				
				
					Lessons Learned from William Godwin’s Diary
					
					It may sound as though I am faulting the Bodleian Libraries, and especially
						the Bodleian Digital Library Systems and Services section, for not providing
						a VM at the beginning of the project as they had promised to do. And while
						they should have done so and enabled development or at the very least a
						production server to be hosted on their infrastructure, I certainly have
						sympathy for their point of view. Before the start of the project, the upper
						levels of the library administration committed them to providing support
						from system administrators but without providing any extra resources to the
						staff to enable this additional work. The necessary imaging of materials was
						provided, pro bono, and they promised to host the website but, when the
						development of the website had finished, hosting was understandably not a
						priority task for them. If I had been working directly for the Department of
						Politics and International Relations (where the project originated) and had
						not had sophisticated local IT resources at the time, then there would have
						been no question that the Bodleian would have provided the necessary
						infrastructure — the project would have been impossible without it. However,
						I happened to work for the Oxford University Computing Services, and so I
						had easy access to VMs and it seemed natural to them that I should provide
						these at no extra cost or immediate effort from them. This kind of approach
						is dangerous, and projects should be sure to get formal agreements of
						in-kind support where feasible.
					This project relied on a single developer (me) to provide some degree of
						unpaid support long after the project had finished. This is why the Endings Principles are so important – they
						encourage discussion of the project afterlife. In the case of the William Godwin’s Diary project, the project team
						gave little consideration to what would happen to the site after it was
						handed over to the Bodleian. Much like a physical output such as a book,
						everyone seemed to think it would be handed over and that would be that. But
						digital research outputs are not like books; they demand care and attention,
						however fleeting, irregular, and inconsistent. This remains true, though to
						a much lesser degree, of static websites as well which at very least need
						servers to run on. While of course I had backups of the William Godwin’s Diary data, and it was deposited in the institutional
						repository, after my departure in 2017 I no longer had access to the server
						or Subversion repository. I only got around to uploading the underlying data
						and code to an open GitHub repository in November 2019. Although this
							GitHub repository https://github.com/jamescummings/godwindiary acts as another
							copy for preservation means, it would make sense to deposit a copy of
							this with the images into an international repository like Zenodo. I
							have not yet done this, mea culpa. I had also previously provided
						a full copy of the data to the Shelley-Godwin
							Archive at the Maryland Institute for Technology in the
						Humanities, who have had their own ongoing maintenance burden for the sites
						they create . 



					
						Google Maps API error on William Godwin’s Diary
							website.
						
						Screenshot of a Google Maps errors informing the viewer that the
							map cannot load
					

					Using freely-available but proprietary systems like the Google Maps API to
						build a pan/zoom image browser was always going to be a compromise.
							Other pan/zoom browsers of the time (such as OpenLayers which was quite
							popular) were tested and the user experience of the Google Maps version
							was preferred by the PI. The API has had major
						backwards-incompatible updates at least twice since the project adopted it.
						Indeed, I am amazed that it still works at all. There is an error message
						notifying the user that it cannot load Google Maps, but the message can be
						easily dismissed and the viewer functions as before, since all of the image
						tiles needed are on the local server. As I mentioned earlier, if built today
						the project would certainly have used the IIIF media server that the
						Bodleian has set up in the meantime. With archival digital image resources
						there is an open question on how best to interact with them and still adhere
						to the Endings Principles. In discussing these
						issues as part of the Endings Project
						Symposium, Martin Holmes pointed out that the use of IIIF might imply a
						viewer (such as Mirador) with server-side requirements and the consequent
						longevity problems inherent in any such software. This is true if the IIIF
						is hosted as part of the project website, but one could design the site so
						that only the remote media server’s viewer were used (embedding or merely
						linking to it) and if one day the images disappeared, the site could degrade
						gracefully, presenting only the text view. For some projects, a fine balance
						must be struck between treating whole remote collections of images as
						research objects and hosting these resources locally . A centralized institutional image store may make
						sense, especially where the same set of images may be used for multiple
						projects, but it needs to be carefully incorporated into the site in a
						manner that prepares for graceful degradation of any linked resources.
							c.f. Endings Principles, 4.7: Graceful failure:
								every page should still function effectively even in the absence of
								JavaScript or CSS support and 4.9 The
								use of an external library may be necessary to support a specific
								function which is too complex to be coded locally (such as mapping
								or cryptography). Any such libraries must be open-source and
								widely-used, and must not themselves have
							dependencies.
					
				
			

				Comparison with the Endings Principles
				
				There are certainly a number of commonalities between the CURSUS and William Godwin’s Diary
					projects (other than my involvement) from which we might learn. The latter
					project, having been developed some years later, benefited from some of the
					lessons learned from CURSUS. 
				Technology is bound to change — some of what now seems impossible will become
					plausible and eventually a reality and developing the resources of the future
					will inevitably be different. Indeed, in archive-based research projects
					digitizing and exploiting textual sources the development and significant
					improvements made to handwritten text recognition (a machine-learning-based
					technique for transcribing handwritten documents, though also applicable to
					print) promises the glimmering hope of an age where whole archives (or those
					materials in similar scripts at least) will be able to be transcribed (c.f. 
					. With a wealth of text available, some will
					exploit these corpora through programmatic analysis, but others will want to
					edit and up-convert the material to provide interpretation and make it more
					accessible to readers. As expected, the Endings
						Principles for most projects do a good job in suggesting some ground
					rules that will always result in easily archivable outputs. The Endings Principles are available at https://endings.uvic.ca/principles.html. Looking at these
					Principles in comparison to the projects above will highlight some of their many
					flaws but looking at these points of failure gives us a method by which we can
					improve. 
				In the creation of the data, the CURSUS project did
					not conform to open standards. While based on TEI P4, the encoding diverged from
					P4 significantly and did not put the effort into canonicalizing the data before
					release. c.f. Endings Principles, 1.1: Data is
							stored only in formats that conform to open standards and that are
							amenable to processing (TEI XML, GML, ODF, TXT).
					Similarly, the files were not really subject to version control. c.f.
						Endings Principles, 1.2: Data is subject to version
							control (Subversion, Git). The William Godwin’s Diary project was better in sustaining itself these
					areas, by using standard TEI P5 and a Subversion repository. Both did employ
					validation and diagnostic analysis of a sort. c.f. Endings Principles,
						1.3: Data is continually subject to validation and
							diagnostic analysis.
				
				Neither site truly meets the principles for documentation, in that while they
					provided some high-level project documentation about the content, neither
					documented the technical infrastructure very well. c.f. Endings
						Principles, 2.1: Data models, including field names,
							descriptions, and controlled values, should be clearly documented in a
							static document that is maintained with the data and forms part of the
							products. Although the CURSUS project had a commented DTD, it merely noted the element
					that was being added; it didn’t explain any rationale or give a description of
					it. With full hindsight, CURSUS should have followed the Endings Principles on licensing; although the original web page
					stated that the outputs were released openly, establishing the rights
					after the fact was a major hurdle. To be fair, Creative Commons had just
						recently launched during the years of the CURSUS project and the number of academic research projects in
						the humanities using CC Licences was still tiny. c.f. Endings Principles, 2.2: All rights and
							intellectual property issues should be clearly documented. Where
							possible the Data and Products should be released under open licenses
							(Creative Commons, GNU, BSD, MPL). This lesson had truly
					been learnt by the time of the William Godwin’s
						Diary project, which licensed all of its materials with a Creative
					Commons Attribution Non-Commercial 3.0 license.
				In the websites’ processing, there were also good and bad aspects. As they were
					XML-based systems, the source files were always valid against a defined schema,
					though the relentless validation did not always extend to the HTML and
					CSS. c.f Endings Principles, 3.1: Relentless
							validation: all processing includes validation/linting of all inputs and
							outputs and all validation errors should exit the process and prevent
							further execution until the errors are resolved. While
					these were both validated at one point, the validation requirements have also
					changed in the intervening decades, as guidelines for web accessibility have
					improved. Neither site had true continuous integration, but both had some degree
					of automation for the generation and testing of the sites. c.f Endings
						Principles, 3.2: Continuous integration: Any change to
							the source data requires an entire rebuild of the site (triggered
							automatically where possible). The Godwin project had a
					variety of behind-the-scenes automated testing, proofreading, and checking
					before any file was copied into the database. The processing code was treated
					similarly, though should have been recognized as being more contingent.
						c.f Endings Principles, 3.3: Code is contingent: while
							code is not expected to have significant longevity, wherever possible,
							all code should follow Endings principles for data and
						products. The benefit of a static site for some projects in
					conforming to the Endings Principles (long after
					these two projects) is the reduction in the burden of server-side processing,
					that is, making sites untethered from the processing that
						created them (Holmes and Takeda in this issue). Both of these
					projects have benefits resulting from those aspects that are static, but
					fragility still exists.
				The main fragilities of the two projects lie in their production of
					outputs/products. Both were dependent on server-side software, CURSUS merely for searching and pipelining dynamic
					transformations to HTML, but Godwin for its entire
					XML database-backed infrastructure. c.f. Endings Principles, 4.1: No dependence on server-side software: build a static
							website with no databases, no PHP, no Python. The Godwin project, in using jQuery for a number of
					aspects, fails at the Endings Principles’ caution
					against fashionable technologies and external libraries or services. c.f.
						Endings Principles, 4.2: No boutique or fashionable
							technologies: use only standards with support across all platforms,
							whose long-term viability is assured. Our choices are HTML5, JavaScript,
							and CSS, and 4.3: No dependence on external
							libraries or services: no JQuery, no AngularJS, no Bootstrap, no Google
							Search. CURSUS is better here, as many of these
					technologies either did not yet exist or were too complex to use, but
					suffers the opposite problem in having later created bespoke server-side
					software (e.g. PyCoon). I suspect that these will be some of the hardest
					Principles to convince developers to follow since they often love fashionable
					external libraries and services that appear to make their urgent tasks easier in
					the short-term. What is really needed, and StaticSearch is a good start,
						is end-to-end solutions that make it easier for projects to follow the
						Ending Principles. They should be using software because it is easy and as a
						benefit also get Endings Principles compliance
							.
				
				Neither site has URLs that contain query strings and both have straightforward
					URLs for all individual entities on the site. c.f. Endings Principles,
						4.4: No query strings: every entity in the site has a
							unique page with a simple URL that will function on any domain or IP
							address. The two sites also provide all the underlying
					data for download, though both could do better at documenting it. c.f.
						Endings Principles, 4.5: Inclusion of data: every site
							should include a documented copy of the source data, so that users of
							the site can repurpose the work easily. While both sites
					do provide all the necessary data in order to function in the page, they do not
					truly meet the ‘massive redundancy’ that the Endings
						Principles suggest. c.f. Endings Principles, 4.6: Massive redundancy: every page contains all the components
							it needs, so that it will function without the rest of the site if
							necessary, even though doing so means duplicating information across the
							site. In both projects, while an individual page might
					have all the text necessary for its own functions, it might link to a shared
					liturgical item as a source that can take users to other pages, or provide
					additional prosopographical information never intended to be embedded in that
					individual page. 
				Both sites meet the principles of graceful degradation reasonably well. As
					primarily text-based sites, they function fairly well, though in an even uglier
					way, with JavaScript and CSS turned off. c.f. Endings Principles, 4.7:
							Graceful failure: every page should still function
							effectively even in the absence of JavaScript or CSS
						support. With CURSUS this
					functionality is partly because it predates the mass adoption of JavaScript and
					uses only fairly simple CSS. With Godwin, conscious
					attempts were made to enable graceful degradation; in reality, this approach
					only means mitigations such as a system whereby clicking on the main menu item
					with JavaScript disabled leads to a page containing the menu sub-items as a
					nested list. Happily, this choice is also beneficial for user navigation with
					touch interfaces, whose popularity was only beginning at that point, and is
					something that is still sometimes neglected even in responsive mobile sites. 
				Two concessions in the Endings Principles
					 c.f. Endings Principles, 4.8: Once a fully-working
							static site is achieved, it may be enhanced by the use of other services
							such as a server-side indexing tool (Solr, eXist) to support searching
							and similar functionality and 4.9: The use
							of an external library may be necessary to support a specific function
							that is too complex to be coded locally (such as mapping or
							cryptography). Any such libraries must be open-source and widely-used,
							and must not themselves have dependencies. (that good
					static websites generated from data may be enhanced with server-side tools like
					eXist-db or external libraries) might justify some aspects of the Godwin website, but not convincingly, since these
					tools were the foundation of the site rather than an added extra. This
					concession might have justified adding a Swish-E index to the CURSUS site, although Swish-E has since been removed
					because it failed when the site was rehosted.
				Neither site fully met the principles for release management. In both cases the
					website was updated as and when particular data was available or software
					improvements were complete, with no news items, warnings, or even public version
					numbering. c.f. Endings Principles, 5.1: Releases
							should be periodical and carefully planned. The rolling release
							model should be avoided.
					 While all files are valid, the project release could not be said to be
					both coherent and complete, or have an edition/version number. c.f.
						Endings Principles, 5.2: A release should only be made
							when the entire product set is coherent, consistent and complete
							(passing all validation and diagnostic tests) and 5.3: Like editions of print works, each release of a web
							resource should be clearly identified on every page by its build date
							and some kind of version number.
					 Neither site gives unambiguous information on how to cite any specific
					page of the resource, although providing this information would have been
					easy. c.f. Endings Principles, 5.4: Web resources
							should include detailed instructions for citation, so that end-users can
							unambiguously cite a specific page from a specific
						edition. Similarly, changes made to the site during the
					lifetime of the project meant, to our shame, that resources at particular URLs
					were not persistent. c.f. Endings Principles, 5.5: URLs for individual resources within a digital publication should
							persist across editions. Any moved, retired, or deleted resources no
							longer available at a previously accessible URL should be redirected
							appropriately. Although neither site fully meets the
					ideals of the Endings Principles, it is surprising
					how little might need to be done to upgrade, flatten, and prepare these projects
					for a more archival afterlife. 
			
Conclusion
				In the funding bids for academic projects, Data Management Plans often extol the
					standards used and the long-term preservation benefits resulting from the way
					their data and websites will be constructed. But, as with the agreements for
					in-kind support or partnerships with external partners, projects should also
					plan their afterlife with more than just funding bid fictions. However good a
					digital research project’s sustainability plan is, it is still very rare for the
					lifespan of most digital projects to outlast their creators for very long. Just
					as humans should not leave it up to the grief-ridden survivors to guess at what
					should be done with their effects after they pass away, neither should digital
					humanities research projects leave it to librarians or technical teams to decide
					what should be done with their outputs. Instead, we should all be clear in
					advance what the plan is for the eventual sunsetting of projects, having already
					archived our well-documented data long in advance, and not rely on the best
					efforts of those left to interpret what should be done with them. Some websites
					will be rejuvenated and preserved as the front-facing access to their data is
					seen as too important (or costly) to merely archive, while others will become
					nothing more than a ZIP archive downloaded by those who really want to explore
					the data. But we should plan for failure, and we should plan for the project
					being cut short for any reason with no notice. To realize these plans, we should
					make the data we produce as transportable and transparent as possible. We should
					simultaneously recognise that all aspects of an archival research project’s
					website may be important, not only the underlying data but the choices made in
					presenting it. Some may be inconsequential, as with both of these two websites,
					but we should be mindful that the interface through which the data is presented
					also forms a part of the editorial argument and needs to be preserved if
					possible. Limiting oneself to minimal technologies may facilitate this. As
						part of preserving the interface, as mentioned earlier, screen capture
						videos should be recorded in standard formats documenting the interactivity
						and user experience of the website for archiving alongside the data because
						the videos may be useful to information historians at a later date.
				
				Many of the project flaws identified in this article are partly down to
					inexperience (as many of the technologies were only just emerging), and the
					eternal problem of busy people having too much to do and relying on shortcuts.
					Indeed, there were so many moments along the way when these websites could have
					been destroyed through policy change or simply vanished through neglect. It is
					easy to see now in hindsight what should have been done — and by and large what
					should have been done was to follow the then not-yet-created Endings Principles. 
			
