Title:  Studying Up: A Review of Alice Marwick’s 
Volume:  009
Issue:  2
Date:  1 September 2015
Abstract:  
                
                Status Update is an ethnography about Silicon
                    Valley, Twitter, and the way that its residents use Twitter to oil the wheels of
                    late capitalism. The review finds much to like in Marwick's book: it is an
                    eloquent take-down of Silicon Valley culture and its pretense of being part of
                    the counter-culture while forwarding distinctly neo-liberal ends. But the review
                    also finds that Marwick has a tendency to study up.
                    Her ethnography is so focused on Silicon Valley elites that it ignores how
                    people outside Silicon Valley produce and consume (and tweet about) digital
                    culture.
            
Full Body Text: 
Studying Up: A Review of Alice Marwick’s Status
                    Update

                
                    Each one began to look at the others and to want to be
                        looked at himself, and public esteem had value. The one who sang or danced
                        the best, the handsomest, the strongest, the most adroit, or the most
                        eloquent became the most highly considered; and that was the first step
                        toward inequality…
                    
                
            
I recently read Alice Marwick’s Status Update in which
                she closely studies the political beliefs and social media habits of people in
                Silicon Valley. It’s first and foremost a portrait about digital culture and the way
                that digital culture shapes political belief. But it should also be interesting to
                digital humanists who, to use Kathleen Fitzpatrick’s phrasing, ask 
                    traditional kinds of humanities-oriented questions about
                        computing technologies
                    
                . Status Update is very much in this vein since
                it examines how we use our tools and how, in turn, those tools shape
                consciousness.
For Marwick, the main tool in question is Twitter, and as a way of a hands on
                exercise while reading her book I decided to tweet her about it: 
                    
                 Unfortunately, Marwick never responded to my tweets.
This minor Twitter tale underscores one of the central points that Status Update is making: in Marwick’s view, social media
                users (or at least the users she studied in the Bay Area) tweet not only to exchange
                information but to increase their social capital. And in striving to increase their
                social capital, they also participate in modeling and practicing the type of
                activities that support neo-liberal economies that thrive on hustle. Building on an
                argument first forwarded by Richard Barbrook and Andy Cameron in The Californian Ideology
                 Marwick contends that people involved in the Bay Area
                    tech scene ascribe to a set of neo-liberal beliefs that
                give foundation and legitimacy to Silicon Valley entrepreneurial business practices.
                On the surface, Silicon Valley presents itself as a counter culture that is
                epitomized in the figure of Steve Jobs who had more than a few hippy predilections
                including a vegan diet, youthful wanderings in India, and a [perhaps fatal] faith in
                the power of alternative medicine. But while Silicon Valley may take on
                revolutionary and counter-cultural vestments, its more fundamental commitments are
                to neoliberalism and its celebration of individuals who compete freely with one
                another by selling and promoting themselves through markets. While these cultural
                contradictions have been described by others besides Marwick (see for example Fred
                Turner’s From Counterculture to Cyberculture
                ), she ups the ante by arguing that these same
                contradictions have been embedded in so-called Web 2.0 social
                media platforms. Marwick observes that many people in the Valley believe that these
                platforms carry out democratic and egalitarian ends by facilitating connections and
                by spreading information. While social media may do these things sometimes, in
                Marwick’s view, its more salient function is that it allows people to use it for
                self promotion, for enhancing status, and for displaying oneself to others. So in
                tweeting, I too might have been subjecting myself to these same
                questionable models of social behavior.
As I was absorbing these points, I happened to tweet about them: 
                    
                 At the time, my tweeting seemed like a benign act. I’d merely transferred
                my habits of annotating books from the physical marginalia of the printed page, into
                Twitter. But if you apply Marwick’s theoretical framework to this act, it takes on a
                darker, more disturbing character. To be sure, I’m performing a Status Update (e.g.
                    Hey followers! I’m on page 6 of Marwick’s book and she’s
                    making a pretty cool point!). But I’m also probably engaging in a more
                competitive and performative act of updating (and promoting) my status (e.g. Hey followers! Check out the erudite books I read! Retweet it and
                    maybe your followers will start following me).
While the second parenthetical is purposefully left unsaid when people tweet,
                seasoned Twitter users are aware of it. And since we tolerate these types of
                messages and produce some of our own, we’re turning ourselves into subjects that
                model neo-liberal ideals of virtue. Marwick didn’t reply to this tweet either. I can
                only speculate as to why but here are two possible explanations: internalized
                neo-liberal subjectivity suggests that one's status wouldn't be enhanced by
                connecting with me. Alternatively (and more positively), such an interaction would
                give further unwelcome credence to neo-liberal models of the self.
In subsequent chapters on lifestreaming and self-branding, Marwick argues that the
                performative self isn’t just a discrete behavior that people in Silicon Valley adopt
                while using social media. Instead, it’s a behavior that pervades entire lives
                whether individuals are working, playing or socializing. In a chapter titled Self-Branding: The (Safe for Work) Self Marwick traces how
                inhabitants of Silicon Valley regard their entire lives as a brand that needs to be
                groomed and managed for the workplace. And in a chapter titled Lifestreaming: We Live In Public she details how Silicon Valley social
                media encourage its inhabitants to see themselves continually through the gaze of others. In the aggregate, Status Update is a compelling description of how some people in a
                particular time, and a particular place, inhabit and navigate a neo-liberal world. 
It’s worth emphasizing the fact that Marwick is talking about a particular time and a
                particular place. Like any good ethnographer she tries to clarify the limits of her
                study and the boundaries beyond which her analysis doesn’t reach. But as readers and
                interested scholars, we want to know if the study scales. Can Marwick’s observations
                be taken as a synecdoche of how the rest of us use social media? Have people who
                live in other parts of the world succumbed as completely to a neo-liberal ethos as
                the Valley has? Marwick presumes to be writing to an audience that extends beyond
                the inhabitants of Silicon Valley. But whether that is true or not is an open
                question.
Part of the answer to these questions lies in reviewing how others have studied
                culture. As the anthropologist Laura Nader observed, in traditional ethnography,
                anthropologists had a tendency to 
                    study down
                    
                . They took their craft to the ends of the earth, and instead of studying the
                colonizers, they studied the colonized. Marwick has done the reverse. She is mostly
                studying up. The book illustrates her using the rather regal twitter handle @alicetiara, hobnobbing at the invitation-only conference
                Google Zeitgeist, and flying to the expensive South By Southwest conference.
                Elsewhere we see her cabbing to an opulent hilltop event
                    space for a Facebook party and agonizing over what to wear in front of
                the step and repeat at the Webutante Ball. This isn’t to say that there’s something
                inherently wrong in studying up. Elites too deserve study and the requirements of
                participant observation (as anthropologists call it) probably justify the amount of
                time Marwick devotes to glamming it up with the tech glitterati. But studying up,
                just like studying down, has its limitations and they are on display here.
First, the elites who Marwick studies are mostly in the business of promoting,
                selling, marketing and writing about technology. Yet the book spends little time
                talking about how actual programmers and engineers feel about their position in the
                mode of production. Status Update, in other words,
                focuses on the promotion and consumption of technology rather than its production. 
Second, Status Update portrays a world where everyone is
                on the make, where everyone has become outer directed, where the authentic self is
                eclipsed by the edited self, and where everyone has become so consumed by
                self-presentation that nothing is left but an edited self. To be fair to Marwick,
                it’s possible that almost all modern individuals are outer directed and seek acclaim
                from others. In the Discourse on Inequality, Rousseau
                postulates that this is simply a facet of becoming civilized . As such, perhaps Status
                    Update is a mirror that reflects contemporary American life. Still, it’s
                unlikely that individuals are outer-directed to the same degree or that it’s the
                predominant mode of living in a world pervaded by digital culture. The social media
                platforms after all were created by software engineers, who, according to an article
                by Luis Capretz in the International Journal of Computer
                    Studies
                , occupy the top introverted quadrants of the Myers
                Briggs test. It’s not like programmers don’t occasionally want to bask in the
                limelight. But programmers wouldn’t be programmers if they didn’t derive some of
                their most enjoyable experiences from talking to machines rather than performing in
                front of others. 
Third, part of the purpose of studying up is to examine how the colonizers have
                subjected (or reshaped) the colonized. Marwick does a pretty good job of showing how
                that has taken place in the Bay Area. Her study is replete with personal anecdotes
                by people in Silicon Valley using social media that has been created in Silicon
                Valley. But it’s an open question as to how much the ideology of the Valley has
                colonized the rest of us. In particular, when the book suggests that neoliberal
                ideology is part and parcel of whatever people have adopted when they subscribe to
                Web 2.0 principles and Web 2.0 technologies, it makes an association that probably
                doesn’t have that much traction outside Marwick's field site. The people who use the
                term Web 2.0 these days are programmers and designers who refer to it when they are
                trying to describe a rich user interface that is snappy and responsive. It has a
                discrete meaning and its principles are subscribed to by programmers and designers
                of many different political stripes. Some of them may be neoliberals but others –
                especially those who are members of The Free Software Foundation -- are distinctly
                not. Status Update, however, glosses over this more
                common usage of Web 2.0 and piles onto the phrase a set of politics that are not in
                keeping with the way it is most commonly employed. This isn’t to say that Marwick
                has invented her definition out of whole cloth. It is derived from the way Tim
                O’Reilly and other elites of the Valley have tried to spin the term. But the
                dissonance between her definition and the way it is used elsewhere illustrates the
                fact that her study cannot be easily scaled. Put another way, Status Update may be a
                faithful portrait of life in the Valley. But we should be careful not to let that
                portrait eclipse how technology is being produced and used in the hinterlands where
                social media may be being repurposed for other ends besides status enhancement.
By studying up, Status Update misses out on a large
                segment of Web 2.0 producers and consumers and fails to describe the less
                narcissistic ways that some of its members have chosen to integrate themselves into
                late capitalism. If cyberspace was developed in Silicon Valley (and that proposition
                might itself be a myth), its power base is diffusing rapidly across the world. To
                document this digital culture, we’ll need to complement Marwick’s successes in
                studying up with other ethnographies that study out and
                    study down. Until then we won’t know whether or not the
                colonizers have actually colonized the rest of us. 
For scholars of the digital humanities these are important questions to be asking.
                Marwick claims that digitization and the over-reach of social media has affected our
                sense of what it means to be human in the era of late capitalism. She has certainly
                made a compelling case that in Silicon Valley the sense of what it means to be human
                is being reshaped by the technologies that Silicon Valley has itself created. But
                for scholars in the digital humanities comparative case studies are needed. We
                should be working hard to find out how applicable Marwick's thesis is in other parts
                of the world.
