Title:  Revenge of the Nerd: Junot Díaz and the Networks of American
                    Literary Imagination
Volume:  007
Issue:  1
Date:  1 July 2013
Abstract:  
                
                Junot Díaz’s writing actively questions the boundaries between genre and
                        literary fiction, aesthetics and politics, and English
                    and Spanish, using a framework of multiple linguistic, formal and cultural
                    registers to establish an authorial presence that defies critical
                    categorization. Díaz arrived explosively on the U.S. literary scene with his
                    second book, the novel The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar
                        Wao. The multi-generational story of a Dominican American family
                    overshadowed by a brutal dictatorship and the challenges of forging a new life
                    in the United States earned many accolades, including the Pulitzer Prize for
                    Fiction and the National Book Critics Circle Award. I read Díaz’s transgressive
                    blending of genre and linguistic registers as a reverse
                        colonization that calls into question the demarcations of
                    American ethnicity as well as the racial politics of nerds. My argument uses
                    Díaz as both an object of study and a paradigm for the potential of a hybrid
                    digital humanities methodology. The complex cultural translation that Díaz asks
                    his readers to perform creates a middle ground where Caribbean history, language
                    politics and the class and ethnic tensions of immigration collide with the nerdy
                    core of the mainstream American imagination.
            
Full Body Text: 
Revenge of the Nerd: Junot Díaz and the Networks of American Literary
                Imagination
Junot Díaz’s writing actively questions the boundaries between genre and
                    literary fiction, aesthetics and politics, and English and Spanish, using
                a framework of multiple linguistic, formal and cultural registers to establish an
                authorial presence that defies critical categorization. Díaz arrived explosively on
                the U.S. literary scene with his second book, the novel The
                    Brief Wondrous Life of 
                Oscar Wao (2007). The multi-generational story of a
                Dominican American family overshadowed by a brutal dictatorship and the challenges
                of forging a new life in the United States earned many accolades, including the
                Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and the National Book Critics Circle Award. Three years
                after its publication in 2008 it remained at the top of Amazon's bestseller list for
                the Hispanic American Literature & Fiction category and is well on its
                way to central canonical status. The galvanic prose of Oscar Wao
                 Hereafter, an abbreviation for The Brief Wondrous Life
                        of Oscar Wao. traverses tropical magic realism, punk-rock feminism, hip-hop
                    machismo, post-postmodern pyrotechnics and enough polymorphous multiculturalism
                    to fill up an Introduction to Cultural Studies syllabus, to quote two of
                the novel’s reviews from The New York Times, and it
                illuminates the rules of contemporary canonicity through the incandescent exceptions
                Díaz has carved out 
                . I will read Díaz’s transgressive blending of genre
                and linguistic registers as a reverse colonization that calls into question
                the demarcations of American ethnicity as well as the racial politics of nerds (a
                term I define below). My argument uses Díaz as both an object of study and a
                paradigm for the potential of a hybrid digital humanities methodology. The complex
                cultural translation that Díaz asks his readers to perform creates a middle ground
                where Caribbean history, language politics and the class and ethnic tensions of
                immigration collide with the nerdy core of the mainstream American imagination. 
My methodology in pursuing these claims is to define a framework for the
                    literary in contemporary American fiction by asking how books are
                contextualized and discussed not just among critics and scholars but also among a
                general readership online. Digital traces of book culture (by which I mean user
                reviews, ratings and the algorithmic trails that our browsing and purchasing actions
                leave online) allow us to make claims about relatively large groups of readers and
                consumers of books, creating opportunities for the ‘distant reading’ of literary
                fame, but without losing the specificity of individual texts and authors.
                    Franco Moretti has defined distant reading in contrast to traditional
                        close reading as the study of hundreds or thousands of literary texts
                        . As we shall see, this approach attempts
                to find a middle ground between the trend for large scale, data-driven digital
                humanities research and the kinds of analysis more comfortable to traditional
                literary scholars. My research here incorporates book reviews from professional
                critics and everyday users of the websites Amazon and LibraryThing as well as
                automated recommendation networks operating on both of those sites. By considering
                these digital traces of reading through the conceptual frame of the network, this
                article explores literary culture as a process of contextualization and elevation.
                My approach draws from John Guillory’s work on cultural capital and his argument
                that the syllabus and the list are central to the process of canon-making . The list, expanded into multiple
                dimensions, becomes the network. These new dimensions are visible articulations of
                taste: both book reviews and website recommendations make certain cultural
                assertions about the relationships between various texts and authors. By recasting
                these assertions as links and the names and titles as nodes, we can begin to see
                where books cluster and where they remain solitary. This is a way of studying the
                social forces influencing books and readers at their intersection with literary
                production itself, and it draws on related approaches that James English and Mark
                McGurl have pioneered in their work on contemporary literary culture, and more
                distantly from Bruno Latour and Pierre Bourdieu 
                
                
                
                
                . In short, I propose a turn in the digital humanities to
                incorporate not just algorithms but algorithmic culture into our critical framework
                and to recognize that humans and machines are learning to read in new ways.
                    Ted Striphas has blazed the trail for the study of algorithmic culture
                    .
            
Network analysis allows us to explore the middle ground between the individual text
                and the distant reading of thousands of texts, exploring the emerging space of
                cultural distinction for a particular author’s work at a particular time. I
                    use network analysis in the sense of social network analysis, or the
                    quantitative study of relationships between people and/or objects. For an
                    introductory overview see Social Network Analysis
                    . It is this combination of specificity (in
                terms of time and authors) and generality (in the sense that hundreds or thousands
                of data-points might influence a particular configuration between books) that offers
                us a window into a changing system of literary prestige, a glimpse at the middle
                ground where readers and critics make their judgments within constrained horizons.
                Professional book reviewing and commercial consumption are two major intersections
                between the worlds of art and commerce, zones of exchange where popular canonicity
                and literary prestige are forged. As Pierre Bourdieu noted, the boundary has never been as blurred between the
                    experimental work and the bestseller, a truth that can
                hardly be better demonstrated than with the runaway commercial and critical success
                of Díaz’s Oscar Wao
                . The novel’s deliberate complication of
                genre and ethnic literary boundaries has led Díaz to an almost defiant
                acknowledgement of his mainstream success: They’re so happy to claim me as literature because it
                    makes them all look better. They don’t want to relegate me to areas of ethnic
                    studies
                .
This position has led scholarly reception of Díaz to its own complex multivalent
                space, with critics from the Latino/a, Caribbean, African Diaspora and Dominican
                literary traditions all interpreting his success (Díaz acknowledged each of these
                traditions in the interview quoted above). Daniel Bautista agrees that Díaz is
                    somewhere both inside and outside
                    of the ‘mainstream,’ writing fiction that defies a simple binary
                between ethnic studies and the mass market .
                Indeed, Elena Machado Sáez suggests that the picture emerging from the criticism of Oscar
                        Wao is of a superheroic literary text…that breaks through oppression
                    to posit an ideally marginal but resistant diasporic subject
                . A reaction to this superheroic reading argues
                instead that the novel is a darker meditation on the violence inherent in narrative.
                For example, the text’s own charming but dictatorial narrator (Yunior, a version of
                a recurrent protagonist from Díaz’s earlier stories) serves as a troubling proxy for
                its primary narrative engine, the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican
                Republic from the 1930s–1960s . Reading the novel as a
                    historiographic battle royale clearly aimed at a United States reader, as
                Monica Hanna does, neatly encapsulates the challenges Díaz’s work poses to the
                established categories of genre By this I mean ethnic and geographical
                    categories such as Latin American, Caribbean and Dominican fiction as well as
                    formal mainstream cultural categories such as historical fiction,
                    fantasy, science fiction, comics and literary fiction. and comfortable
                patterns of reading. Its gripping style conceals a refusal to translate along
                multiple axes: the novel does not gloss its Spanish and Spanglish slang for that
                mainstream reader, nor does it contextualize its references to Caribbean literary
                figures like Edouard Glissant any more than it explicates its allusions to comic and
                fantasy characters like Darkseid or Sauron. This weird English, as Evelyn
                Nien-Ming Ch’ien calls it, demands that its readers bridge the gap, confronting the
                untranslatable and interpolating around it, grappling with Díaz’s rebellious
                idiom.
By insisting on blending codes and discourses beyond Dominican and standard
                English, Díaz alienates himself from particular communities in the tradition of
                commercially successful postcolonial writers around the globe . In applying the same technique to
                subcultures within the mainstream United States, he makes a subtler point about
                racial politics. As an immigrant, Díaz did not take solace in his identity as a
                Dominican American, since that identity was continually pressured by poverty and
                racial bias. Instead, he claims what
                    saved my life was being a nerd, watching all those bad science fiction movies
                    and reading cartoons
                . Díaz doubly rejects normative behavior,
                embracing neither the standards of his own ethnic community nor those of mainstream
                American culture. This renunciation is standard nerd practice, but the staging is
                usually quite different. The nerd is a complex and shifting figure in contemporary
                culture with its roots in what Mary Bucholtz calls hyperwhite performance,
                including superstandard English (like Oscar Wao with his flash words)
                and the rejection of cool culture 
                . I extend this frame to assert that the nerd is
                defined in relation not merely to superstandard language but highly specific
                dialects — the mastery of technoscientific skills, obscure popular genres and,
                increasingly, a socially impermissible obsession with almost any arcane subject. For
                example wine nerds, XML nerds and comic book nerds are all likely to be among the
                readers of this article. In this sense, the nerd as I deploy the term here is an
                extreme version of the fan or fanboy, a phrase Díaz also uses and to
                which I will return below.
With Díaz as just one example, it is also important to note that the racial
                categorization of the nerd is becoming increasingly nuanced, with Michael Hanson
                defining the Afrogeek categories of thug-nerds and rap-geeks
                . Oscar’s status as an ambiguously dark-skinned Dominican
                completes his own hybrid role as a GhettoNerd
                . In fact, as Ron Eglash notes, the figure of
                the nerd is not so much a bastion of white male elitism as it is a potential paradox that might allow greater
                    amounts of gender and race diversity into the potent locations of
                    technoscience because it is not racially but performatively white, or
                    implicitly white
                . While the future of nerds may be defined
                more by Barack Obama than The Simpsons’ Comic Book Guy,
                whiteness continues to function as a powerful stigma and defining attribute of the
                category, leading African American students who excel in science and technology to
                be accused of acting
                    white even as it sustains a form of hyperwhiteness performed
                by nerds of all kinds . Díaz’s choice to deploy
                the dialects of comic book nerds, science fiction nerds and others establishes a
                correspondence between ethnic boundaries and the deep, nerdy interior of the
                mainstream white imagination. 
Allow me to develop this point through my own nerd self-affirmation as I discuss my
                methodology. The data I present here is drawn from literary culture in the
                    wild — newspaper and magazine book reviews along with traces of digital
                consumption (consumer reviews and automated recommendations) from the websites
                Amazon and LibraryThing. Each of these sources links us to only a fraction of Díaz’s
                public readership, but they are communities of literary practice that illuminate how
                his stylistic project has played out in the mainstream. I will use two basic sets of
                data to build these empirical arguments. First, book reviews: I have collected and
                analyzed a set of professional reviews, author profiles and other literary press
                from nationally recognized newspapers and magazines, as well as a complementary
                database of consumer book reviews from Amazon. The professional reviews are
                    drawn from nationally recognized reviewing publications: New York Times, Los Angeles Times,
                        Chicago Tribune, Washington Post, Time, Newsweek, Nation and
                        New Yorker. In Díaz’s case, the New Yorker has published more than ten of his stories
                    but never reviewed his work. Amazon reviews include all reviews of the U.S.,
                    English-language editions of Drown and The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao posted before
                    March 2011. I identify the proper nouns, particularly authors and texts
                that are mentioned together in these book reviews and create networks based on the
                number of times different terms co-occur in the same paragraph. Defining links
                    by paragraph instead of sentence or review provides the best level of
                    granularity for this very simplified approach, avoiding both the complexities of
                    parsing sentences and the tenuous connections that would result by considering
                    all proper nouns in the same review as linked. Over the course of this
                research project I assembled a hand-tooled dictionary of proper nouns and used a
                Perl script to seek potential matches in individual documents from this corpus
                (repeating the process numerous times as I extended the dictionary). The script
                created a series of basic XML files with proper nouns tagged as nodes that I checked
                for errors before analyzing for co-occurrences using another set of Perl scripts
                that indexed those nodes by paragraph. I stored the resulting connections in a MySQL
                database and output co-occurrences in GraphML format for viewing with yEd, a network
                graph editor .
The result is a basic network of primary literary entities — authors and texts — that
                are explicitly named In the future a more sophisticated algorithm might
                    identify these proper nouns even when they are described using generic pronouns
                    or descriptors like the author, but such syntactical sophistication was
                    far beyond my skills as a programmer and remains, to the best of my knowledge, a
                    challenging problem in algorithmic semantic analysis. in particular
                paragraphs of Díaz’s professional and consumer book reviews. As a brief example, if
                we were to apply this system to a one-sentence review that said Díaz reminds me of Frank Herbert, but also of Julia Alvarez,
                we would get the following:

                A Co-Occurrence Example
                
                A Co-Occurrence Example
            
The co-occurrence links all three nodes in an equal, non-directional way. The method
                treats each paragraph as a bag of words with no attention paid to syntax or
                nuance. Replacing the review above with the following would generate the same
                diagram: Díaz is nothing like Frank Herbert or Julia Alvarez. This may seem
                counterintuitive, but I posit that the fact of connection is at least as important
                as its tenor. As I have argued elsewhere, the canonizing influence of a reference or
                a list in a piece of criticism serves to put the books in question into the same
                context, even if the reference itself is negative . Another way of making this point is to consider the peculiar economy of the book
                review, a piece of publicly oriented secondary literature challenged with keeping
                the reader’s attention in a compressed format that is by definition a metanarrative.
                The set of major reviewing publications yielded 22 articles on Díaz, with an average
                word length of 1,294. By contrast I collected 613 Amazon reviews, averaging just
                under 166 words each. Reviewers deploy references with purpose in this context, and
                a negative comparison carries as much cultural weight for the reader as a positive
                one, establishing in both cases a contextual framework for the subject of the
                review. 
As the average lengths indicate, this economy is especially true for reviewers on
                Amazon, where the competition for literary attention is sharpened by multiple
                reviews of the same book and the status of the arbiter is always in question. My
                methodology compares these two fields of literary discourse through the framework of
                proper noun networks. Tracing these webs of allusion, reference and context allows
                us to explore both sides of that great literary event horizon, the purchasing of a
                book. While there are of course exceptions, people tend to read professional critics
                before they buy something, and they tend to write Amazon reviews afterwards. If book
                critics are gatekeepers to the literary marketplace, readers on Amazon report
                back from beyond the turnstiles, telling us why they went through. Below we will see
                that as the balance of power between the two groups shifts, everyday readers are
                coming to define the literary in new ways.
The project’s second data set, recommendations, focuses on this literary exchange as
                a market: I have collected data from Amazon, the world’s largest bookseller, and
                LibraryThing, a leading social reading community site, regarding how
                consumers on Amazon associate books through their shopping patterns and readers on
                LibraryThing do the same by listing books together in their virtual libraries.
                Amazon and LibraryThing present this data in recommendations such as the
                    Customers Who Bought This Item Also Bought mechanism on Amazon, providing
                an algorithmically driven feedback loop between accumulated acts of cultural
                distinction and specific kinds of literary desire. In this instance, I used Perl
                scripts to record an expanding web of recommendations on each site from a given
                start page (arbitrarily selected by me as the author in question’s most prestigious
                book). For Amazon, the script would start at Oscar Wao
                and record the first ten Amazon offers an irregular number of recommendations
                    depending on the product, typically over 80 per product. I chose to concentrate
                    on the first 10 as these are most visible to consumers on the site and
                    presumably represent the strongest connections in the Amazon network.
                Customers Who Bought This Item Also Bought links, and then move on to record
                the first ten links on each of those pages, continuing to three levels of depth. The
                same process was repeated for LibraryThing based on the first ten LibraryThing
                    recommendations. As a brief example of how these recommendations are
                diagrammed, consider this excerpt from Figure 4:

                A Recommendation Example
                
                A Recommendation Example
            
In this data, the lines between nodes have directionality: browsers on the Oscar Wao page will see a link pointing them towards
                    Kavalier & Clay. Likewise, those starting out
                on the Chabon page will see a link back to Oscar Wao.
                In this case, Amazon believes that readers of one book will enjoy the other, and the
                two texts end up mutually supporting each other in the larger system of
                recommendations.
The mutual link is based, Amazon claims, primarily on purchase data: enough people
                who bought one book went on to purchase the other that Amazon codified the
                connection, hoping to entice further sales from users making a similar cultural
                calculus. The fact that this feedback loop is maintained, manipulated and studied by
                Amazon speaks both to our increasingly corporate cultural lives and to the
                importance of recognizing the contingency of data — all data. Amazon sells books and
                manipulates its recommendations in order to sell them more efficiently, so it is
                possible that the mutual connection above is shaped by other factors, such as
                marketing campaigns, but we can rest assured that the connection is productive, or
                it would be replaced by another, more productive one. Amazon’s networks
                    clearly operate in dialog with external forces such as school syllabi, an
                    observation I discuss in more detail in a parallel study of Toni Morrison . That is to say that given Amazon’s dominance,
                we can assume it is reasonably deft at this particular cultural game: acting as an
                algorithmic mirror to its users’ literary desires, inflecting and reflecting taste
                through countless computations and statistical judgments.
A full analysis of Amazon’s growing dominance in literary production, from author
                contracts to sales, is beyond the scope of this article, but I want to briefly
                sketch out its role and my reasons for studying it. At this stage the relevance of
                Amazon to mainstream literary life is hard to deny, if we give any credence to
                critics like John O’Brien, publisher of the Dalkey Archive Press, who believes
                    the greatest threat to book
                    publishing in the United States right now is Amazon (quoted in ). Whatever role Amazon plays in our readerly futures, its
                role in the present is to influence a huge number of acts of literary distinction,
                and to study these acts is to explore a core sample of mainstream American literary
                culture. And it is mainstream in all the ways Díaz inflected that term above: its
                users are better-educated, wealthier and less likely to be Hispanic than the U.S.
                Internet user average . Reading Díaz through Amazon is
                to read him through a broad American public still rooted in a white mainstream,
                unveiling a cultural politics of authenticity and success that surfaces constantly
                in the data below. That contest of literacies is mirrored by my methodology’s
                contest for what Ted Striphas calls algorithmic literacy
                . Just as I am reading Amazon here, Amazon is
                    reading its users and perfecting algorithms to perform that reading ever
                more efficiently and more closely.
For his part, Díaz confronts the question of literacies with a culturally charged
                mixture of the familiar and the exotic (an effect that varies in specifics but not
                in nature depending on whether the reader identifies most readily as Latino/a or
                white, an English professor or a science fiction nerd), and my approach does
                something similar by challenging our notions of reading on several levels.
                    Reading, in this framework, is a fundamentally social action, bound up in
                collectively negotiated conceptions of language and inflected at every stage by the
                sociocultural influences that lead us to books and shape our thinking before, during
                and after our direct engagements with them. It is also, as I noted above, a form of
                collective interpretation that can be performed by Amazon’s servers as well as human
                beings. As more of our literary cultural actions, from browsing to discussion,
                migrate to screens and digital media, reading takes place increasingly online.
                    Readers, then, are the users visible through their aggregate choices in
                the methodology just described. Limiting the field to professional criticism
                    and the reviews and recommendations of Amazon puts us squarely in the first
                    world, affluent consumerism that already defines mainstream American literary
                    culture. When I describe these Amazon consumers as a general readership
                    (and given the demographic constraints already mentioned), I use the phrase
                    within the confines of that limited cultural space. It should also be
                noted that professional critics and Amazon reviewers are not necessarily distinct,
                though I have yet to encounter a professional critic who also voluntarily (or
                openly) reviews books on the site. But of course there are overlaps — this is a
                marketplace, and professional critics influence markets, just as markets influence
                critics — perhaps the most obvious being that many critics purchase books on Amazon.
                The middle ground perspective that I adopt here balances out the impact of such
                individual overlaps by looking at reviews and recommendations in aggregate,
                exploring the remarkable public literary spaces created by thousands of readers
                online.

                Negocios: The Literary Marketplace
                Where established authors have clearly defined canonical positions, Díaz is an
                    authorial signifier whose meaning is still being negotiated by arbiters from all
                    corners of the literary universe. In the few years since its publication, Oscar Wao has already appeared on hundreds of college
                    and high school syllabi. This rough measure of prominence can easily be
                        verified by conducting a targeted Google search for Portable Document Format
                        files from academic domains such as syllabus junot diaz filetype:pdf
                        site:.edu, which returned 396 files on October 30, 2011. Conducting the same
                        search for .doc files presented another 93 results. Yet Díaz
                    continues to hold a fluctuating position in networks of literary prestige as
                    groups of readers contextualize him in various ways. The literary marketplace is
                    the most active and hotly contested zone of cultural distinction, capturing both
                    the influence of other, less commercial forms of critical elevation (book
                    reviews, best books of the decade lists, etc.) and the direct impact of school
                    reading assignments. We can glimpse these competing forces by contrasting Díaz’s
                    presence in Amazon’s Customers Who Bought This Item Also Bought networks
                    at a particular point in time with a look at persistent nodes in the same
                    network over several months. Figures 3–6 represent those texts recommended from
                    the Amazon page of Oscar Wao at four roughly
                    monthly intervals from December 2010 to March 2011, with Figure 5 combining the
                    data into a holistic view of persistent nodes.
                In early December Díaz appears in the context of mainstream commercial success,
                    surrounded by novels that straddle the middlebrow zone between critical acclaim
                    and mass popularity like White Teeth, The Road, Olive
                        Kitteridge and The Known World (Figure
                    3). One axis of distinction at work here is clearly the Pulitzer: Tinkers won the prize in 2010, as did every other text
                    just mentioned. Where the networks of more established authors often present
                    multiple valences of influence (Oprah's Book Club selections, genre connections
                    and biographical affiliations, for example), Díaz is being read here primarily
                    in the context of the Pulitzer. I will speculate (briefly) that we see the
                    holiday shopping season at work here and the release of major lists such as the
                        New York Times
                    Best Books of the Year.
                    Oscar Wao spent far more time on the bestseller
                    lists in paperback than it did in hardcover, and its status as a significant
                    book of the decade was clearly being cemented in editorial offices around the
                    country. The gift-giving season also signals prime advertising, and publishers
                    can allegedly buy recommendations on Amazon just as they can rent display
                    cases and sales areas at brick and mortar stores . While reliable sales numbers are elusive, the website NovelRank tracks
                    Amazon’s Sales Rank metric and traced a surge for Oscar
                        Wao’s ranking from 2,652 on November 29, 2010 to its best position
                    of the year, 209 on January 21, 2011 .
                        NovelRank offers one year of back data, so the year I discuss here stretches
                        from October 30, 2010 to October 30, 2011 based on date of access.
                    Since the rank of 1 is assigned to the top-selling book on Amazon at any given
                    time, December and January were obviously very good months for Oscar Wao, which would correlate with a shift in
                    Díaz’s recommendations context. The feedback loop of advertising and consumer
                    desire plays a major role here, in this case highlighting those texts with the
                    prestigious gold stickers that embody prize capital. Díaz is on a rare plane of
                    the publishing world at this moment, placed among books that are expected to
                    sell hundreds of thousands of copies. While we might draw a number of these
                    texts together around the rubric of travelers and homelands, we can only
                    encompass all of them by calling them prize-winners, list-makers,
                    blockbusters.
                
                    Amazon Recommendations, Díaz, Early December 2010
                    
                    Amazon Recommendations, Díaz, Early December 2010
                
                By the end of December, this newly commercial position has begun a shift into
                    something else: another Pulitzer-winner, Michael Chabon, appears in the network
                    and the Caribbean classics Dreaming in Cuban and
                        In the Time of the Butterflies are linked in
                        Oscar Wao’s first-order subnet (Figure 4).
                    These, along with the Spanish-language edition of Oscar
                        Wao, clearly align Díaz with a particular genre, once again placing
                    him back in the context of the list Amazon calls Hispanic
                        & Latin American Fiction. Nevertheless, he remains a literary
                    gateway from this genre of ethnic literature to a distinct canon of mainstream
                    prize-winners. Díaz’s academic audience also makes itself known here with
                    another critical text on migration issues linked to Oscar
                        Wao. These shifting networks mark out the ways in which multiple
                    constituencies, responding to different elements of Díaz’s fiction, vie for
                    cultural dominance in contextualizing his work. In Figure 4 these forces almost
                    seem to be pulling Oscar Wao in different
                    directions, creating a more nuanced kind of prestige — an effect that will be
                    evident below as competing cultural forces seek to interpret Díaz through
                    reviews of his work.
                
                    Amazon Recommendations, Díaz, Late December 2010
                    
                    Amazon Recommendations, Díaz, Late December 2010
                
                In January and February of 2011, Díaz readers begin to link him into a grander
                    plane of the mainstream American canon, first superseding the genre barrier to
                    align him with Allen Ginsberg and Robert Haas, and later linking him to
                    established major novelists Toni Morrison and Don DeLillo (Figure 5, Figure 6).
                    At the same time, he is, like Morrison before him, helping to transform a
                    loosely defined genre into a clearly demarcated space of literary study. The
                    anthology Latino Boom does not excerpt Díaz
                    directly, but Amazon claims it is frequently bought together with both Oscar Wao and Dreaming in
                        Cuban, and it is not difficult to imagine the literature classes
                    currently being taught around those three texts. The simultaneous emergence of
                    professional anthologies and affiliation with established canonical titans like
                    Morrison and DeLillo also mark an inversion point for Díaz where his work is no
                    longer in need of illustration and explanation, but can now be used to
                    reinterpret established canons. The transition marks the moment where race and
                    gender cease to operate as explicit categorical functions (i.e. Hispanic & Latin American Fiction) and instead
                    become implicit gravitational forces for a mainstream canon that includes
                    Morrison and Díaz but remains predominantly white and male.
                
                    Amazon Recommendations, Díaz, Late January 2011
                    
                    Amazon Recommendations, Díaz, Late January 2011
                
                
                    Amazon Recommendations, Díaz, Early March 2011
                    
                    Amazon Recommendations, Díaz, Early March 2011
                
                
                    Persistent Recommendations, Díaz, December 2010 – March 2011
                    
                    Persistent Recommendations, Díaz, December 2010 – March 2011
                
                As Díaz teeters between ethnic studies and mainstream canonicity, we can
                    get a clearer glimpse of the enduring substructure of his fame when we limit our
                    network only to explore links that have persisted across several monthly
                    snapshots. Figure 7 offers a completely different view of Díaz, identifying him
                    as a peripheral member of a Latin Caribbean literary community dominated by
                    Cristina García, Julia Alvarez, Sandra Cisneros and Esmeralda Santiago. These
                    sustained links mark Díaz squarely within an ethnic tradition of writing
                    inspired by the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Puerto Rico. Just as striking is
                    the extent to which this particular sub-genre is represented on Amazon by female
                    authors. When Díaz is compared to other writers of what booksellers might call
                        serious literary fiction the list is almost entirely male, but here
                    the market tells a different story, placing Díaz on the edge of a subnet of
                    immigration narratives penned by, and largely about, women. Celebrated for his
                    innovative style, his nerd credentials and his esoteric references, Díaz is
                    still defined primarily by genre in the market.
            

                
                    Across and Back: Professional Reviewers
                If the commercial status of Díaz’s work continues to shift between the registers
                    of big ambitious novels, Latin American fiction, New
                        Yorker elect and pop culture fandom, his various readerships present
                    him in a different light when the question of context is no longer framed
                    through book shopping. In the network of authors and texts mentioned at least
                    twice in Díaz’s professional book reviews, the author of Oscar Wao is contextualized through multiple registers (Figure 8,
                    with more frequently linked notes at the top). When professional critics write
                    about Díaz, they unsurprisingly mention him in the same paragraph as Oscar Wao and Drown more
                    often than any other terms, and that shared presence is our unit of measurement
                    here. But the next most frequent co-occurrence in the network is Rafael
                    Trujillo, marking the significance of Oscar Wao’s
                    engagement with Dominican history. Díaz would no doubt be pleased to learn that
                    the Dictatingest Dictator whose malevolence overshadows his novel is also
                    haunting his reviews very effectively as critics situate Oscar Wao within a Caribbean context . The larger network bears out this point, freighted as it is with
                    nodes like Tolkien and Dune. Critics often used
                    David Foster Wallace as an exemplar in discussing Díaz’s footnotes, though in
                    his own reviews Wallace tended to have his complex arrangements of cultural
                    references described rather than explained . Yet here
                    Díaz’s footnotes and allusions are extensively unpacked by reviewers introducing
                    readers to this strange new beast, the nerdy immigration narrative. Díaz himself
                    is an author who needs explaining before readers can be told about his work —
                    the Oscar Wilde node here reflects Díaz’s story, repeated by several reviewers,
                    about the mispronunciation of Wilde in Spanish and the easy segue it
                    offers for describing the author’s transnational, bilingual work.
                
                    People and Books in Díaz Professional Review Collocations, Ordered
                        Vertically by Centrality
                    
                    People and Books in Díaz Professional Review Collocations, Ordered
                        Vertically by Centrality
                
                Yet in many ways, Díaz’s fiction is much more polylingual and multicultural than
                    it is merely a combination of English and Spanish. The diversity of references
                    indicates a lack of consensus among professional reviewers. As a Dominican
                    American, Díaz falls easily into the Caribbean and Latin American spaces of
                    Derek Walcott, Gustavo Perez Firmat, Francisco Goldman and Mario Vargas Llosa.
                    As a writer describing oppression and ethnic tension, his work aligns with Zora
                    Neale Hurston, Toni Morrison and Philip Roth. Yet he is also firmly linked to
                    popular culture, from Tolkien to Stephen King, and many of the single-instance
                    references not shown here trace those connections, from Sauron and Mordor to
                        Star Wars and The
                        Matrix. The presence of Dickens in the diagram brings particular
                    nuances to Díaz’s role as a literary protestor and political activist. A review
                    of Drown in the Los Angeles
                        Times suggests that it is artists who offer most of us the only way across and back between
                    immigrant hardships and the comfortable mainstream .
                    Díaz’s almost lustful exposure of a cultural underbelly is, it seems, just what
                    we mainstream American readers need — the challenges of immigration and (with
                        Oscar Wao) political repression brought to life
                    in fiction. And yet the authentic experience, the horrors below that the
                    review describes as Díaz’s core subject, include not only colonial and immigrant
                    nightmares but the deep interior of the American nerd imaginary — Star Trek, The Lord of the
                        Rings and comic books celebrated primarily by a subset of the white
                    mainstream. Díaz’s work as a go-between does not stop at providing the
                    mainstream with news from the subaltern underbelly of ‘ethnic studies.’
                    This review presages that element of critical reaction to Oscar Wao which marveled at Díaz’s particularly American cultural
                    fluency — his comic book knowledge, his literary references, his sitcom
                    allusions — which served to persistently yank the narrative out of ethnic
                    literature and into the cultural mainstream, troubling both spheres to remind
                    readers that these dramas were playing out not in some stylized America but the
                    same landscape we inhabited already. In 2007 Díaz described his intention to
                        contaminate the real with all this
                        nerdy narrative, and then the same way just doing the exact reverse —
                        contaminating the nerdy with the painfully real….[F]anboys and consumers of
                        what we’ll call nerd culture resist any infection by the real.
                        Fanboys will go out of their way, they’ll bend over backwards to swear to
                        God that J.R.R. Tolkien has no racist elements, which is hilarious. 
                    
                
                This two-way contamination haunts the Díaz review network in Figure 8 and its
                    tight link between social and genre boundaries is reflected by critics who work
                    to convey the complexity of Díaz’s stance, his position across and against
                    established genres, through the very language of genre itself. 
            

                Middle Earth: Trujillo, Fantasy and American Publics
                The process of literary reverse colonization, of deliberately contaminating the
                    language of one discourse with the icons of another, has drawn a diverse
                    readership around Oscar Wao and Díaz’s work as a
                    whole. When we use the same methodological lens to explore co-occurrences in
                    Amazon reviews (Figure 9), it is immediately obvious that the most prominent
                    nodes in both networks are identical. For all their similarity to the
                        professional criticism, however, the Amazon reviews are much more diverse in
                        their references. For the sake of legibility this image has been filtered to
                        include only nodes with at least two connections to the central subnet
                        visible here — without this limit, this visible graph would have been ringed
                        with another layer of nodes with just one or no connections at all to the
                        core, many of them unique to Amazon readers. Like professional
                    critics, real readers respond to the dark history at the heart of Díaz’s
                    work, making Trujillo an even more central node in the network than Díaz’s first
                    book, Drown, and the centrality of Trujillo in both
                    networks speaks to the character’s influence over reader reactions. By
                    personifying history so pointedly in Trujillo and adapting a distinctly American
                    cultural mythos to convey that history, Díaz not only earned accolades but also
                    achieved the rare accomplishment of eliciting the same reaction across the
                    board, from both professional and non-professional readers. The Trujillo we see
                    at the center of this network is the prototypical Latin American caudillo
                    Díaz describes in his first footnote for Oscar 
                    Wao, establishing this postmodern literary device
                    as a vehicle for subaltern history, rage and cultural reference all at once:
                        He was our Sauron, our Arawn, our
                        Darkseid, our Once and Future Dictator, a personaje so outlandish, so
                        perverse, so dreadful that not even a sci-fi writer could have made his ass
                        up
                    . The escalating rhetoric is hilarious and
                    sad at the same time, presenting the anger of the Dominican people in the
                    slightly bemused and jaded tone of a partisan scholar scoring points in, of
                    course, a footnote. Sauron, arch-villain of the Lord of the
                        Rings, is a connection that many readers make, but Arawn and
                    Darkseid, of The Chronicles of Prydain and the DC
                    Comics universe, raise the stakes, signaling a level of fandom and genre
                    knowledge that leaves most readers behind and imposing a surprising
                    metanarrative on the metacomment of the footnote itself.
                
                    People and Title Collocations in Amazon Reviews
                    
                    People and Title Collocations in Amazon Reviews
                
                If we look at the center of Figure 9 as a series of triangles, we can see Díaz’s
                    game of cultural stacking as readers uncover and interpret his layers of
                    reference. The central, expected triangle is between Díaz and his two published
                    books. But this core is mirrored and even overshadowed by the triangle Trujillo
                    forms with Díaz and Oscar Wao: the dictator
                    actually overwhelms discussion of Díaz in the literary context of his short
                    stories in favor of the history of the Dominican Republic. Yet this triangle,
                    too, has its reflection in the shape Tolkien makes with Díaz and Trujillo, a
                    cultural echo or inversion that manages to humanize this alien history for
                    American readers and demonize its antagonist in one fell swoop. This narrative
                    doubling and redoubling, which appears so seamlessly in the casual references
                    Díaz works into his novel, becomes its own source of challenging discussion as
                    readers identify its different narrative components. 
                The racism inherent in Middle Earth is a metaphor Díaz does not employ so much as
                    he reverse colonizes it, suggesting that the cherished fantasy series confronts
                    the same dark impulses that overshadow Dominican history and the lives of
                    immigrants in the United States today. Shadows and darkness — these are the
                    terms that Díaz seeks to trouble for us across the cultural landscape of
                    four-color archvillains. Trujillo, that portly, sadistic, pig-eyed mulato who bleached his
                        skin is a figure from the same troubled color zone as these imagined
                    enemies; the forces of evil we have so carefully illustrated as unreal are still
                    manifestations of real fears, hatreds and bigotries . A whole segment of the nerd demographic is drawn to Díaz
                    through the magic of that Tolkien triangle, recognizing him as one of their own.
                    One tongue-in-cheek writer suggests that Díaz has given him the perfect snapshot
                    of Dominican culture, with injuries explained in terms of hit points — perfect for those of us who
                        understand how similar life is to the terms laid out in the Dungeons & Dragons Player's Handbook
                    
                    . The connection to Dungeons
                        & Dragons is particularly significant since it links Oscar Wao to a performative, collective form of
                    fan-driven narrative. Just as players gather around a table and transform die
                    rolls and paper notes into an act of collective imagination, Díaz calls on his
                    readers to reinterpret a literally alien story through uniquely American
                    touchstones, to use their well-developed faculties of the fantastic to conjure
                    up the discomfiting real.
                 The series of triangles in the center of this graph marks off two territories,
                    then, serving as the pivot along which
                        the culture swings in the world literary system of commodifying
                    authentic ethnicity . As Sarah Brouillette argues
                        in her excellent study, several things characterize the postcolonial literature that achieves
                            the greatest success in the current market: it is English-language
                            fiction; it is relatively sophisticated or complex and
                            often anti-realist; it is politically liberal and suspicious of
                            nationalism; it uses a language of exile, hybridity, and
                            mongrel subjectivity
                        . The space above the
                    triangles is the one Díaz was thinking of when he mentioned fanboys protecting
                    their sacred Tolkien. As one reader described this divide: If you love any of the great Latin American modernists,
                        or American writers like Chabon, Lethem, Eggers, and the recently departed
                        David Foster Wallace, or if you can imagine a great combination of the two,
                        then this book is for you…Diaz [sic] my man, wherever you are, know that
                        you're the best you are at what you do, and a No-Prize is winging its way to
                        you through the phantom mailways of the Universal Nerd Alliance! 
                    
                
                Here the full cultural territory is laid out. Díaz combines the great Latin
                        American modernists and American writers, and his transcultural
                    work has earned him a No-Prize, an iconic non-award Marvel Comics bestows
                    on readers who successfully identify and rationalize continuity problems in the
                    ever-expanding Marvel Universe. In other words, Díaz brings together the
                    political, historical discourse of Latin America and the innovative energy of
                    the best contemporary (white, male) American writers, uniting them in a literary
                    package that reinterprets both according to the logic of an ironic nerd
                    discourse.
                 We can get a second bearing on this subcurrent, this other
                    metanarrative in the Trujillo footnote quoted above, by exploring another
                    data set, one that stands between the diffuse network of Amazon purchase-driven
                    recommendations and the highly intentional acts of contextualization drawn from
                    literary reviews. The website LibraryThing encourages book collectors and
                    aficionados to join a social reading community by sharing their
                    libraries, book reviews, local literary events and other reading activities. The
                    gravitational center of the site is the user library, where individuals can
                    itemize, categorize, rate and review their book collections. Each work has its
                    own page, much like on Amazon, but the commercial undertone is largely replaced
                    by a social one: browsers can see which other users have read a particular book
                    or see what books others have recommended for those who enjoyed a particular
                        title. Ironically, when Amazon purchased AbeBooks in 2008 it also
                        purchased a large (but not controlling) stake in LibraryThing . So far the site seems to have maintained
                        its cultural independence. In effect, this creates a voluntary,
                    non-commercial, user-generated analog to the purchase-driven recommendations on
                    Amazon. True to its social mission, LibraryThing also allows other users to
                    endorse or critique a particular recommendation with a thumbs up or thumbs
                        down mechanism, allowing us to measure the strength of positive and
                    negative ties within this network of texts. When we graph this recommendation
                    network, the results are dramatically different from Amazon, in part because of
                    the uneven results of such crowdsourcing.
                 To begin with, this human hive-mind recommendation network is less consistent
                    than Amazon’s algorithms, which typically churn out 80 or more recommendations
                    for each text. Here, the number varies, with Oscar
                        Wao attracting fifteen suggestions but the average node in its
                    three-level network garnering only 2.28. In this sense, the network is already
                    much more representative of social position: instead of an artificial ten
                    out-links per node, an organic mesh emerges where edge counts demonstrate a real
                    form of popularity. In addition, this network is much more stable, determined
                    not by a constantly fluctuating flow of sales transactions but a much more
                    permanent record of votes left by readers and endorsed by others asynchronously
                    over a period of months or years. 
                Hence measurements of prestige carry even more weight here, based as they are on
                    human intentionality weighted by reader votes for or against
                    particular recommendations. My definition of prestige is one of the simplest in
                    network theory: nodes with the highest number of incoming links are the most
                    prestigious. This measure of importance in a network graph aligns closely
                    with the idea of a canonical text that is frequently listed in that canon. In this case, the links are weighted
                    according to the number of votes each received from other users, so a link with
                    four votes would count twice as much as a link with two.
                 This is not to say that the LibraryThing recommendations are any more definitive
                    or unbiased than Amazon’s, merely that they represent a different space of
                    literary consumption. Where Amazon’s recommendations are presumably influenced
                    by thousands of users and transactions, on LibraryThing only ten different users
                    offered suggestions for Oscar Wao (though these
                    suggestions were then voted on by a handful of other users). And the
                    LibraryThing group as a whole has its demographic skew, just as our other
                    reading groups do, which becomes apparent when we look at prestige
                    rankings for books in the three-level Oscar Wao
                    network (Table 1). 
                
                    Prestige in Díaz LibraryThing Network
                    
                        
                            Title
                        
                        
                            Author
                        
                        
                            Centrality as % of Highest Score
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Nineteen Eighty-Four
                        
                        George Orwell
                        1
                    
                    
                        
                            Brave New World
                        
                        Aldous Huxley
                        0.62
                    
                    
                        
                            Fahrenheit 451
                        
                        Ray Bradbury
                        0.42
                    
                    
                        
                            The Giver
                        
                        Lois Lowry
                        0.34
                    
                    
                        
                            A Clockwork Orange
                        
                        Anthony Burgess
                        0.27
                    
                    
                        
                            The Handmaid's Tale
                        
                        Margaret Atwood
                        0.26
                    
                    
                        
                            The Shadow of the Wind
                        
                        Carlos Ruiz Zafón
                        0.23
                    
                    
                        
                            Animal Farm
                        
                        George Orwell
                        0.22
                    
                    
                        
                            Crime and Punishment
                        
                        Fyodor Dostoevsky
                        0.22
                    
                    
                        
                            The Master and Margarita
                        
                        Mikhail Bulgakov
                        0.2
                    
                    
                        
                            …
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
                        
                        Junot Díaz
                        0.11
                    
                
                Between Orwell, Burgess, Bradbury, Lowry and Huxley, a clear dystopian, science
                    fiction bent makes itself evident here. In short, we have entered the realm of
                    the fanboys, the American nerd culture that Díaz so deftly adapts to
                    Oscar’s alien life in New Jersey. Just as some reviewers of the novel on
                    Amazon found Díaz’s nerd credentials comforting as they learned about the
                        foreign culture of Dominican Americans, here we can see Díaz
                    interpreted through a community that is itself positioned deep in a particular
                    territory of genre fiction. 
                The direct connections from Oscar Wao (Figure 10)
                    belie the dystopian cast of the broader LibraryThing network but still bear out
                    its nerd credentials. Readers link Díaz to both science fiction (Cory Doctorow)
                    and graphic novels (Chris Ware) as well as elements of the American popular
                    contemporary canon, including John Irving’s The World
                        According to Garp and Chabon’s The Amazing
                        Adventures of Kavalier and Clay. As in the Amazon network, Díaz is
                    also brought into contact with a Latin American subnet including the familiar
                    García Márquez, Llosa and Alvarez. The LibraryThing interface offers these book
                    nerds a way to gloss their recommendations, a feature two of them have taken
                    advantage of on the Oscar Wao page. In the Time of Butterflies is recommended because
                        
                        Oscar Wao mentions In the
                            Time of the Butterflies in a footnote. Both dealing so
                        gracefully with the Trujillo regime, they seem like complementary
                        books
                    . The textbook is suggested to learn more about the DR, and for an essay by
                        Junot Díaz. In both cases, readers are specifically instructing one
                    another in the context of Díaz’s universe, taking his footnotes at educational
                    face value and collaborating to produce a better network.
                These signs of social reading signal the appeal of LibraryThing’s basic
                    structure as a collective database of libraries and book notes, a space
                    populated by literary nerds with a penchant for cataloging and sharing their
                    collections. This is our clearest view of Díaz’s effective mobilization of the
                    subaltern nature of nerd culture, or what Matt Hills calls the improper identity of a
                    fan defined by genre cultural artifacts ).
                    The fan, or that more intense instantiation, the nerd, functions as a cultural
                    minority within the American mainstream. The fan’s engagements with
                    texts move beyond consumption into the realm of the creative, as Henry Jenkins
                    argues. Building on Pierre Levy’s concept of collective intelligence, Jenkins
                    sees communities like this LibraryThing network as some of the most fully realized versions of Levy's
                        cosmopedia, expansive self-organizing groups focused around the collective
                        production, debate, and circulation of meanings, interpretations, and
                        fantasies in response to various artifacts of contemporary popular
                        culture
                    . In light of Díaz’s novel, these impulses also echo
                    the Caribbean traditions Edouard Glissant lays out of
                        métissage, a mixing and hybridity of peoples, languages
                    and cultures, and relation, a form of engaging the other that does not rely on
                    erasing or ignoring difference but accepting it as a kind of sacred truth . The sacrament of the nerd is to
                    embrace the weird and the obscure in a celebration of those very distancing
                    qualities. But the LibraryThing nerd is still a figure deeply linked to
                    projections of whiteness who energetically pursues what Glissant calls the
                    Western impulse of filiation — ordering, ranking and categorizing the universe
                    and striving for empirical mastery. 
                The Oscar Wao page, an attractor for reader
                    interest, utilizes a number of the site’s filiation features that can tell us
                    more about Díaz’s interactions with these book nerds. In classic fan form, users
                    have filled out an extensive Wikipedia-like entry on the book, including a list
                    of major characters, the endorsement quotes on the book jacket, important places
                    in the text, et cetera. This level of detail goes beyond even what Amazon’s deep
                    pockets will finance for its book pages, matching the definitions of
                    collaborative fan cultures identified by scholars like Jenkins and Jason Mittell
                        , . These links echo
                    the productive literary spirit of The Annotated Oscar Wao site, where users can
                    contribute to a reader’s guide that offers translations, glosses and links to
                    further reading, much of it on Wikipedia . The
                    Annotated Oscar Wao is another complex collective reaction to Díaz, combining
                    elements of both relation and filiation in discussing and glossing his work. In
                    such interpretive spaces, Díaz’s readers can respond to his nerd discourse in
                    kind, celebrating his writing as it references fan universes from The Lord of the Rings to The
                        Fantastic Four. These sustained engagements with his work
                    demonstrate how successfully Díaz drives real dialog with multiple audiences,
                    and this is the crucial pivot on which his game of politicizing language
                    turns.
                
                    First-Order Recommendations for Oscar Wao,
                        LibraryThing
                    
                    First-Order Recommendations for Oscar Wao,
                        LibraryThing
                
            

                Revenge of the Nerd: The Middle Territories of Díaz and Digital Humanities 
                 By drawing together Spanish, English, the literary, the nerdy and other
                    discourses into one vibrant creole, Díaz successfully appeals to a broad
                    American readership. But his particular embrace of the nerd accomplishes another
                    goal for the mainstream reader, leading us to confront our own investments in
                    some cultures but not others. The nerd in the guise of filiation, by pushing
                    away non-canonical and transgressive elements of his own cultural universe,
                    defines an extreme, interior superstructure of white popular culture. It is the
                    tribal narrative of the member who takes his myths too seriously, who tries too
                    hard and speaks too carefully. This depiction has its reflection in the
                            elaborate ornamentation
                            imposed on the French language by [Martinican] men of letters
                        Glissant describes in Caribbean Overtures
                        . But Díaz inverts this
                    situation, pulling the figure of the nerd to the outside, putting texts like
                        The Lord of the Rings in direct conversation
                    with real cultural others. As a nerd, Oscar Wao is both part of the U.S.
                    mainstream and a symbol of the many ways it reflects, traffics in and grapples
                    with African American, Caribbean and other cultural sources for the true power
                    of the alien and the fantastic. 
                In refusing to translate Spanish or even italicize it in his work, Díaz is only
                    one of several bilingual writers exploring the politically charged zone of
                        code-switching, A number of scholars have written on this subject. For
                        a clear overview and discussion of the phenomenon in 1990s U.S. literature,
                        see Lourdes Torres’s In the Contact Zone
                        . but he performs a second kind of
                    radicalism by engaging the parallel universe of untranslated Elvish. Díaz sees
                    this blurring of registers as a real political act: By forcing Spanish back onto English, forcing it to
                        deal with the language it tried to exterminate in me, I've tried to
                        represent a mirror-image of that violence on the page. Call it my revenge on
                        English
                    . The refusal of italics implicitly asks readers to
                    perform a contextual interpolation, to learn the words and sound
                    them out instead of bracketing them or translating them. Díaz even asserted his
                    militancy on this issue with the single most important advocate for his career,
                    the New Yorker, successfully lobbying them to stop
                    italicizing foreign language terms .
                         Throughout this paper I have written the author’s name with a
                            diacritical í, as he has in both of his books. However his name
                            has experienced a typographical evolution over the course of his
                            literary career as publications struggle with his typographical
                                foreign accent. The New York
                                Times
                            Times Topic page for Junot Diaz
                            continued to have it both ways as late as April 2011, with the
                            Americanized title belied by book reviews with the name spelled
                            correctly. Database copies of newspaper reviews reveal a number of
                            character encoding issues, often replacing the í with an error
                            character similar to □, though most databases recognize both
                                Diaz and Díaz as potential matches for Junot Díaz.
                            This is not to argue that such errors are intentional, but rather that
                            the failure to reproduce non-English diacritical markings, particularly
                            í, is a sign of telling neglect by U.S. media. Díaz’s choice to
                            emphasize this aspect of his identity is part of a larger effort to
                            integrate these markings of cultural difference into the typographical
                            mainstream.
                        The story of the í is also a technological one: as word processing
                            software has increasingly made us our own typesetters as well as
                            editors, scholars and writers of Latino/a and Chicano/a literature have
                            been able to reclaim the diacritical markings that publishers were once
                            unwilling or unable to reproduce, a process Paula Moya described to me
                            in an email on April 15, 2011..
                     Cast in the light of this linguistic agenda, the continuous reappearance
                    of Tolkien, Dune and other terms in the Amazon data
                    is evidence of a contact zone between nerd and ‘ethnic studies’ dialects.
                    In one striking example, an Amazon reviewer compared Díaz’s use of Spanish to
                    Tolkien, suggesting it helps to
                        create a mood, a feeling of verisimilitude (overused as that word is), a
                        depth. It really invites you into the inner lives of this Dominican
                        family
                    . Díaz has worked to make his language difficult in a
                    particularly productive way, implicitly demonstrating how we are all implicated
                    in one another’s languages. This term also shares productive overlaps with
                        the term in Latino/a and Caribbean studies known as opacity, an integral
                        component of the concept of relation .
                
                By embracing the elevated diction and obscure references of nerd culture, Oscar Wao upends our conception of the nerd by linking
                    it to the traumas of immigrant life. We are all faced with unintelligibility as
                    readers of Drown and Oscar
                        Wao, brought to confront the fissures between notions of America and
                    immigrant communities and within the idea of America itself. The multiplicity of
                    Díaz’s prose, his deliberate polyvocalism, defies conventional ideals of
                    assimilation by demonstrating just how fragile our notion of the mainstream is,
                    how easily Oscar can complicate the hyperwhite figure of the nerd by
                    becoming a ghettonerd. The psychological fuel that powers this narrative
                    engine for many readers is the story of Díaz himself, an original ghettonerd,
                    who began crafting his writing as a response to the ways in which other
                    immigrant writers catered to mainstream expectations about their lives. Sitting
                    on a writing panel, he realized that his colleagues were putting on this mask to try to hide the nerd….The
                        great silence on that panel was the silence of this experience these guys
                        lived immediately. Being nerds, loving words, being writers, going to elite
                        graduate schools, going to elite schools — that was the huge silence
                    . Through his assault on the mainstream,
                    Díaz both refuses to translate and aggressively contextualizes his work, turning
                    the conflict of authenticity from a silent battleground into a boisterous
                    network of relations. 
                This narrative of Díaz the nerd, then, is ultimately a story about reconfiguring
                    reading, the tale of a violent assault on English to carve out a new political
                    space for language. By asserting his membership in mutually contradictory
                    groups, Díaz has led us to spell out our own silent boundaries and ask when
                    untranslated Spanish is really not the same as untranslated Elvish. One Amazon
                    reviewer who felt as unfamiliar with his nerd allusions as with his use of
                    Spanish wrote: As a white,
                        middle-aged woman in mid-america [sic], the world of Oscar is about as far
                        off as another planet. However, thanks to Junot Diaz, I was able to travel
                        there and be sincerely touched by what I saw
                    . Just as minorities of previous generations carved
                    out mainstream distinction by extracting interior white cultural constructs like
                    Latin verse or classical music and excelling at them, Díaz claims nerdhood as
                    his own. It is an act of recontextualization, a deft game of what Glissant would
                    call relation, that depends on fostering reading that embraces many cultural and
                    national languages. This is, I humbly submit, exactly what scholars in the
                    digital humanities are engaged in as we struggle to speak in the languages of
                    humanities departments, coding schema and cultural relevance all at the same
                    time. We, too, are nerds seeking to change the rules of reading.
                
                Like Díaz, I seek to redefine reading by expanding the contested territory:
                    moving from books themselves to that middle ground of reception and
                    recommendation. This essay includes close reading and cultural arguments as well
                    as empirical evidence, shuttling back and forth between academic registers to
                    make its claims. It approaches Díaz through networks, but not vast and
                    impersonal ones — they are familiar, culturally localized core samples that
                    still carry idiosyncratic traces of individual critics and actors. Even the
                    recommendation networks on Amazon reflect the organic engagement of humans and
                    algorithms in feedback loops, producing a far more surprising selection of texts
                    than we might expect from a bookstore or library’s shelving system. In this
                    sense I believe we need to expand close reading by looking carefully at
                    the full context of a literary network at a particular point in time,
                    particularly the new dynamic influences of algorithms and digital reading, and
                    to mark that expansion with the term middle ground as I have above. 
                The payoff of this approach, then, is in the cultural and literary work that the
                    networks allow me to perform, the argument about the complicated
                        otherness of nerds that builds in the previous two sections. I take
                    my stand in the middle ground between purely data-driven research, close reading
                    and cultural critique: a definition of the literary in the digital humanities
                    that strives for relation as well as filiation. After all, it’s in the middle
                    ground where culture takes place, particularly online — where our e-books might
                    come with highlights from an invisible reading collective, where our authors
                    tweet alongside us, where the game of fame has many more players and many more
                    goals. As the digital humanities continues to define its position in humanistic
                    study, I think one of the best arguments we can make is for our own hybridity as
                        readers of many different languages, including software, algorithms
                    and other digital media. If you accepted my opening claim that reading is a
                    social enterprise, you should also accept that technology — the digital — is as
                    well, and that the best digital humanities approaches embrace the social and
                    cultural criticism lurking within our tools and programs. It’s not enough to
                    recognize how algorithms read us — we need to learn how to read them. As Díaz
                    has so elegantly demonstrated, the literary is one more collaborative network,
                    and it’s time to get everyone thinking about who and what we include in the
                    conversation. 
            
