Title:  Music Scholarship Online (MuSO): A Research
                    Environment for a More Democratic Digital
                    Musicology
Volume:  013
Issue:  1
Date:  12 April 2019
Abstract:  
                
                This paper describes the work to date on Music Scholarship Online (MuSO), an
                    online research environment for digitized and born-digital music resources that
                    inscribes itself within the federated model of the Advanced Research Consortium
                    (ARC). With the project now in its third year, MuSO has reached an inflection
                    point where it has developed a music-centered RDF schema and demonstrated the
                    potential for federated searching across ARC nodes by crosswalking
                    eighteenth-century music content from Europeana into ARC. The case study
                    presented here outlines the dissemination role that MuSO proposes to play within
                    the music research community, the history of MuSO in relation to ARC, the
                    Europeana test case, and future steps for the continued development of MuSO. By
                    facilitating the discovery of digital music content, and providing a virtual
                    environment for music researchers, MuSO will promote data reuse, strengthen
                    community standards in music representation, and create possibilities for
                    cross-disciplinary exchange. We propose that by leveraging the connections
                    between digital music resources and digital humanities research technologies,
                    MuSO will facilitate new research that expands the musicological discipline.
                
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                This paper describes the work to date on Music Scholarship Online (MuSO), an
                    online research environment for digitized resources and digital scholarly
                    outputs relating to music that inscribes itself within the federated model of
                    the Advanced Research Consortium (ARC). With the project now in its third year,
                    MuSO has reached an inflection point where it has developed a music-centered RDF
                    schema and demonstrated the potential for federated searching across ARC nodes
                    by crosswalking eighteenth-century music content from Europeana into ARC. The
                    case study presented here outlines the dissemination role that MuSO proposes to
                    play within the music research community, the history of MuSO in relation to
                    ARC, the Europeana test case, and future steps for the continued development of
                    MuSO. By facilitating the discovery of curated digital music content, and
                    providing a virtual environment for music researchers, MuSO will promote data
                    reuse, strengthen community standards in music representation, and create
                    possibilities for cross-disciplinary exchange. We propose that by leveraging the
                    connections between digital music resources and digital humanities research
                    technologies, MuSO will facilitate new research that expands the musicological
                    discipline. 
            

                Background
                Researchers of music have come to depend on digital tools and information
                    resources in their work, similar to scholars in other humanistic disciplines.
                    Digital indexes and databases such as the Digital Image Archive of Medieval
                    Music (DIAMM), Chopin’s First Editions Online (CFEO), and the British Library’s
                    Early Music Online have radically simplified the task of finding scholarly
                        resources. For DIAMM, see https://www.diamm.ac.uk/; for CFEO, see http://www.chopinonline.ac.uk/cfeo/; for Early Music Online, see
                            https://www.royalholloway.ac.uk/music/research/earlymusiconline/home.aspx.
                    Meanwhile, this ever-growing corpus of digitized primary source material has
                    transformed an erstwhile preoccupation of scarcity into what is at least an
                    appearance of abundance, extending on Rosenzweig's remarks on born-digital
                    records . Music researchers must now stay current
                    with a proliferation of new online resources to ensure that they overlook
                    nothing of significance to their subdiscipline . They
                    increasingly prefer digital tools and resources over print and other physical
                    formats, even while voicing concerns over incompleteness and the superficiality
                    of working with digitized materials . There is,
                    moreover, a consensus that digital technologies have had, and continue to have,
                    a transformative effect on scholarly networks and the work of interpretation.
                    The ease and speed of access to digital research inputs and outputs, and the
                    shifts in methodological scope from close to distant reading, though not yet
                    broadly shared in musicological circles, open significant new research prospects
                        
                    
                    . 
                Even so, systems of scholarly production, review, and dissemination have not
                    fully adapted to the digital realm. The infrastructures of print and publication
                    that have dominated musicological dissemination continue to shape the discipline
                    in the digital domain, both in the content that is produced and in the formats
                    of that content. Traditional ideas about what is worthy of study have influenced
                    digitization decisions and consequently the digital research that is now being
                    undertaken on those resources. If, as Hooper notes, the allowable topics of
                    musicological enquiry have diversified over the past few decades, the digital
                    offers an even greater opportunity for researching underrepresented areas in
                    musicological canons . As Johnson has argued, these
                    marginalized voices are valuable, acting as the blind spots on the map, the
                        dark continents of error and prejudice that 
                        carry their own mystery
                        
                    . Without the compulsion to sell enough printed stock to offset the costs
                    of producing that stock, digital scholarship offers, at least in theory, an
                    opportunity to further democratize music history, contrasting well-known
                    exemplars with lesser-known, non-canonical voices. But in an academy in which
                    recognition and reward remain tied closely to the published word, and therefore
                    to the pressures of producing content that aligns with established cultural
                    preferences, digital recovery work is noticeably scarce .
                Beyond promoting existing content biases, the majority of digital publishing has
                    also simply shifted formats from an analog monograph or journal article to an
                    epub or pdf. The rich multimedia capabilities of the digital are therefore
                    largely underutilized in a music scholarship whose digital outputs still tend
                    towards the static, text-centric restraints of the printed page. To be fair,
                    there are digital projects in music that do display virtuosic technical
                    accomplishment, but the content of these projects rarely receives the same level
                    of theoretical attention. 
                The traditionalist skew of digital scholarly media belies the fact that the use
                    of digital tools across the musical domain is complex and overlapping. The
                    boundaries between the study of musical texts (scores) on the one hand and the
                    study of musical sounds (performances) on the other, let alone the various aims
                    supported by digital technologies such as training, analysis, dissemination, and
                    music making, are persistent even while fuzzy . In
                    addition, the radical potential of digital technologies to unify music
                    scholarship through shared resources and methodologies remains unrealized.
                    Siloed projects, isolated research communities, and solitary work cultures have
                    constrained the impact of such technologies to a relative few.
                This mirrors the state of literary scholarship over ten years ago when Jerome
                    McGann and Bethany Nowviskie produced a founding document for the Networked
                    Infrastructure for Nineteenth-Century Electronic Scholarship (NINES). In it,
                    they described the state of the field of aggregation for digital humanities
                    scholarship: 
                        what you see now on the web is
                            what you get: an agglomeration of sites and projects whose content is
                            atomized and whose scholarly and educational value is
                            indeterminate
                        
                    . NINES was founded to explore the informational design for scholarly
                        work at a global scale; the goal was to develop a structured online
                    environment that would promote access and repurposing of digital
                    scholarly outputs . For NINES, scholar-produced
                    digital projects included early digital humanities efforts such as The William Blake Archive and The
                        Rossetti Archive. 
            

                A musical solution
                This atomized digital content, first described by McGann and
                    Nowviskie within a literary context, is becoming more prevalent within music
                    scholarship. Resources such as The Lost Voices
                        Project or Digital DuChemin, Hearing
                        Wagner, and Songs of the Victorians are
                    examples of the ways interdisciplinary and multimodal research outputs can
                    utilize and extend content available through digital library and archives.
                         See http://digitalduchemin.org/ for The Lost
                            Voices Project; http://www.transforming-musicology.org/news/2014-11-13_hearing-wagner-at-being-human/
                        for Hearing Wagner; http://www.songsofthevictorians.com/ for Songs of the Victorians.  The valuable research
                    materials offered by these projects, which include biophysical data, newly
                    accessible digitized and annotated scores, and dynamic digital editions and
                    visualization tools, are not readily findable to those scholars because their
                    status as self-published scholarly outputs precludes their inclusion among many
                    library- and publication-based digital catalogs and search engines. 
                Music Scholarship Online (henceforth MuSO) is working to improve the
                    dissemination of music scholarship by making digital scholarly outputs
                    discoverable alongside digitized music resources.
                        http://muso.arts.gla.ac.uk/index.html
                     With the term digital scholarly output, we refer to content that was
                    created primarily for digital dissemination, denoting a shift away from a
                    unidimensional print paradigm. This content may include a variety of data,
                    media, and formats, but at its core it is content that has been transformed
                    intellectually through the actions of experts. To give an example, Freischütz Digital is a digital edition of the opera
                        Der Freischütz. Not only does this resource
                    provide access to digitized manuscripts and printed editions of the opera and
                    its libretto, it offers multitrack audio recordings, XML-based digital editions
                    inclusive of editorial interventions made by Carl Maria von Weber, Friedrich
                    Kind, and various copyists working with the creators, as well as the
                    researchers’ analytic commentary that extends upon the data provided by these
                    sources. On occasion, digital scholarly outputs include software tools,
                    datasets, and computer code, in addition to a web presentation for the general
                    public. The Centre for the History and Analysis of Recorded Music (CHARM), for
                    instance, provides a search interface for its sound files as well as a suite of
                    software tools for conducting analyses of recorded sound.
                        http://www.charm.kcl.ac.uk/index.html
                     Similar to MuSO in its aims, the Virtual Library of Musicology
                    (ViFaMusik) is an information resource that provides access to a range of
                    materials that includes primary and secondary resources.
                        https://www.vifamusik.de
                     It also promotes networking opportunities with a database of music
                    scholars, which is at this time oriented towards the German-speaking
                    musicological world 
                    . Moreover, although ViFaMusik lists digital scholarly
                    outputs like Freischütz Digital, these resources
                    are not treated with the same level of granularity as the digitized content. For
                    instance, one cannot search for a particular musical edition or digital object
                    made available by the Freischütz Digital project.
                    MuSO seeks to expose the constituent parts of digital scholarly outputs, making
                    them as discoverable as digitized resources, and thus to maximize the potential
                    for large-scale digital research. 
                MuSO began in 2015 as a Digital Humanities Start-up Grant funded by the National
                    Endowment for the Humanities. At the initial planning stage, music librarians,
                    music encoders, and musicologists gathered to discuss issues surrounding
                    aggregation and peer review for digital scholarly outputs in music . During this meeting, the group decided to follow in
                    the footsteps of McGann and Nowviskie’s NINES by becoming a member of the
                    Advanced Research Consortium (ARC). As a consequence, MuSO will build on ARC’s
                    expertise in curating digital scholarly outputs alongside digitized collections.
                    Through advisory and peer review activities, MuSO will identify and evaluate
                    specialized music resources, and aggregate selected resources together with any
                    associated data and software. In doing so, MuSO will strengthen community
                    standards in the representation of music data and promote data reuse. Through
                    federated searching across ARC nodes, MuSO's users will be able to discover
                    high-quality, vetted scholarly resources that have been curated by experts in
                    other humanistic disciplines, and thereby conduct thorough, multidisciplinary
                    research. With these efforts, MuSO will advocate for open, collaborative, and
                    cross-disciplinary research practices in music.
            

                ARC: A collaborative for digital research in the humanities
                ARC is a federation of scholarly organizations that identify, review, and curate
                    digital content most relevant to the community of scholars each organization
                    serves, e.g. NINES serves nineteenth-century scholars and 18thConnect,
                    eighteenth-century scholars. Socially, the ARC organization is made up of
                    representatives from digital research environments like NINES and MuSO.
                    Technologically, ARC is the home of the ARC Index — the
                    physical computing and software infrastructure that aggregates reviewed and
                    curated digital content into one single catalog that then provides high-quality
                    scholarly resources for humanities scholars.
                ARC is not a digital repository (like Bepress, DSpace, or Fedora Commons) or a
                    publishing platform (such as the Manifold digital publishing platform
                        https://manifoldapp.org/
                    ), nor is ARC a digital library environment, like the Perseus Digital
                    Library or HathiTrust Digital Library, as ARC does not host or publish digital
                    content. This means that, instead of hosting resources, such as digitized page
                    images, scholarly presentations and papers, or book publications, ARC ingests
                    metadata about digital resources that already exist on the web and
                    have been reviewed or curated by ARC’s scholarly organizations. 
                ARC’s research environments are digital aggregators, and each research
                    environment prescribes a set of peer review guidelines for the inclusion of a
                    resource. Usually, scholar-created digital projects undergo blind peer-review
                    and databases of digitized content undergo community approval processes. When a
                    digital resource, project, or database has been approved, metadata about the
                        holdings (or discrete digital items) is ingested into
                    the ARC index. Once ingested into the index, this metadata
                    allows each research environment to provide a search experience that aggregates
                    records describing respected, scholarly digital resources into one federated
                    search and discovery system. Search is open, whether across ARC nodes, or within
                    individual ARC research environments, but each ARC node may choose to aggregate
                    content that is behind a paywall according to its prescribed guidelines or
                    review policies.
                
                    An ARC workflow showing the stages of peer review and curation, and
                        discovery and dissemination via ten contributing nodes: 18thConnect, the
                        Canadian Writing Research Collaboratory (CWRC), Great Lakes Aggregator
                        (GLA), Medieval Electronic Scholarly Association (MESA), Modernist Networks
                        (ModNets), Musical Scholarship Online (MuSO), Networked Early American
                        Resources (NEAR), NINES, Renaissance Knowledge Network (ReKN), and Studies
                        in Radicalism Online (SiRO).
                    
                
                When a scholar searches the ARC index, the experience is similar to searching
                    within an institution’s library search interface or the Digital Public Library
                    of America, in which searches populate a list of results that point to a
                    physical (in the stacks of a library) or digital space (in a database like
                    JSTOR) where the item lives. Like DPLA and library search interfaces, using ARC
                    for research purposes will return a list of results that point to where digital
                    content can be located. Unlike other scholarly research portals online, ARC also
                    points scholars to curated digital scholarly outputs created by and relevant to
                    humanities researchers. These digital scholarly outputs, which range from
                    annotated digital editions to complex archives, are indexed within ARC, and the
                    digital content findable within ARC’s catalog contains not only a single
                    metadata record pointing to the project, but many records describing the content
                    available within the project.
                ARC’s digital aggregation efforts have resulted in a catalog of over two million
                    curated digital objects, spanning the medieval period and up to copyright, in
                    federated digital research environments such as those listed on the right-hand
                    side of Figure 1. The resulting federated ARC network allows scholars to search
                    for content in previously atomized scholar-produced
                    projects. Once spread far and wide across the internet, the digital projects
                    aggregated by ARC are now discoverable via a single, scholarly, and
                    scholar-designed search interface. For instance, see BigDiva, http://www.bigdiva.org; and
                        Collex, https://github.com/collex.
                ARC intends to reflect the interdisciplinary nature of digital humanities. Since
                    digital work is often collaborative and interdisciplinary, an aggregated body of
                    digital research inputs and outputs should consequently be findable and
                    accessible to scholars from various disciplines. For digital methods to be fully
                    integrated as humanities research methodologies, the outputs of these methods
                    must be familiar to all humanists: all of the multidisciplinary, multilingual
                    and international scholars that our institutions serve. Against the backdrop of
                    this rich history of interdisciplinary and non-hierarchical work, MuSO joins ARC
                    as a research community that seeks to build on ARC’s engagement with humanities
                    scholars, by serving music scholars.
            

                MuSO and Europeana
                At the conclusion of the NEH start-up grant, the MuSO team recognized the need
                    for a new way to describe digital objects in music that would bring digital
                    scholarly outputs in music together with digitized resources. At the same time,
                    the schema and its descriptive ontologies needed to be accurate, while still
                    broad enough to ensure interoperability across the boundaries of discipline and
                    format within ARC. This discovery-level schema would not be intended to supplant
                    the valuable, highly descriptive preservation-level data being generated by
                    libraries, as MuSO would still send users to the resource and its accompanying
                    preservation-level metadata to conduct more in-depth analysis. Rather, MuSO’s
                    metadata schema would need to draw out the most important pieces of information
                    that researchers need for discovery. To help with the creation of such a schema,
                    MuSO chose to rely on yet another digital aggregator, Europeana.
                Europeana 
                        is the organisation tasked by the
                            European Commission with developing a digital cultural heritage platform
                            for Europe
                        
                    . Since its launch in 2008, Europeana has been working with libraries,
                    museums, and other organizations in the cultural heritage sector throughout
                    Europe to aggregate their digital collections into a single catalog and online
                    interface. In the autumn of 2016, Europeana instituted a new grant scheme,
                    entitled the Europeana Research Grant scheme, for scholars to work with its
                    aggregated collections. Building on Europeana’s expertise in standardizing
                    metadata descriptions of widely disparate collections, this grant would allow
                    MuSO to construct an initial metadata schema, which could bridge the gap between
                    Europeana’s metadata schema, the Europeana Data Model (EDM), and the ARC RDF
                    schema while maintaining and incorporating the long-established cataloging
                    standards of the music research community. 
                The new MuSO schema would allow music scholars to use MuSO for its music-specific
                    content, but they could then expand their search to encompass the
                    period-specific offerings of 18thConnect, the node of the Advanced Research
                    Consortium (ARC) dedicated to eighteenth-century studies. MuSO’s federated
                    searching capability therefore would become an opportunity to widen and
                        bridge research fields as well as to promote knowledge of digital
                    humanities research tools and methodologies within the musicological community
                        . In other words, MuSO would provide users with
                    what they are increasingly demanding: the ability to isolate content relating to
                    Haydn’s The Flowers of Edinburgh, Hob. XXXIa:90
                    (for instance), regardless of whether it is in the context of a website covering
                    eighteenth-century folk songs, Scottish literature, or a complete Haydn digital
                    edition. 
            

                Aggregating Eighteenth-Century Material from Europeana Music
                In the first phase of the Europeana Grant, the team, consisting of a subset of
                    the original MuSO team, inspected the metadata standards of over a dozen other
                    projects and organizations, including the Digital Image Archive of Medieval
                    Music (DIAMM), Répertoire International de Littérature Musicale (RILM),
                    Répertoire International des Sources Musicales (RISM), Répertoire international
                    de la presse musicale (RIPM), the Library of Congress’ Music Treasures
                    Consortium, and others in order to identify common traits which might inform our
                    decisions, as well as more customized metadata requirements which might also be
                    useful. The overarching categories identified from these and other metadata
                    standards included repository identifier, item identifier, language, data,
                    physical description, title, and statements of responsibility. 
                With this information, the team entered the prototyping phase of the project. The
                    team met for two days to discuss and formulate an initial metadata schema based
                    on the information that was gathered in phase one. We distinguished where
                    existing standards such as Dublin Core provided adequate structure, and where it
                    might be necessary to propose specialized fields. 
                The third phase of development was necessarily iterative, as the team's abstract
                    model made contact with actual data. During this phase, the team
                        crosswalked eighteenth-century content in the Europeana
                    Music Collection over to ARC using the new MuSO schema. A crosswalk is designed
                    to show users or database managers how to translate data from one descriptive
                    formatting to another. Because multiple metadata schemas exist in the humanities
                    and cultural heritage sector, e.g. Dublin Core, MARC, TEI, RDF, such an
                    intellectual and technical mapping must take place to allow search and indexing
                    technologies to speak to each other. In general, the workflow followed a classic
                    Deming cycle: Plan, Do, Study, Act. In general, the workflow followed a classic
                    Deming cycle: Plan, Do, Study, Act. The workflow was progressively refined as
                    implementation produced new information to incorporate: some elements which
                    seemed desirable in the planning stages were not practical to implement in this
                    phase or were not germane to the actual content of the data. 
                For instance, one element that seemed highly desirable was notation form, in
                    order to distinguish systems like Gregorian chant notation, and lute tablature
                    from modern standard notation. However, retrieving such information would have
                    required item-level examination, as notation was inconsistently described in the
                    dc:description field. And while the Resource Description and Access vocabulary
                    for notation type was integrated into the MuSO metadata schema, the team chose
                    to defer full notational description in view of time considerations.
                        http://www.rdaregistry.info/termList/MusNotation/
                    
                
                The team had also hoped to use the Library of Congress Genre/Form Project
                    vocabularies in its subgenre field for maximum interoperability, but that
                    project is still in progress and has not yet published an official vocabulary.
                    In its absence, the team carried over Europeana fields that contained
                    information on musical form and genre. This information will be retained until a
                    standardized vocabulary is established.
                Variations and areas for interpretation inevitably arose, even in a standardized
                    structure such as Europeana’s. One of these areas was an unforeseen
                    complication: institutions with multiple RISM sigla. RISM sigla have become the
                    standard in the music community for identifying cultural heritage institutions
                    (libraries, archives, museums, etc.) that hold music source materials. These
                    sigla consist of a two-letter country code followed by a unique 3-4 letter
                    institution designation.
                        http://www.rism.info/en/sigla.html
                     Though the sigla are intended to be unique, some institutions have
                    become consolidated since their sigla were assigned. This has led to many
                    institutions such as the Bibliothèque nationale de France having several sigla
                    assigned to them. The MuSO team therefore had to determine which sigla to use.
                    In another example of the data variations in the Europeana dataset, certain art
                    forms required consensus due to their multidisciplinary nature, such as ballet,
                    which incorporates music, dance, and drama. Some cases also pointed to a clear
                    need for new genre terms in the ARC vocabularies, which the team suggested: e.g.
                    dance, pedagogy, ethnography, and sculpture/architecture.
                Similarly, a consensus was necessary on the English translation and labeling of
                    terms describing roles and responsibilities, as with Éditeur scientifique and Compositeur
                        prétendu.
                        Éditeur scientifique ordinarily designates an
                        editor of a scholarly monographic series or journal, however in the case of
                        the eighteenth-century score anthologies held in the Bibliothèque nationale
                        de France, the term was used to describe the role of the person responsible
                        for compiling and editing the songs published therein. Consequently, the
                        MuSO team agreed to use the Compiler relator code for
                        this term. Compositeur prétendu described a
                        circumstance in which a work’s creative attribution was later called into
                        question; the MuSO team preserved this term in its metadata as
                            Attributed name. This process was also
                    iterative, as team members conferred and reconciled interpretations and
                    decisions across datasets. Retrospective editing was not difficult, as the facet
                    and clustering function in OpenRefine, which is an open source tool for working
                    with messy data, aided finding and replacing terms as needed.
                With the data successfully crosswalked, the fourth phase focused on ingesting the
                    data into 18thConnect. During this time, the team worked with the development
                    team at 18thConnect to ensure that the data was consistent and that it displayed
                    properly on the 18thConnect website. Furthermore, the team launched a new MuSO
                    website that would highlight MuSO’s schema and aggregated content.
                        http://muso.arts.gla.ac.uk
                    
            

                Looking Forward
                Despite the advances of the MuSO project, much work remains in generating a
                    digital portal that is fully capable of curating scholarly research and
                    materials. During the phases of the Europeana grant and the initial Start-up
                    Grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the MuSO community of
                    scholars identified four significant tasks for the project. These include
                    building a search platform for MuSO, developing interdisciplinary project review
                    and data integration workflows within the ARC community, identifying and
                    incorporating more digitized collections into MuSO’s catalog of musical
                    resources, and finally promoting digital outputs and metadata standards among
                    music scholars and humanists.
                Thanks to the efforts of 18thConnect, MuSO has been able to make a selection of
                    the content found in Europeana Music interoperable with the existing ARC
                    catalog. This is an important step, as it allows scholars to discover articles
                    about Mozart alongside the actual letters and scores that those articles cite.
                    Nevertheless, ARC’s reliance on text-based metadata means that its current
                    search interfaces are completely biased towards the search and discovery of
                    textual information, even if that information is describing some non-textual
                    content. Although music can be notated and encoded in ways similar to text, it
                    is also heavily reliant on sonic and non-textual manifestations, and a number of
                    researchers are working on these issues of musical search for both audio and
                    symbolic formats. Given MuSO’s commitment to interdisciplinarity, its search
                    interface must bring these efforts in non-textual search together with existing
                    textual search technologies, expanding ARC’s search capabilities to allow
                    scholars to search and discover melody, harmony, and rhythm in addition to text. 
                MuSO’s collaboration with the ARC community will likely result in more than an
                    expansion of search capabilities. ARC was originally organized according to
                    temporal boundaries such as nineteenth-century studies, medieval studies, and
                    modernist studies. MuSO is one of the latest in a number of recent additions to
                    ARC that is dedicated to a particular topic or discipline. MuSO’s efforts to
                    promote digital scholarly outputs alongside digitized musical resources are
                    spurring the ARC community to re-evaluate its curatorial practices. It is not
                    enough to append a new music-based research environment to ARC’s current
                    structure. MuSO will invariably aggregate content of relevance to ARC’s other
                    research communities (i.e. Wagner-related content for nineteenth-century
                    scholars). MuSO’s future efforts will therefore include partnering with the
                    existing research communities in ARC to ensure that digitized musical resources
                    are discoverable in the relevant research environments outside of the MuSO
                    portal so that Wagner-related content can be discovered in NINES along with
                    MuSO. Moreover, MuSO will work with the ARC community to develop methods of
                    conducting both period-specific and discipline-specific review of digital
                    scholarly outputs that will provide relevant peer-review for contributors while
                    assuring users that the content made available through ARC and its nodes has
                    been vetted by experts in relevant disciplinary and cultural-temporal fields. 
                MuSO will continue to identify and aggregate existing digital collections into
                    its catalog. Resources such as Europeana, HathiTrust, and the DPLA continue to
                    grow, and MuSO will do the same, identifying digitized primary sources and
                    secondary scholarship for inclusion in the MuSO catalog. MuSO will also work to
                    include digital scholarly outputs in its catalog. It has already identified a
                    number of digital projects that meet technical and scholarly standards that
                    would likely pass peer review and could be incorporated into the MuSO catalog.
                    MuSO will reach out to these projects and ones of similar quality that arise in
                    the future, encouraging them to consider digital peer review.
                This goal is closely related to MuSO’s final future goal to promote digital
                    outputs and metadata standards among music scholars. MuSO will work closely with
                    digital projects to ensure they follow best practices for describing their
                    digital outputs, and it will promote those outputs by making them available for
                    the scholarly community to search and discover alongside other relevant
                    scholarly resources. The criteria for inclusion in MuSO remain under development
                    in anticipation of the continued evolution of digital scholarship in music. In
                    addition to accommodating emerging technologies and methods, our intention to
                    democratize participation in digital scholarship favors an inclusive approach to
                    proposed projects. Therefore thinking outside the box may
                    find a place as a feature, not a bug, where traditional
                    modes of scholarly communication in music research retain a formidable pedigree.
                    The basic criteria for inclusion established in the January 2016 meeting for
                    MuSO continue to apply: Does the project make a worthwhile contribution to
                    research in its subject area? Is its methodology sound? Does the project achieve
                    its own goals? Are there major obstacles to usability? Are its existence and
                    accessibility sustainable? 
                
                Scholars are increasingly turning to digital resources for conducting and
                    disseminating their research. Professional societies such as the Modern Language
                    Association  and the American Historical Association
                         are setting standards for digital outputs, and
                    governmental standards initiatives such as the United Kingdom’s Research
                    Excellence Framework are making allowances for digital outputs. However, current
                    outlets for reviewing music scholarship are optimized for static print and
                    therefore struggle to assess multi-modal and multidisciplinary digital scholarly
                    outputs. Amidst a growing set of high-quality digital projects, the musical
                    community demands not only a set of standards for assessing born-digital
                    scholarship but it demands a community with expertise in assessing that
                    scholarship . Without a central location afforded by
                    traditional publishing platforms such as journal articles and monographic
                    series, digital scholarly outputs demand digital aggregation platforms that
                    ensure they are discoverable by the scholarly community. MuSO is poised to step
                    into this void, promoting quality digital scholarship in music while giving it
                    an equal voice alongside the traditional platforms of dissemination.
            
