Title:  Philosophy and Digital Humanities: A review of Willard McCarty, 
Volume:  001
Issue:  1
Date:  3 April 2007
Abstract:  
            A review of Willard McCarty's Humanities Computing.
         
Full Body Text: 
Humanities computing is still a fledgling discipline, in spite of its claim to a lineage now
      decades old that descends from the estimable Father Busa and his assiduous labors
      in the stony fields of concordance and corpus linguistics. The cultural authority of computing
      has an older history yet, linked as it is to traditions of analytic thought and rational
      calculus in the work of Descartes and Leibniz. Noble pilgrims of the
      flock have wrestled hard in recent years to define humanities computing and dignify the
      complex undertaking with a status beyond mere service. By taking on the challenge of framing
      the intellectual project as an epistemological one, Willard McCarty raises issues germane to
      the humanities in their current dialogue with digital technology. McCarty’s method is that of
      the via negativa, a rigorous approach to the study of knowledge through
      attention to ignorance, that pushes at assumptions to lay them bare. For McCarty that means we
      should pay attention to our ways of knowing as much as to objects of knowledge. So if
      knowledge is not an object, but a method, then humanities computing is a way of producing
      knowledge, and McCarty asks how it works as an epistemological practice. To answer this
      question, McCarty moves through a series of discussions meant to define and address the issues
      he sees as central ones. What is the scholar’s task, particularly the task of commentary? What
      is a discipline? How does analytic reason relate to humanistic inquiry? What may be automated?
      And perhaps most basic of all, how are scholarly activities in the humanities to be understood
      as interpretive acts in which modeling is fundamental? Focusing attention on the ways
      computational techniques produce means and objects of study for humanists, he brings the
      humanist’s skills to bear in creating historically-referenced, philosophical self-awareness in
      his study. 
This book sits very comfortably within the growing corpus of works in this field. More
      specifically focused, pragmatic books like Susan Hockey’s
            
               Electronic Texts in the Humanities
             and case-based studies, such as 
               Electronic Text: Investigations in Method and Theory
            , edited by Kathryn Sutherland, have posed some of these arguments around
      the edges of their central project of documenting and discussing research methods and
      practices. The pieces in the Blackwell’s 
               Companion to Digital Humanities
            , edited by Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John
        Unsworth present a wide range of framing arguments within the individual pieces, some
      blatantly speculative and theoretical, some waving aside philosophical issues and just getting
      on with the job of introducing text encoding or the current impact on specific disciplines.
      Among these publications, Jerome McGann’s
            
               Radiant Textuality
             stands out for its particular breadth. Shot through with insights from the textual
      critic’s experience, it is a graceful and engaging introduction to the workings of a scholar’s
      art in and through development of a first-generation project of the Institute for Advanced
      Technology in the Humanities at UVa. The coming of the Web and the serious engagement of
      John Unsworth with the creation of the Rossetti Archive so that it could be
      served in a networked environment, not just a digital one, is crucial to the reflections in
      Radiant Textuality. McGann’s report of the progress of digital
      collection building documents a revelation — the coming into awareness of the
      possibilities for ways of thinking differently, anew, and with renewed enthusiasm about
      textual studies and interpretative work that finds many echoes in the digital scholarly
      community in the last decade. McCarty also got his digital hands dirty, so to speak, through
      his development of computational techniques to study the way personae are constituted
      linguistically in Ovid’s Metamorphoses. These experiences are
      crucial. 
McCarty’s unique contribution here is the singularity of his focus on digital humanities as
      an epistemological undertaking. For this reason, contrast with the work of McGann is
      particularly useful since it brings out sharply the outlines of McCarty’s orientation.
      McCarty’s attention is shaped by an allegiance to analytic methods that aspire to the
      objectivity of those used in empirical sciences while McGann’s is forged in an ever-increasing
      insistence on the subjective inner-standing point as the locus from which knowledge is
      produced. On the face of it, McGann’s approach would seem irreconcilable with the formalizing,
      disambiguating constraints of computational technology, while McCarty’s deliberate adherence
      to ratio seems calculated to fit this inquiry perfectly. But the strength of the field is
      demonstrated by the fact that different as these two scholars are in their approach to digital
      humanities, their work complements rather than cancels each other’s. The history of knowledge
      in which McCarty wants to place digital humanities is scientific rather than literary in its
      cultural affiliation, more in the lineage of philosophy of science (Thomas Kuhn,
      Kurt Gödel, and Hans Gadamer) than that of poets and literary
      philosophers (Mikhail Bahktin, Alfred Jarry, Francesco
        Varela, or Roland Barthes). Humanists gravitate to various intellectual
      poles, and our understanding of humanities computing will continue to expand when approached
      through yet other intellectual avenues. Aesthetics, visual epistemology, and cultural
      anthropology, for instance, leap to mind and the volumes pumped out through MIT Press,
      Manchester University Press, and Harper’s Basic Books are ample testimony to the critical
      industry of cyber-studies that crosses blurry boundaries somewhere near the edges of
      humanities computing. 
The four chapters that form the core of McCarty’s book each take up a different aspect of
      digital humanities: modeling, genres, discipline, and computer science. He ends the book by
      setting an agenda for the field that contains a number of very practical recommendations with
      regard to building a professional community and establishing a broader awareness of the field
      and its value across disciplines. But he begins with modeling, and rightly so, since
      understanding the ways we give form to knowledge are crucial to any other insight. His
      analysis emphasizes the activity of creating models as schematic, abstract structures, but he
      quickly makes a compelling distinction between dynamic processes and static abstractions. Only
      through an iterative process of feedback and rework can modeling remain open to the
      intellectual challenge of humanistic inquiry. The concept of the model lies
      at the heart of any analysis of a representation or expression of human intellect. Here
      McCarty draws usefully on the critical literature in the sciences to make his points,
      emphasizing the need for the self-reflexive method. Since, as McCarty points out, historians
      and philosophers of science have long paid attention to the role played by models, that
      critical literature provides a useful foundation for thinking about how we think about things
      — and also, about thinking itself (albeit from within a specific disciplinary
      perspective). Modelling the thinking process is the grail here, and though much of this
      theoretical reflection gets swept aside in the heat of actually making digital artifacts, it’s
      worthwhile to step back and remember that one of the great benefits of working in a digital
      environment is the productive conflict between the habits of humanistic thought and those of
      the logic-based systems on which computational activity depends. McCarty makes perhaps too
      much of the authority of logic, and seems to place a priority on rational thought that I would
      challenge on philosophical grounds (part characterological difference, no doubt, and part a
      difference of intellectual training). I think the cultural authority of computing has rested
      too squarely on an assumption of the intellectual validity of reason and rational process.
      Challenges have to come from subjective and aesthetic realms with equal, and equally potent,
      authority. But those are my thoughts, not McCarty’s. (As McGann is fond of saying, The poets got it right.) McCarty wrestles with mathesis to come to its
      terms, perhaps in the belief that reason has a verifiability that gives it clout. In any case,
      his allegiances are consistent, and he works to pull the interpretive uncertainties of
      modeling into alignment with the procedurally self-conscious rigors of analytic method and out
      of what he considers the fire (or rapids) of mere fashioning of form for convenience. Would he
      allow the possibility that a computational model might work through an aesthetic provocation?
      He seems to leave the way open since he concludes by noting a fundamental paradox, that though
      we may aspire to (a pseudo or real) empirical method to model cultural artifacts, we
      nonetheless have to realize that modeling anything is an imaginative act. 
In the chapters that follow, Genres, Discipline, and Computing, McCarty addresses the way
      scholarly activity, particularly that of creating commentary, changes in a digital
      environment. Unlike the discussion of modeling, with its scientific reference frame, this is
      squarely in humanist territory. Rethinking the notion of the library, document, and text are
      all familiar conversations, hotly and richly discussed in the last few years in popular and
      specialized realms. This brings McCarty to the business of defining a discipline, and he
      borrows his terms here from cultural anthropology, casting a critically descriptive eye on the
      emerging intellectual formations in digital humanities and their nascent institutionalization
      in its early phase development as a systematic science. His
      discussion of Computing explores the way automation is achieved,
      with particular interest in and emphasis on the history of rules of
        thought that find their effective (and instrumental) manifestation in algorithms.
      The transformation of cultural artifacts and humanistic approaches into computationally tractable data is the central task of humanities computing in
      McCarty’s view, and so he concludes his epistemological inquiries (all far more detailed,
      subtly nuanced, richly referenced, and complex than my reductive account of them here) with an
      appreciation of the extent to which computing has succeeded through formal means, however
      qualified we must be about the limits of formal systems for modeling humanistic artifacts. 
McCarty’s arguments are dense. This is not a book through which to be introduced to digital
      humanities, but a book meant to prove that digital humanities can sustain a serious
      intellectual inquiry about its methods. Its arguments are posed in a language of philosophic
      investigation. Those looking for (or dependent on) concrete examples from case studies will
      need to look elsewhere for a way into these debates. McCarty has ample sources and reference
      points, and his experience with Ovid is at the heart of his discussions. But those without a
      penchant for abstract discussion may find this text elusive and unnecessarily, pedantically
      overworked at times. But Humanities Computing deserves considerable respect,
      both for what it aims to do and does do — to frame the diverse activities of this
      emerging field within a critical study of epistemology, calling into question basic premises
      and politics of knowledge production. His works shows that this field is a worthwhile
      intellectual undertaking, one that is humanistic at its core (concerned with the preservation
      and continued reinterpretation of our cultural legacy) and disciplined in its means. 
What McCarty doesn’t say, but could have on the basis of his study, is that humanities
      computing may even be the most important humanistic project of our time. That preservation of
      cultural heritage, as well as other patterns of access and use, will be carried out through
      the electronic instruments we are currently making. The self-conscious awareness of the
      substantive significance of that task is essential to making a place for this work within many
      still-resistant and dismissive realms of academe where, to use McCarty’s apt phrase, many
      contemporary scholar-teachers regard the computer as a knowledge
        jukebox that simply plays whatever text or artifact they google on the screen. The
      habituation to ease of access has blinded the academic community to the basic mediating
      activity of computing as an act of modeling and representing knowledge. The most naïve
      assumptions of vehicular attitudes towards digital media as transparent — and of
      works of culture as self-evident — have heaped disdain on these activities among
      practitioners in many traditional academic departments. As I write this, I mark significant
      changes in the way digital humanities fits within the framework of institutional support and
      priorities here at UVa. This is both a sign of maturation, the end of an initial phase of
      explorative innovation, and a cautionary tale from which some sad but important lessons might
      be learned. 
But the shape of knowledge as we will know it is being modeled in digital environments and
      instruments. The tools for understanding the interpretive force of choices made in structuring
      these environments will come from every field of critical, cultural, media, and visual
      studies. But only for those sensitive to the basic condition of all knowledge as mediated
      representation. You would think that would include all humanist scholars, as well as
      administrators — wouldn’t you? That it doesn’t shows how far we have to go with the
      crucial social tasks ahead — to make the arguments within the culture of academia
      that will make clear to the current and next generation of humanists the extent to which the
      mediated condition of all knowledge is now shifted into digital frames — and that
      any humanist encounter with such knowledge has to begin with a critical understanding of how
      the very modeling on which artifacts appear to us in digital form works to constitute the
      objects of our collective inquiry. The first step of the via negativa will
      be Digital Media Studies, Understanding Digital Media, or Humanities Computing 101. 
Are there things that McCarty’s book doesn’t do? Of course. But as digital humanities
      continues to grow, this work will be among those that further reflection and inquiry,
      providing a solid foundation of argument for the legitimacy of the field and rich detail as to
      how and why that legitimacy has the historical shape that it does. 
