Title:  Network Narration in John Dos Passos’s 
Volume:  005
Issue:  2
Date:  17 May 2011
Abstract:  
            Wesley Beal examines John Dos Passos’s U.S.A. trilogy
               (1930-36) to read its complex form — what the author once referred to as a four-way conveyor system — as an intricate networking
               scheme, and considers it as an archive of early network thinking. Contrary to
               traditional readings of U.S.A. that discuss its formal
               properties in terms of dispersal and the supposedly ruinous disconnections of modern
               life, the paper argues that the interplay of these formal fragments results in a
               semiotic web that drives Dos Passos’s narrative strategy toward a totalizing vision
               of the nation and, indeed, history. Beal’s paper deals with the progressive widening
               of network figuration in American modernism to think the very politics of national
               space, and in focusing on the machinic dynamics of Dos Passos’s form, the article
               establishes network discourses as the organizing principle of several
               pre-digitization modes of production, including Fordism and the modern
               corporation.
         
Full Body Text: 
Network Narration in John Dos Passos’s U.S.A.
            Trilogy
The literary history of John Dos Passos’s U.S.A. trilogy is
            in some respects as epic as the work itself. Common, for example, is the position that
            Michael Denning takes on the trilogy’s troubled relationship with critics over the
            tumultuous period of late modernism: 
               To put it crudely, his move to the radical right lost him his
                  left-wing admirers, while the undisputed sense that his early works are his finest
                  made him a difficult icon for the right [….] Unlike many of his contemporaries, he
                  did not move from a radical political art to an apolitical formalism, and thus
                  never won the allegiance of formalist or aestheticist critics
               
            . This trajectory, however, does not fully account for a spike in interest in the
            author and the trilogy in the early 1980s: a 1980 Modern Fiction
               Studies special issue dedicated to U.S.A.,
            Townsend Ludington’s sprawling biography of Dos Passos of the same year, and chapters in
            several books throughout the decade. Nor does it account for the late 1990s revival in
            Dos Passos scholarship — perhaps partly fueled by the 1996 publication of a Library of
            America edition of the U.S.A. trilogy — in which Denning
            himself is a key figure. Yet on the whole these remain as minor peaks of interest, and
            in American literary scholarship the U.S.A. trilogy is not
            exactly gone, but is close to forgotten.
Whatever restoration the U.S.A. trilogy has enjoyed at the
            turn of the century encourages its own historicization. For these 1980s and 1990s
            revivals of U.S.A. scholarship correspond to the advances
            in digital technology that have spawned not only the scholarly field of digital media
            studies, but have also led to the adoption of digital figurations across the humanities
            — especially in the powerful figure of the network. The network is, after all, the
            central figure of some of the most prominent works that have defined the theoretical
            production of the last thirty years or so, and that in various ways respond to
            technological developments that have forged the Information Age and the economic trends
            loosely associated under the omnibus term globalization. Of course it would be sloppy to
            argue for a causal relationship between the humanities’ turn toward network theory and
            the returns to U.S.A. But the correspondence between these
            two developments raises important questions that could illuminate some of the trilogy’s
            formal complexity, as well as deepen our understanding of the relationship between
            modernism and networked discourses. What might one find if she were to look at the
            trilogy in terms of the network theory that has accompanied the renewed attention to it?
            Moreover, to what degree was network theory already present in the intellectual and
            literary production of Dos Passos’s milieu?
This paper takes up these gaps in scholarship on U.S.A.’s
            networked dynamics and, along with the other papers in this cluster, the importance of
            networks to American modernism. Dos Passos’s trilogy provides an exemplary case study in
            the moderns’ experiments with networks, because it uses network narration in its
            representation of early twentieth-century American history. Perhaps more than any other
            modernist work, U.S.A. deploys the fundamentally modern
            trope of the fragment and simultaneously insists on a totalizing vision of its
            fragments. Accordingly, its form offers a framework that turn-of-the-century readers
            should recognize, if only implicitly, as a networked construction. For by insisting on
            the interrelationships of these textual fragments, Dos Passos transforms fragments to
            nodes on his totalizing network. Dos Passos’s conception of networks is the focus of
            this essay, which will study the trilogy’s formalist network logic and its intervention
            into characterological connectivity that place his conceptualization of the network as
            an early marker of the intellectual history of network theory — a history that begins
            well in advance of the digital revolution that has come to displace variants of network
            thinking that came before it. Dos Passos’s intervention into networked discourse, I
            argue, is that he uses networks to mediate his formal strategy of fragmentation and
            totalization as a model of historical study.
The thrust of the argument is not only aimed at registering the network dynamics of
               U.S.A., but also at using the trilogy as a case study in
            the literary history of what has come to be called the network
               narrative genre. When recently the network narrative has come into play in
            genre studies, the result has tended to have a limiting effect that, while appropriate
            in the delimitation of generic boundaries, has too often excluded important modes of
            network narration — along both formal and historical lines. Film scholar David Bordwell,
            for example, restricts the network narrative genre to films structured around the
            six-degrees-of-separation theorem such as Robert Altman’s Nashville (1975) and Short Cuts (1993), Michael
            Haneke’s 71 Fragments (1994), or Paul Haggis’s Crash (2005). Offering but lip-service to texts like Thornton
            Wilder’s Bridge of San Luis Rey (1927) and Vicki Baum’s
               Shanghai ’37 (1939), Bordwell defines the genre as
            comprised of those narratives in which there are […] several
               protagonists, but their projects are largely decoupled from one another, or only
               contingently linked
            . And David Ciccoricco’s much more theoretically
            rigorous Reading Network Fiction (2007) offers an
            altogether different vantage of the genre, framing it as the product of a digital
            environment. With studies in texts such as Michael Joyce’s Twilight, A Symphony (1997), Ciccoricco studies the formal complexities of
            narrative when it operates in a truly hypertextual state. But both of these definitions
            of the genre make some crucial omissions that this paper will begin to amend — Bordwell
            confining the genre to the narrative of the six-degrees theorem, and Ciccoricco
            restricting it to a hyperlinked environment.
To define a genre is a terribly messy business that almost always entails amendment and
            revision, so I certainly empathize with Bordwell and Ciccoricco when I advance my
            formulation of the network narrative: simply that it mediates the dialectic of
            totalization and fragmentation with linking mechanisms that draw atomized nodal
            formations into a constellar system. This dialectical tension is especially significant
            in the case of Dos Passos and his contemporaries, as it may well constitute the cultural
            logic of modernism, given the technological, demographic, and ideational upheaval
            outlined in the introduction to this cluster of essays. Precisely what kind of network
            such a narrative might use as a narrational model is variable — networks of people,
            material or technological networks, and perhaps most relevant to Dos Passos’s modern
            milieu, networks of form itself, to name but a few possibilities. Of course this
            flexibility is at once the strength and the weakness of such a loose definition, and for
            my purposes it allows us to read the networked dynamics of modern texts that predate the
            dawn of hypertextual narratives that are but one set of the genre. This flexibility
            grants us a position to see that the network narrative is a twentieth-century
            phenomenon, but not an exclusively late twentieth-century phenomenon, as this study of
               U.S.A. attempts to demonstrate. Through a reading of
               U.S.A., I contend that we can locate some crucial modes
            of network thinking in the aesthetics of modern narrative, and that these early forms of
            the network narrative can illuminate an overlooked period in the development of network
            theory. 

            A Four-Way Conveyor System
            
            That the fragment is a standard trope deployed by the moderns is a truism among
               scholars of modernisms. Likewise, the moderns’ investment in totalization has been
               established as an equally central element in modernist literature. These competing
               impulses — to represent a society breaking into pieces under the pressures of rapid
               social changes, and simultaneously to find a semblance of unity to guard against
               outright societal entropy — coincide in the form, as well as the content, of major
               works of high modernism. The fragment is not necessarily an indicator of a networked
               body, but very often networked figuration mediates the tension of these competing
               impulses as an important mechanism to bridge the gap between dispersal and unity that
               typifies the modernist aesthetic experiments in form. The U.S.A. trilogy’s intervention into modernist fragmentation is especially
               noteworthy in its intensification of the formal experiments already seen in short
               story cycles like Sherwood Anderson’s Winesburg, Ohio
               (1919) or in Jean Toomer’s collage of poetry, prose, and drama in Cane (1923), to name just two of the most canonical
               examples. The architecture of Dos Passos’s narrative evokes the figure of the network
               as it circumscribes American history from 1900 up to the late 1920s. Thomas
               Ludington, the authoritative biographer of Dos Passos, explains that Dos Passos
               conceived of the trilogy as a 
                  series of reportages of the time
                in which he was 
                  
                     trying to get something a little more accurate than
                        fiction
                  
                  
               .
            The distinction of U.S.A.’s fragmentation lies in its
               experimental technique of employing four discrete modes for this historical
               narrative. As Denning notes, Dos Passos referred to the trilogy’s structure as a
                  four-way conveyor system comprised of some
               sixty-eight Newsreels, fifty-one Camera Eyes, twenty-seven biographical sketches, and
               fictional narratives centered on twelve anchoring character-threads . Denning argues convincingly that Dos Passos’s
               architectural narration was designed as 
                  a series of formal solutions to the problem of building a
                     novel that culminates in the magical unity of the title itself, U.S.A.
                  
                  
               . And indeed, each component of this architecture seems to perform a
               specialized task in the service of that narration, a design that Denning argues
               reflects an 
                  aesthetic Taylorism
                  
               . The Newsreels offer newspaper copy, advertisements, and popular song lyrics
               to narrate the history and zeitgeist of the period. The Camera Eye, which scholars
               often recognize as a stream-of-consciousness rendering of Dos Passos’s own life,
               narrates the lived experience of the period — if a lived experience constrained to
               the author’s biography. The biographical sketches outline a punctuated history via
               great-man-of-history portraits of Woodrow Wilson, Eugene Debs, Andrew Carnegie,
               Thorstein Veblen, and the Wright Brothers, to name but a few of the figures whom Dos
               Passos explores alongside their interventions. The fictional component narrates the
               developments of the period through a matrix of characters experiencing different
               segments of the historical spectrum.
            It bears noting that this four-way conveyor system was
               quite controversial among early reviews of the trilogy’s volumes. Even to his
               contemporary readers, already accustomed to the moderns’ revolt against
               verisimilitude, Dos Passos’s four-way conveyor presented a challenge. Upton
               Sinclair’s review of The 42nd Parallel for the New Masses, though perhaps not quite representative given
               his commitment to social realism, lashed out at Dos Passos’s three non-fictional
               modes. Sinclair called the Newsreels vaudeville
               material; he said that the insofar as the biographical sketches were
               relatively short we don’t mind them especially; and he
               lamented that the Camera Eye passages bear no strong relation to the
               character-threads . Espousing a common
               ambivalence toward the four-way conveyor system, Matthew
               Josephson’s Saturday Review piece on 1919 treated the non-fictional modes as white noise,
               characterizing them as 
                  a sort of vivid backdrop against which the characters pass in
                     procession
                  
               . And it is telling that the British publisher of The 42nd
                  Parallel wanted to eliminate altogether the Newsreels and Camera Eyes from
               their edition .
            Against these critiques we can contrast Malcolm Cowley’s New
                  Republic review of The Big Money, which
               addresses the complete trilogy’s reliance on technical
                  devices to make Dos Passos’s architecture of history cohere, and he treats
               each of the four narrative modes to show their unique contributions to the text . Cowley even revisited that review a year
               later to argue that the Camera Eye segments perform the function of maintaining
               interiority that prevents U.S.A. from being a mere 
                  collective novel
                  
               . Cowley’s persistent defense of Dos Passos’s non-fictional modes should
               indicate the extent to which the ambivalence of Josephson’s white-noise assessment
               prevailed among reviewers of the U.S.A. trilogy, which
               seems to indicate critics’ bafflement at what common purpose these separate conveyors share.
            What I find distinctive about this formal architecture is that it offers a networked
               vision of the United States and of narration itself. Dos Passos de-centers the
               character-threads by introducing that element third, behind the first volleys of
               Newsreels and the Camera Eye that inaugurate The 42nd
                  Parallel. With the plot-driven narration marginalized from its usual
               position of authority, U.S.A. proceeds to locate its narration in the interstices of
               the four nodes that compose its vision of the United States.
            The conveyors indeed cooperate as an assembly line to
               fill in the gaps left by the other nodes, and that analogy is perfectly appropriate
               for two reasons. First, each separate node unfolds in roughly chronological order, in
               the movement of a conveyor. For example, the Newsreels start with the dawn of the new
               century, cover the tumult of the war years, and move on to the first Florida land
               boom and other hallmarks of the Roaring 20s. And the other narrative nodes follow
               that trajectory, with the character-threads presenting minor exceptions in the
               movement between one dominant character and another that sometimes requires resetting
               history to get a character’s back-story. Second, the conveyors structure replicates Fordism’s strategy of subsegmentation. The
               general wisdom is that Fordism is characterized by linearity and centralized control.
               The former holds, borne out in the rigid edicts of management that coordinated the
               production of the entire workplace, but the notion that Fordist production was a
               strictly linear affair simply does not obtain. The Fordist paradigm operates on the
               division of labor, where separate tasks are performed by separate workers on separate
               assembly lines. So a worker on the factory floor would not experience the production
               model as a linear process that oversees each unit from nascent part to salable whole,
               but as a network wherein different components were manufactured separately and
               contemporaneously only to be assembled at the last moment. That paradigm — a division
               of labor — is precisely the model of Dos Passos’s architecture: a division of
               narrational labor that assigns four modalities of representation to four distinct
               segments of narrative that move along as autonomous, interdependent conveyor belts.
               That Fordist interdependence of distinct narrative tasks sets up a constellar mode of
               production. In other words, the structure of the trilogy is that of a network
               comprised of four anchoring nodes.
            We can see this networked narration on display in a sequence of each of the four
               modalities in 1919. The sequence addresses Armistice Day
               in each mode of narration. Joe Williams, whom we first met as he deserted the
               merchant marine in Buenos Aires, is in France when the news comes, and he enjoys the
               exuberant scene — 
                  Everybody was dancing in the kitchen and they poured the cook
                     so many drinks he passed out cold and they all sat there singing and drinking
                     champagne out of tumblers and cheering the allied flags that girls kept
                     carrying through
                  
                — partly with his trademark womanizing. Newsreel XXIX, which immediately
               follows the Joe Williams piece, conveys the objective history of the event with
               headlines reporting the actual signing of the Armistice as well as the riotous
               celebrations that accompanied it: The arrival of the news caused
                  the swamping of the city’s telephone lines; at the
                  Custom House the crowd sang The Star Spangled Banner under the direction of Byron
                  R. Newton the Collector of the Port; Oh say can you
                  see by the dawn’s early light; and so on . The thirty-sixth Camera Eye relates the experience of the event: 
                  Hay sojer tell me they’ve signed an armistice tell me the
                     wars over they’re takin us home latrine talk the hell you say
                  
               . The biographical sketch at the end of this sequence is a portrait of Woodrow
               Wilson, and while the Armistice itself gets only glancing treatment — 
                  Almost too soon the show was over
                  
                — the sketch neatly situates Wilson in the context of the empire building that
               followed the end of the war: alongside Clemenceau and Lloyd George, Wilson is one of
                  three old men shuffling the pack, / dealing out the
                  cards of imperial mapping .
            Still, the sequence of the Armistice Day accounts is but one of the most literal
               examples of the networked narration that structures U.S.A. The nodal formation of the four anchoring fragments does not
               always provide a concise examination of one punctual moment with such tight thematic
               clustering, oftentimes preferring a more diffuse, constellar narration of a
               wide-ranging development in the United States’ first decades of the new century.
            One of the more pronounced issues engaged across the breadth of the trilogy is the
               development of the public relations industry. The impact of public relations is
               demonstrated in the trajectory of the Newsreels across the trilogy. As Caren Irr
               shows, the arc of the Newsreels moves from news-related headlines to the want ads, promotions of dancing lessons, celebrations of new auto
                  parts and other advertisements that dominate The Big
                  Money
               . The Camera Eye follows this pattern, as brand
               recognition begins to enter the speaker’s subjectivity: 
                  walk the streets and walk the streets inquiring of Coca-Cola
                     signs Lucky Strike ads
                  
               . Curiously, Dos Passos’s biographical sketches do not feature a founder of the
               PR field — someone like Ivy Lee or Edward Bernays would not have been surprising —
               but some of the later sketches do bear the suggestion of PR’s influence. Henry Ford’s
               sketch, for example, opens with the glamorizing account by a featurewriter whose profile of the auto magnate is equal parts
               advertisement for Ford and for one of his automobile prototypes: 
                  The machine certainly went with a dreamlike smoothness. There
                     was none of the bumping common even to a streetcar
                  
               . Stabilizing those diffuse engagements with public relations in the
               non-fictional modes is an anchoring thematization of PR across the character-threads.
               The sketches of J. Ward Moorehouse, the father of PR in Dos Passos’s fictionalized
               America and one of many characters working in the field throughout U.S.A., are vital threads that establish the importance of
               PR in The 42nd Parallel. And while his featured profiles
               expire with the first volume, Moorehouse has cameos in the profiles of Joe Williams
               and Dick Savage in 1919 and of Charley Anderson and Dick
               Savage in The Big Money — and these are but a few of the
               many characters who figure prominently in the PR industry.
            In both cases, the punctual event of Armistice Day and the development of public
               relations, Dos Passos’s strategy is a formal circumscription. His vision of U.S.A. is a composite of these fragmentary perspectives
               performed by the four narrative modes. But it is the cooperation, not the severance,
               of those fragments that is telling here. The four modes of narration in U.S.A. are not merely perspectivism, as in Wallace Stevens’s
               famous 13 Ways of Looking at a Blackbird, nor are they
               interchangeable or divisible vantage points from which to view American history.
               Rather, they cooperate as a network to reflect the very networking of that history.
               For instead of a diaspora of fragments performing abject disconnection, the structure
               of U.S.A. is a nodal one: one’s reading of the Camera
               Eye in isolation imperils an understanding of Dos Passos’s attempt at formal
               totalization. The formal logic of U.S.A. transforms the
               modernist aesthetic of fragmentation into a constellation of nodes, a network.
            In a way, U.S.A.’s networked form has been obliquely
               observed in scholarly treatments of its likeness to montage, the buzzword that
               dominates the bulk of recent scholarship on the trilogy. I do not invoke
                  network as a substitution term for
                  montage — as if this were some kind of shell game of
               postmodernist and modernist lexicons; rather, each term illuminates the logic of the
               other. The montage analogy demonstrates some of the burgeoning recognition of Dos
               Passos’s networked dynamics, and it is no accident that scholars have traditionally
               recognized Dos Passos’s debt to film. As is routinely observed, Dos Passos’s
               Newsreels are reminiscent of the newsreels edited by Russian filmmaker Dziga Vertov
               in the Kino-Pravda series (1922-25), and in naming one
               of his narrative modes The Camera Eye, Dos Passos invokes Vertov’s
                  kino-eye, an avant-garde philosophy of montage performed in Man with a Movie Camera (1929). David Kadlec observes that
               by the mid-thirties Dos Passos’s debt to Vertov was an open secret and that Vertov
               was proud to be known for influencing Dos Passos . Kadlec notes that many critics establish Dos Passos’s debt to Vertov in his 1928
               tour of Moscow and Leningrad, when he attended some of Vertov’s screenings, which he
               preferred to 
                  the grander, state-backed productions of [Sergei] Eisenstien
                     and Vsevolod Pudovkin
                  
               .
            Montage remains a mainstay of U.S.A. criticism — so much
               so that many scholars seem to feel compelled to integrate it into their arguments or
               argue against it when addressing Dos Passos’s formal invention. Celia Tichi, for
               example, grapples with that tradition when arguing for the form’s function as a
               machine: 
                  The filmic montage is a figure that does not go far enough to
                     capture the full sense of Dos Passos’s innovation [….] Though Dos Passos
                     identified his fiction with film and cinema and called his own writing an
                     intrinsically satisfying craft, his omniscient fictional form comes from the
                     contemporary model of machine and structural technology
                  
               . Irr, writing about the collisions that underlie U.S.A.’s performance of social speed, also obliges the issue of montage,
               observing the many literal collisions in the narrative — of cars, airplanes, and so
               on — before noting the logic of collision at the formal level: Dos Passos 
                  constructs montages whose organizing principle is the
                     collision between these equally inadequate modes of writing
                  
               .
            The aesthetics of montage are a foundational scholarly force to be reckoned with, as
               Tichi, Irr and a host of other Dos Passos scholars can attest. Framing the trilogy in
               terms of montage provides a helpful visual analogy for the text and rightly asserts
               Dos Passos’s debt to film, but it does not fully engage the logic of U.S.A.’s form. Instead, what many readers understand as
                  U.S.A.’s appropriation of montage techniques would be
               better viewed within the frame of the network. In the montage experiments of modern
               film and even the photography and advertisements that experimented with the new
               technology of the half-tone press in the 1880s,See Christopher Phillips’s
                  introduction to Montage and Modern Life, 1919-1942
                     () for a more detailed account of the
                  lineage and evolution of montage in the visual arts. old meanings are
               overturned and new meanings are produced by different techniques — sequential
               revolutions, overlays, split images, mirrored images, and so on. The productive
               capacity of montage, according to traditional scholarship on this practice, lies in
               the collisions it creates, in the violent contrast of juxtaposed images. And this is
               the force of montage for Irr, who reads the four narrative modes as operating on an
               organizational principle of collision.
            A networked reading of montage, however, focuses not on the collisions, but on the
               collaborative moments the technique facilitates. Such collaboration is, after all,
               evoked in the Fordist metaphor of the four-way conveyor
                  system. The four modes of narration are distinct, to be sure, but they
               produce meaning in their collaborative — not colliding or disjunctural — narration of
               history, as in the networked narration of Armistice Day and other developments and
               events that fall under the trilogy’s scope. Accordingly, Dos Passos’s narrative
               system performs Fordist subsegmentation, producing meaning not by violent
               juxtaposition but by the cooperation of separate functions that are simultaneously
               isolated and integrated, nodal and networked. Denning argues that Dos Passos’s four-way conveyor system is an aesthetic Taylorism that may be as much a symptom as it is a critique of
               rationalized labor . But the analogy of Fordism
               better illuminates our understanding of the trilogy’s formal interplay: if we view
               this narrative architecture in terms of its emphasis on compartmentalized production
               instead of its reputation for demanding efficiency, then Fordist subsegmentation
               comes to the fore and we can understand how the four narrative modes cooperate.
            The Fordist element of U.S.A.’s formal network schemes
               bears further consideration, since it aligns the trilogy with an early mode of
               network theorization. As I argued earlier, Fordism emphasizes centralized management
               at the same time that its actual production strategy relies on networked
               simultaneity. So Dos Passos’s characterization of U.S.A.
               as a four-way conveyor system invokes Fordism’s
               important principle of modern network formulation. And while the networks of Fordism
               are rigid and hierarchical compared to the truly distributed networks of post-Fordist
               production strategies and economic systems, it is still important to register how
               Fordism prefigured a networked model of production in the simultaneity of its
               subsegmentation. That such a model also drives the formal structure of U.S.A. only reinforces that modern context in which the
               ideological and ideational force of the network was developing — a trend reflected in
               the Fordist networking of U.S.A. itself.
            
               U.S.A.’s narration has the multi-dimensional force of
               montage, but the logic of its productive capacity is fundamentally different from the
               theories and practices of montage that rely on collision. Disjunctural montage and
               networked montage both operate on a constellar model, but networked montage has the
               separate goal of totalization — a goal that is announced in the very title of Dos
               Passos’s trilogy. And this networked montage may be a uniquely American intervention.
               Christopher Phillips argues that, in contrast to the European and Russian experiments
               with montage, by the late 1930s in the United States, 
                  montage was more and more recognized not as a means to evoke
                     the flux and discontinuity of the modern world, but as a way to represent a
                     dominant social theme in late-Depression America: the idea of the unity in diversity of all classes and ethnic
                     groups
                  
               . Phillips responds to American trends in the visual arts, but Dos Passos’s
               interventions into montage follow the same path, emphasizing the networked
               interdependence of the separate narrative modes instead of their dispersal.
            Far from some anachronistic misapplication of a contemporary buzzword or catchphrase,
               a networked reading of U.S.A. helpfully demonstrates Dos
               Passos’s formal logic and allows us to recognize the points of connection between the
               trilogy’s four narrative modes. It is no longer sufficient to observe that Dos
               Passos’s representational strategy of the four-way conveyor
                  system fits neatly into one of the now-standard narratives for modernism —
               that the moderns’ revolt against verisimilitude was necessitated by rapid social
               changes that demanded radically new means of representation — or simply that it
               borrows montage techniques from avant-garde film. Instead, in light of the rise of
               network theory in the late 1900s, we must begin fitting U.S.A. into a narrative for the rise of the network as the dominant
               figure of a literary history and an intellectual history for the American twentieth
               century.
         

            
               U.S.A.: The United Six-Degrees of America
            Next to his radical formal innovation with the four-way conveyor
                  system, the interconnectivity of Dos Passos’s content may seem tame. Not
               only had the characterological, six-degrees-of-separation mode of networking already
               been explored by others, but Dos Passos himself had experimented with it in Manhattan Transfer, his sprawling ode to New York City
               published in 1925. Ludington reminds us that in many ways, the fictional element of
                  U.S.A.’s reportages of the
                  time remained at the core of Dos Passos’s vision: the trilogy would be 
                  not a novel, but a series covering a lengthy period, in which characters appeared and reappeared
                  
                  
               . Indeed, if one node of the narrative structure weighed just a bit more than
               others for Dos Passos, it would be the character threads: Despite incorporating nonfiction, his ultimate aim was
                     always to produce fiction, and he thought himself sort of on the edge between them, moving from one field to the other very
                     rapidly. The series of reportages was to be a
                     contemporary commentary on history’s changes, always as seen by some
                     individual’s ears, felt by some individual’s nerves and tissues
               
               .
            And so architectural networking of the form is matched in the networking of the
               fictional content, with individual characters refracting the developments of Dos
               Passos’s reportages. In this respect, the fictional
               characters serve as secondary nodes under the primary nodal construction of U.S.A.’s form, providing a comfortable fictional body
               through which the historical and social developments resonate. In The 42nd Parallel, J. Ward Moorehouse is the figural
               manifestation of the developments in public relations, as we saw above, and several
               others like G.H. Barrow and Dick Savage carry that banner throughout the remainder of
               the trilogy. Joe Williams figures the tumultuous war years in 1919, and Ben Compton does the same for labor movements during that
               period. Charley Anderson and Margo Dowling figure the roar of the debt-fueled Roaring Twenties throughout The Big Money. And the other key character-threads generally perform the
               same function, reinforcing the reportages’ historical commentary with a handy
               synechdochal figuration of the major developments in American history. And so the
               individual characters act as another system of nodes that support the four-way
               conveyor system’s networked narration of American history.
            It is also notable that within the fictional narrative mode, the individual
               characters are nodally connected to each other — not just to the broader networking
               schemes of U.S.A.’s formal approach to narration. Dos
               Passos’s goal of a trilogy traversing a wide span of time in
                  which characters appeared and reappeared means that U.S.A. takes a narrative structure that is increasingly common in
               contemporary narrative production: the six-degrees theorem. Under the totalizing
               network of vast schemes of American history performed by the four-way conveyor system lies this second network of crisscrossing
               characters.
            But for many scholars these characters’ relationships remain a jumble of
               disconnection. Michael Denning, for example, writes that the organizing principle of
               the fictional narration is disaggregation — a critique that was common among the
               trilogy’s contemporary reviewers: 
                  Perhaps the most striking thing and unsettling aspect of
                        U.S.A. is the lack of any coherent connection
                     between the characters: no family or set of families constitutes the world of
                     the novel; no town, no neighborhood, or city serves as a knowable community; no
                     industry of business, no university or film colony unites public and private
                     lives; and no plot, murder, or inheritance links the separate
                     destinies.
                  
                And for that reason, Denning concludes that the fundamental social unit of
                  U.S.A. is a cocktail party, a function that, he
               notes, marks the climax of each of the three volumes. The cocktail party, he writes, 
                  stands as a substitute for narratives of home and family, an
                     alternative to the domestic space that usually organizes the novel [….] In
                        U.S.A., the party is not only a social
                     structure and a symbolic space, it is a narrative kernel, one of the basic
                     building blocks of the novel
                  
               .
            Denning’s attempt to stabilize this disaggregation in the locus of the cocktail party
               is admirable, given the profile of literal cocktail parties in the culmination of
               each volume and in the aura of socialite Eveline Hutchins, and given the figurative
               cocktail party of ill assorted people — to use one of
               Hutchins’s phrases — who have but little in common throughout the trilogy . And it is a reading to which I am
               sympathetic, as it serviceably addresses the lack of organic connections throughout
               the trilogy. But Denning’s reading does not go far enough in explaining the logic of
               the characters’ connections. To impose such a substitute for
                  narratives of home and family to organize the fictional characters of
                  U.S.A. is a false projection of a traditionally
               ordered narrative. Instead, making sense of that disaggregation on its own terms is
               precisely the demand placed on readers by this narrative.
            Denning’s discomfort with the erosion of traditional mechanisms of social
               organization — family, community, work, etc. — speaks to the very dispersal that Dos
               Passos tries to capture, and simultaneously to balance with the formal ligatures of
               the characters’ interconnections. It is, in other words, a marker of one side of the
               cultural logic of modernism: an intense concern over entropic disaggregation that
               many moderns feared to be threatening the coherence of nation, community, and
               culture. To see the networked mediation of these dialectical polarities — fragment
               and totality, dispersal and unity — let us consider the case of one of the trilogy’s
               most colorful characters, Doc Bingham. Never does Bingham enjoy the spotlight of a
               chapter titled after his name; instead, we only see him through the character-threads
                  Mac in The 42nd Parallel
               and Richard Ellsworth Savage in The
                  Big Money. His appearance alongside Fenian Mac
               McCreary is brief, but memorable. Mac answers a want-ad listed for The Truthseeker
               Literary Distributing Co., Inc. by Emmanuel R. Bingham, D.D. They travel the
               countryside, posing as purveyors of moral pamphlets but are quick to advertise other,
               less pious wares: Bingham stocks such scandalous tracts as The
                  Queen of the White Slaves and tells one mark, 
                  We have a number of very interesting books stating the facts
                     of life frankly and freely, describing the deplorable licentiousness of life in
                     the big cities, ranging from a dollar to five dollars. The Complete Sexology of
                     Dr. Burnside, is six fifty
                  
               . The con is up, however, when Bingham is caught in bed with a patron’s wife
               and abandons Mac to fend for himself. He does not resurface until deep into The Big Money, when Dick Savage is assigned to handle a
               public relations account for Bingham, now going by E.R. Bingham,
               whose latest scam involves alternative medication and diets — regimes we might label
                  new age today. Again, the appearance is fleeting. Bingham,
               the advocate of clean living, convinces Savage to escort him around some of the
               city’s seedy sex districts and eventually grants him the account. His only subsequent
               appearance in the text is indirect, as Savage and the Moorehouse PR firm lobby food
               legislation on his behalf and arrange favorable publicity on radio and newsreels —
               though not, I should clarify, the Newsreels of the complementary narrative mode.
            In many ways, Bingham’s reemergence is completely frivolous — the kind of detail
               common in six-degrees narratives that, for some, smacks of contrivance. And it is
               true: Bingham is unnecessary to demonstrate Savage’s loyalty to the Moorehouse firm
               and the degradation to which he falls, which one might assume are Dos Passos’s
               primary goals in dragging Savage through strip clubs and Bingham’s incessant
               claptrap. But if the frequency of such tangential crisscrossing is any indication,
               the network of relationships — Mac to Bingham to Savage to Moorehouse to Charley
               Anderson, and so on — is the important discovery that Dos Passos wants to reinforce
               here. And, as I suggested earlier, that very networking is the basic unit of social
               organization within the fictional mode of narration, and its replacement of narratives of home and family that traditionally organize
               the novel makes for an important reconception of the nation — one that demonstrates
               the network’s foothold in literary production and intellectual history in the modern
               period as it mediates the impulses toward outright social disintegration and the
               traditional ligatures of family, place, and work.
            A major aspect of that networked conceptualization is the contingency that runs
               throughout the fictional narrative mode. The appearances and reappearances, the
               meetings and departures — these nodal connections tend to take place by chance.
               Besides Dick Savage’s connection to Bingham, one might study the contingent crossings
               of G.H. Barrow with Mac McCreary, stenographer Janey Williams,
               Dick Savage, the wandering Anne Elizabeth Daughter Trent, labor
               advocate Mary French, activist Ben Compton, and aspiring actress Margo Dowling — an
               improbably wide and inclusive social circle to travel in. Or, to belabor the point
               with one particularly rich case with a more concrete locus, at the last of Eveline
               Hutchins’s cocktail parties — indeed, the party that concludes The Big Money — Mary French briefly glimpses Margo Dowling. French’s
               profile thus far has centered on her social activism through Hull House and her
               advocacy for Sacco and Vanzetti, and Dowling has been something of a foil character,
               self-involved and materialistic in her fervent pursuit of stardom. The connection is
               a fleeting one: 
                  Mary saw a small woman with blue eyelids and features regular
                     as those of a porcelain doll under a mass of paleblond hair turn for a second
                     to smile at somebody before she went out through the sliding doors
                  
               .
            The very lack of intimacy in this last connection gets to the heart of what many
               criticize as disorganization, disaggregation, or atomization in the fictional
               narrative mode. Mary and Margo are not introduced, they do not speak, and they do not
               even enjoy mutual recognition since Margo would not identify a lowly activist by
               sight. In fact, the only thing they have in common is Eveline Hutchins, their
               mediating link. And this dearth of intimacy gets to the issue of knowability, the
               lack of which Denning finds so troubling. It is true: whatever connections there are
               between these characters, there is rarely enough to constitute a knowable community.
               Even in the case of family, most characters carry a high degree of estrangement: Joe
               Williams, Dick Savage, Daughter Trent, Ben Compton, Charley
               Anderson, Margo Dowling, Mary French — nearly all of the major characters are deeply
               alienated from their families in some way or another. And in the absence of any
               knowable community to assemble these characters, one might not be completely mistaken
               to conclude that contingency is the organizing principle of the social in the
               fictional narration.
            It is a mistake, however, to read the shortages of intimacy and knowability as
               constituting a narrative of dispersal. Instead, the fictional mode of U.S.A. insists on the interconnectivity of its networked
               characters, and while those relationships may lack profundity, the abundance of such
               connective chains demonstrates Dos Passos’s totalizing impulse. As with the
               fragmented narration of U.S.A.’s form, the characters in
               the fictional mode of narration are best viewed not simply as indications of the
               fragmentation of the social, but in terms of the network that connects such disparate
               individuals.
            This polarity of dispersal and totality might be illuminated by Jean-Paul Sartre’s
               work on seriality and the practico-inert in his Critique of
                  Dialectical Reason
               . In an essay from 1947, Sartre hailed Dos Passos as
                  the greatest writer of our time, but his concern in
               the Critique is not a literary one . Rather, his goal is to understand the development
               of group formations. Among his three modes of group formation — seriality, fusion,
               and institution — the series most readily relates to the problems readers might raise
               in Dos Passos’s character-threads. Sartre investigates the series with an anecdote of
               a queue at a bus stop: the series is a plurality of
                  isolations wherein no individual has a relation to the other beyond the
               common need of transportation, wherein each individual in the series is completely
               interchangeable with any other . There are serial behaviour, he continues, 
                  serial feelings, and serial thoughts; in other words, a
                        series is a mode of being for individuals both in relation to one another
                        and in relation to their common being and this mode of being
                     transforms all their structures
                  
               . Thus, the series certainly expresses the dispersal felt by Dos Passos’s
               characters: they are isolated from each other in almost every meaningful way; as
               types to represent various developments — labor advocacy during the teens and 20s,
               the birth of public relations, etc. — they are often interchangeable with each other.
               And most importantly, they conceive of themselves as a series — as evident in the
               estrangement of families and the superficiality of relationships between the major
               titular character-threads like Mary French and Margo Dowling.
            The reader, however, does not share that experience of dispersal, and it is from her
               vantage point that network dynamics become visible. For Sartre, the series can never
               approach totality precisely because of its atomizing limitations: 
                  The totality of the gathering is only the passive action of a
                     practico-inert object on a dispersal. The limitation of the gathering to these
                     particular individuals is only an accidental negation
                  
               . He describes practico-inert as matter that is 
                  being-outside-in-the-thing
                  
                — which is to say, an exteriorized object or practice that maintains the group
               from withoutSartre is notoriously hesitant to provide rigid definitions for his
                  neologisms throughout the Critique. Fredric Jameson’s
                     Marxism and Form (1971) offers a helpful statement
                  to fill the void: the practico-inert is 
                     matter which has been invested with human energy and which
                        henceforth takes the place of functions like human action
                     
                  .. In the case of the queue at the bus stop, that exteriorized matter
               is the bus itself, the transportation system, the city, and so on. There are many
               forms of the practico-inert in the content of U.S.A. —
               Moorehouse’s public relations industry, Charley Anderson’s work for the airline
               industry, and so on. To the extent that the practico-inert content constitutes a
               material axis of connection, the characters are networked by these material,
               exteriorized mediations. But these material mediations do nothing to overcome the
               subjectivity of seriality that determines how the characters conceive of each other
               in disconnection. The practico-inert that successfully resolves the dispersal and
               disaggregation of these characters is Dos Passos’s totalizing vision. Or, in other
               words, the practico-inert that networks U.S.A.’s
               characters is form itself.
            None of this is to resolve these problematics with a critical cliché — form is
               content! — but recognizing the form’s stabilization of these diasporic figures into a
               network is key to understanding the connective logic that prevails in U.S.A. and that is the defining strategy of Dos Passos’s
               magnum opus. To say that these characters do not realize their interconnection is not
               to say that they are, in fact, disconnected. The impact of seriality on the
               subjectivity of Dos Passos’s characters is undeniable, but it is also clear that Dos
               Passos strives to show their networked interrelations to the reader. This networked
               reading not only resolves the misgivings one might have concerning the disaggregation
               of Dos Passos’s character-threads, but it also sets Dos Passos as a pioneer in
               conceptualizing the network as the twentieth century’s defining organization for the
               social. Above all, a networked reading of U.S.A. enables
               us to perceive the interconnections that do take place in the absence of ligatures
               such as place or family.
            It would be unsound to label these relationships intimate or knowable, but it would
               be equally unjustified to claim that Dos Passos has nothing but ill assorted people populating his fictional scene. Instead, recognizing
               the networking of these characters enables readers of U.S.A. to grasp the social organization theorized by Dos Passos, an
               organizational scheme that would only become familiar toward the end of the
               century.
         

            
               U.S.A. and the Intellectual History of the
               Network
            Perhaps with an explanation of U.S.A.’s networked form
               and its innovations in characterological connectivity in mind we can contextualize
               some of the puzzlement expressed by Dos Passos’s contemporaries in their reviews of
               the trilogy and its volumes: the formal experimentation of U.S.A. anticipates some network dynamics that did not become a
               commonplace until later in the century. But even in the moment of modernism, the
               network was becoming a powerful ideational and organizational figure. And one might
               pause to think about how U.S.A. participates in this
               general shift toward network thinking that took place even in advance of the digital
               revolution. Randolph Bourne’s 1916 essay Trans-National
                  America, for example, eschewed the melting-pot metaphor in favor of a
                  clusters theory of the nation that today we would articulate
               in the vocabulary of the network. And during the first decades of the century,
               intensifying through the 1920s, the modern corporation — today a major locus of
               network ideology and practice — began to make common a practice of diversification
               that slowly reorganized the corporation as a decentralized, multidivisional,
               networked body. Moreover, one can read Fordism as an early experiment in networked
               production schemes, as I argued above.
            In short, during the modern period the United States was setting out on a long path
               that would result in the network’s figural ascendancy by the closing decades of the
               century. And, to belabor the point, this development of network thinking took place
               independently of the advances in digital technologies that are commonly assumed to
               have sparked the field of network theory. Alongside formative developments like the
               establishment of the corporation and the fracturing of the melting pot, Dos Passos’s
               contributions to network thinking may seem rather insignificant. But I want to argue
               that U.S.A. is nonetheless an important marker of the
               intellectual history of the network’s figural grip on the U.S. over the last century.
               If we read U.S.A. — or other modern texts like Trans-National America, for that matter — as antecedents to
               contemporary deployments of the network, we can begin to see not only the long
               lineage of the importance of the network in American intellectual history, but also
               some alternatives to today’s commonly accepted conventions of network theory, and
               especially the genre of the network narrative.
            If we take literary representation as one marker of intellectual history, we can see
               in the development of the network narrative genre that commitment to network thinking
               dates back to the moderns. Registering the genre in modernism not only stretches the
               literary history of that genre, but also expands the conventions generally ascribed
               to the genre. Where Bordwell limits the genre to films predicated on the six-degrees
               theorem and Ciccoricco confines it to hyperlinked environments, a reading of U.S.A. as a network narrative opens the genre to new — or
               rather, old — methods of network narration that rely more on formal fragmentation and
               totalization. A focus on network narratives that operate on the connective ligatures
               of form itself offers a radical rewriting of scholarship on the genre that could
               allow us to read networked narration in new media — for example, in the avant-garde
               experiments in collage and montage techniques that were major interventions in modern
               arts, and that constructed visual narrative across space according to the logic of
               cooperative nodal configurations.
            Finally, I want to gesture toward a broader hypothesis about intellectual history and
               the network — one that would require a wider range of works to substantiate, but one
               that we can see emerging from this case study of U.S.A.
               and perhaps from this collection of essays as a unit. Often it is assumed that the
               widespread use of the network as a figural dominant across the humanities and even
               across the business world is somehow a derivative of the digital revolution. The
               logic here is that the network became a familiar model for these other fields because
               of its role in information and communications technologies, and that it was
               extrapolated from its digital context for use as a figural and ideational model in
               literary representation, in humanities scholarship, or in theoretical formulations.
               What I want to suggest is a different source of origin in that relationship: it is
               not so much that the digital revolution provided a new figure that these other fields
               could appropriate for new scholarly and literary explorations, but that it gave
               articulation to networked dynamics that had already been present there — indeed,
               present since the modern period. In other words, networks were constitutive elements
               of American intellectual production decades before the digital revolution, and while
               the digital revolution brought helpful articulation to the intellectual use of
               networked dynamics, it only did so well after it was already an established feature
               of the American intellectual landscape. Otherwise, we could not look back on U.S.A. or other modern texts and see so easily the networked
               dynamics they use to inform their texts. Reading U.S.A.
               as a network narrative is not the work of anachronistically projecting contemporary
               digital fixations backwards, then, but of seeing how a modern text can prefigure the
               way we talk about networks today.
         
