Title:  Winesburg, Ohio: A Modernist Kluge
Volume:  005
Issue:  2
Date:  17 May 2011
Abstract:  
            This article argues that Sherwood Anderson’s Winesburg,
          Ohio, while it cannot be considered a text straightforwardly concerned with
          technology, offers a modernist version of the story cycle that anticipates the delocalized
          and highly structured interconnections facilitated by the network. Unlike today’s
          seamlessly embedded networks, however, the prototypical form depicted in Winesburg, Ohio functions as a kluge, 
                  an ill-assorted collection of poorly-matching parts, forming a
              distressing whole
                  
               . Anderson’s kluge augurs network technology and therefore suggests that the form
          loomed large in modernists’ mind. However, Winesburg, Ohio
          illustrates the network’s propensity to foster users’ inner alienation while enabling
          their unprecedented connection and thereby warns against the antagonistic quality of the
          network’s rhizomatic structure.
         
Full Body Text: 

            
            
               
                  The network is the great Outside that always surrounds and envelops
              me. But it is also the Inside: its alien circuitry is what I find when I look deeply
              within myself. The network is impersonal, universal, without a center, but it is also
              perturbingly intimate, uncannily close at hand.
                  Steven Shaviro, Connected
                  
               
            
         

            Winesburg, Ohio: A Modernist Kluge
            It is now a matter of fact that the nonlinear, nonhierarchical, and delocalized
          functioning of the network has transformed the ways that many individuals define
          themselves, establish themselves in relationships, situate themselves in and apart from
          communities, and accumulate knowledge about what can be known in and about the world.
          While today’s most pervasive network — the Internet — facilitates posthumanist
          demonstrations of the power of ameliorative, (according to theorists Barry Wellman and
          William J. Mitchell), connectivity, the Internet and the virtual identities and
          communities it fosters also facilitate far more complex and ambivalent
          connections.Bruno Latour, Donna Haraway, and N. Katherine Hayles have usefully named and explored posthumanist theory. Perhaps unsurprisingly, pundits and journalists
          have been largely responsible for warning against the network’s potentially negative and
          even harmful effects. While members of the media increasingly focus on the Internet’s
          detrimental impact and point to social networking platforms for evidence of the shallow
          and ultimately false promise of community that networks extend to users, Twitter and
          Facebook are only the most recent manifestations of the network’s long tradition of
          fostering users’ inner alienation while enabling their unprecedented connection.
            Rather than proceeding in media res and looking to the Internet to
          understand networks and to comprehend the dynamics of network culture, I take my cue from
          N. Katherine Hayles and look to literature. Apparently antithetical to the culture of the
          blurb, literature reveals 
                  the complex cultural, social, and representation issues tied up
              with conceptual shifts and technological innovations
                  
               . Its representational capabilities stem in part from its own status as an evolving
          technology, a point explicitly demonstrated by the continued publication of electronic
          texts and hypertexts and implicitly demonstrated by William Powers in his recent
          bestseller, Hamlet’s Blackberry. Literary forms illustrate
          technology’s varied promises to and pitfalls for individuals and the communities to which
          they do and do not belong, but so too does literary content. In science fiction, for
          example, technology often leads to the cognitive estrangement that
          results in the fragmentation of individuals and the disintegration of their tenuous
          relationships to one another . Similarly, systems novels generally
          display technology’s propensity to abet its own out-of control proliferation . Ultimately,
          literature’s dependence on and representations of technology and technology’s effects on
          its users make it an ideal medium through which to investigate what network theorists
          Shaviro and Alexander Galloway and Eugene Thacker describe as the antagonistic quality of
          the network’s rhizomatic structure.
            While it cannot be considered a work of science fiction, a systems novel, or even a text
          straightforwardly concerned with technology, Sherwood Anderson’s modernist pastoral Winesburg, Ohio uses the story cycle form to offer an illustration
          of the ambivalent future technology promises. Although seldom considered a contribution to
          any modern comprehension of electronically inflected networks, the text, published in
          1919, features a town poised at a technological divide: its inhabitants look back to their
          agrarian past in which relationships were dependent on proximity and information was
          disseminated by storytelling, but they also look to the specter of the future where
          relationships are more arbitrary and excessive information is routed along the information
          superhighway. The town and townspeople, denied the connections of the past but unable to
          convene as a community of the future, form instead the tenuous connections based on the
          delocalized organization of a nascent network. Unlike today’s seamlessly embedded
          networks, however, the network in Winesburg, Ohio serves as a
          stopgap measure; it arises from out of an explicitly liminal space and can only awkwardly
          connect the text’s grotesque forms and deformed bodies. Rather than hailing what will
          serve as the network’s 21st-century iteration, Winesburg,
            Ohio warns against the network, suggesting that while it may offer the only
          means by which a community can be connected, that community is not only monstrous and
          deformed, but functions as a trap.
            Accordingly, although Galloway and Thacker claim that the
            the idea of connectivity […] so highly privileged today
           has 
                  only recently attained any level of authority as a dominant diagram
              for mass social organization and control
                  
               , Winesburg, Ohio suggests that the network loomed
          large in modernists’ imaginations. Because the model of community that traverses the
          technological breach in Winesburg, Ohio is characterized by
          its awkwardness and lack of refinement, however, the term network may
          be a misleading descriptor. A network cannot help but assume the craftsmanship necessary
          to producing a work of net, and in Anderson’s work, manual
          craftsmanship is relegated to that pre-technological past that Winesburg and its denizens
          no longer inhabit. Accordingly, that community, which exists in the space between the
          past’s emphasis on manual craftsmanship and the future’s emphasis on communicative
          technology, depicts an incipient, not yet fully formed network that might be better termed
          a kluge, an awkward but effective makeshift device that precedes
          technical progression. 
            Although Gary Marcus, in Kluge: the Haphazard Evolution of the Human
            Mind, has recently revived the concept of the kluge as a helpful metaphor for
          the 
                  inelegant — but surprisingly effective
                  
                solutions to the problems constantly encountered by the human mind, the kluge’s
          contemporary meaning is rooted in early computer jargon. J.W. Granholm's parodic guide for
          computer hardware men in the 1962 publication of Datamation popularized the term kluge (or
          kludge) as a word that stands ready...220 VAC
            source. 
               One of the most beloved words in design
          terminology, a kluge is an inelegant bricolage, a transitional tool comprised of
          an ill-assorted collection of poorly-matching parts.  It
          works, but its unnatural shape and aberrant arrangements form a
          distressing whole that constantly calls attention to its awkward construction
          and its unlikely usefulness, and likely temporary usefulness .
            Because kluges — effective and progressive but distressing and ugly — belong to the
          lexicon and job requirement of computer hardware men, they underscore the early and
          anticipatory efforts towards the interconnection and delocalization that characterize
          information systems and models of interconnection and organization. Kluges are especially
          relevant to network technology: indeed, in 
                  the lashing together of whole modules of equipment […] the
              opportunity for applied kludgemanship presents itself to the hilt
                  
               . In part because 
                  the lashing together of whole modules of equipment
                  
                aptly describes Anderson’s take on the story cycle form, the kluge provides an
          important emblem for Winesburg, Ohio. The term calls
          attention to the transitional and intermediary nature of the vision of community imagined
          in Anderson’s text, but it also supplies a technologically relevant context for
          understanding why the progression towards the networked future can be considered
          monstrous.
            Published before kludge or even network became
          a crucial part of computer glossaries, Winesburg, Ohio was
          nonetheless considered by many of its early readers to be a distressing collection of
          interconnected but ill-assorted parts. Its modernist version of the short story cycle
          garnered unfavorable reviews claiming that it was disjointed, that it violated the
          pastoral it appeared to represent, and that it described too vividly the immoral lives of
          America’s provincials. Heywood Broun of the New York Tribune,
          for example, argued that Anderson’s work was marred by his apparent obsession with
          neurotics, and an anonymous reviewer for the New York World
          hoped that Anderson 
                  would one day learn to censor his unnecessarily ugly
              stories
                  
               . Despite such pans, positive reviews welcomed the text as innovative. According to
          these critics, Anderson’s text ushered in a new era for the short story via the new, or
          newly recycled, form of interrelated stories. Writing for The New
            Republic, M.A. called Winesburg, Ohio a 
                  challenge to the snappy short story form, with its planned
              proportions of flippant philosophy, epigrammatic conversation and sex danger
                  
               ,Probably penned by Maxwell Anderson. and H.L Mencken claimed that the
          work offered 
            a new order of short story, something 
                  
                     The
                Spoon River Anthology aimed at, and missed by half a mile
                  
               
          .
            According to its supportive readers, the ill-assorted parts of Winesburg, Ohio were particularly appropriate to narrating modernity’s
          influence on America’s post-industrial small towns. These readers implicitly recognized
          the discontinuity that characterized the twentieth-century’s bifurcated landscape between
          rural and urban America and understood that the story cycle, once a tool used to unify
          disparate poems or tales, could also be used to underscore difference. The story cycle,
          unlike traditional novels, lashes together disconnected and often discordant stories to
          capture what Llewellyn Jones describes in reference to Anderson’s work the 
                  significant episode[s]
                  
                that characterize twentieth-century rural America. Indeed, consequent to Jones’s
          description and the widespread influence of Winesburg, Ohio,
          the short story cycle came to be accepted as an appropriate means by which to chronicle
          the episodic and seemingly increasingly discontinuous lives of small-town America.
            Although Anderson’s text’s contribution to the story cycle’s modernist resurgence can be
          gauged in part by the story cycles that followed in its wake,Jean Toomer’s Cane,
            Ernest Hemingway’s In Our Time, William Faulkner’s The Unvanquished, among many others. the text’s mixed
          reviews and its readers’ reactions to the grotesque figures at the
          center of its stories have made the text’s lasting significance (and most all of Sherwood
          Anderson’s other works) a matter of debate.Indeed, as early as 1926 Ernest Hemingway
            parodied Anderson’s oeuvre to dispel critical comparisons to his own craft, and forty
            years later, Susan Sontag called Winesburg, Ohio’s melodrama 
                     bad to the point of being laughable
                     
                  . Today, however, critics such as Robert Dunne, citing the text’s modernist
          revision of a traditional form, seek to redeem Anderson’s work from its increasingly 
                  minor […] place within the American canon
                  
               . Referencing Robert Spiller’s Literary History of the United
            States, Dunne claims that Winesburg, Ohio deserves deeper and more complex
          contemporary interpretations because Anderson 
                  ‘liberat[ed] the American short story from a petrifying
              technique’
                  
               .
        
            Contemporary interest in the text’s emancipatory version of the story cycle, although
          calling for renewed attention to Anderson’s text, overlooks its kinship to a kluge. While
          the story cycle form is rooted in ancient storytelling tradition and emphasizes unity
          achieved through 
                  structure, movement, and thematic development
                  
               , Winesburg, Ohio emphasizes instead the labor by which
          such unity is forged . Accordingly, because Winesburg,
          irrelevant to the 
                  roaring, word-ridden cities
                  
                after the 
                  revolution [of] industrialism
                  
               , can no longer function as a unifying force, a narrator and his young counterpart,
          George Willard, bear the sole responsibility of assembling Winesburg’s grotesques,
          alienated from themselves and isolated from each other, into a connected and temporarily
          cohesive community.According to Love, the book best represents the 
                     Andersonian dilemma over the actuality of roaring, word-ridden
                cities versus the dream of pastoral stillness
                     
                  . The narrator and Willard’s work to narrate and therefore connect the
          grotesques’ heterogeneous stories results in a community characterized not by continuity
          but by fragmentariness, not by cohesion but by disparity.In Magic and Memory in the Story Cycle, Karen Costellucci Cox describes the
            story cycle’s unity as enforced by a reader who must navigate the story cycle’s
            progressing 
                     erratically and nondirectionally, looping forward and
              backward, often omitting causal links between physical and psychological
              events 
                     
                  .
            
            
               Winesburg, Ohio provides a model of affiliating disconnect individuals who, in an increasingly urban, information-oriented environment, are no longer linked by meaningfully sharing a geographic space or by participating in shared labor with one another. The text therefore merits the contemporary
          critical attention for which Dunne calls, but such attention should focus on the ways in
          which the text’s modernist version of the story cycle anticipates the delocalized and
          therefore highly structured interconnections facilitated by a network. In situating
          Winesburg as less a meaningful geographic space and more a potential hub able to connect
          isolated nodes, the text envisions the social group that can be made to materialize after
          more traditional social groups, such as those formed through shared stakes in a common
          livelihood or in the collective construction of tangible histories, are no longer
          possible.
            Networks often assume positive forms. For example, for Manual Castells, who obliquely
          follows Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari's identification of the network's rhizomatic,
          non-centralized, and non-territorialized function, networks and information systems
          promote the 
                  search for new connectedness around shared, reconstructed
              identity
                  
               . However, Winesburg, Ohio suggests networks are more ambivalent.  Notwithstanding the narrator and Willard's facilitative roles, the characters designated as grotesque in Notwithstanding the narrator and Willard’s facilitative roles, the
          characters designated as grotesque in Winesburg, Ohio search
          for connectedness but are not able to overcome their marginalization and isolation. These
          characters, interpolated into a new system of organization but unable to progress or
          develop there, are barred from the liberation rhetoric of distributed
            networks and thereby suggest that incorporeal connections and reconstructed
          identities offer instead superficial and fragmentary cohesion . Although they cannot help but signify an underlying unity, the grotesques
          are connected by their condition: the nodes of Winesburg’s network — what constitutes its
          vision of future community — underscore the etymological root of nodus that includes
            tumor or swelling among its meanings. Distinguished by
            distortion, unnatural combinations (much like
          the kluge to which they refer), and excess, the grotesques suggest that in the modernist
          iteration of the network, infection is endemic to the network itself .Consider Galloway and Thacker’s word choice when they argue that
              the concept of the network has infected broad swaths of
              contemporary life 
                  
               
            
            While the grotesques personify the unnatural combinations that characterize the text’s
          modernist interpretation of the story cycle, their own stories are also important.
          Introduced by the narrator in the prologue, The Book of the
            Grotesque, the grotesque figures appeared first to an old writer in a 
                  dream that was not a dream
                  
               . The vision, which was prompted by the old writer’s conversation with an old
          carpenter who had attempted to fix the writer’s bed, inspired the writer to write a book
          called The Book of the Grotesque. The narrator claims that
          the book was never published, but that he
            saw it once, and its
            simple statement 
           made an
            indelible impression on his mind . According to its aphoristic
          statement, mankind makes truths, but when men and women take up these truths, take them
          for the Truth, and try to live their lives by them, the truths become false and the men
          and women become grotesques.
            In the stories that follow The Book of the Grotesque, the
          grotesques that appeared to the old writer emerge as Winesburg’s denizens. Although they
          are diseased, the grotesques are 
                  not,
                  
                the narrator writes in The Book of the Grotesque,
               all horrible
               . In his 1960 introduction to Anderson’s text,
          Malcolm Cowley argues that the deformation suffered by the grotesques proceeds from a
          quintessentially modern condition: alienated and isolated by the forces of
          post-industrialism, the grotesques cultivate obsessions they mistake for truth and grow
          increasingly deformed by their inability to 
                  express themselves
                  
                or 
                  truly communicate with others
                  
               . Dependent on constructed connections, their communicative disability indicates why
          they need the narrator and Willard to relate (and thereby make meaningful) what Jones
          calls the significant episodes and what David Bordwell calls the 
                  attenuated links
                  
                that characterize every network narrative .
            According to Cowley’s reading of Anderson’s text, social groups formed by individuals’
          tenuous links to a mutual alienation or a common claim to a defunct geographic space have
          little to say that can be meaningfully said. While the modernist iteration of the
          network’s delocalized and hyperlinked form may facilitate connectivity and ensure
          unprecedented access to information, that connectivity cannot overcome 
                  the innocence and horror of modernity [and the] subsequent
              alienation of the self and others
                  
               . Winesburg, Ohio anticipates a networked future made
          possible by information’s rising value (and the correspondent falling value of material,
          mechanical work), but the kluge the text actually constructs suggests that industry,
          technology, and information do not enable the (implicitly more valuable) kind of communication
          exchanged during the shared, hands-on labor of more traditional communities.
            Before returning to The Book of the Grotesque, it is worth
          pointing out that seventeen years after the publication of Anderson’s text, the same
          information saturation and degradation of meaningful communication functions as the
          subject of Walter Benjamin’s essay The Storyteller. In his
          work, Benjamin describes the process by which “secular productive forces of history”
          outstripped communities that were once defined and held together by the communicable
          experiences of storytellers and the symbiotic relationship between storytellers and
          craftsmen. According to Benjamin, the forces of history contributed to the proliferation
          of information, and because information
            does not survive the moment in which it was new, it functions as an insidious
            form of communication that 
            confronts traditional communities 
                  in a more menacing way
                  
               .
            
               Winesburg, Ohio, which separates the past’s meaningful
          communication from the future’s excessive information, anticipates and illustrates
          Benjamin’s analysis. The narrator and Willard, by mediating the grotesques’ modern
          condition, help to provide this illustration. Together, they cast a Janus face over the
          text’s divide: the narrator looks longingly back to a time before the 
                  coming of industrialism
                  
               , while Willard looks optimistically forward . Illustrating Benjamin’s trajectory, the narrator’s voice begins Winesburg, Ohio. Because, however, he — like the grotesques — cannot
          accommodate the information age he describes, he cedes his storytelling role to Willard.
          As Winesburg’s young journalist, Willard represents the future. Because he looks forward
          to the realization of his dream of becoming an urban reporter, it is the story of his
          departure from Winesburg that ends Anderson’s text.
            Although the entirety of Winesburg, Ohio narrates the shift
          from the traditional communication constituted by storytelling to the modern communication
          constituted by informationalism, in The Book of the Grotesque
          that shift is most conspicuous. There, the typological relationship (or
            mythopoetic, in Benjamin Spencer’s words) between the storyteller
          and the master craftsman is revised away from symbiosis and towards division. The
          relationship, which Benjamin in The Storyteller claims
          defines the storytelling age, and its modification in the wake of information’s influx
          augurs the storyteller’s increasingly liminal role in the twentieth century and his
          ultimate replacement by the journalist.
            In The Book of the Grotesque, an exchange between an old
          writer and an inept carpenter the writer hires to fix his bed illustrates the alteration
          of the relationship between the traditional storyteller and the master craftsmen. Although
          the writer’s dream of the grotesques and basis of his manuscript are prompted by the
          carpenter’s story of his dead brother, the 
                  ludicrous
                  
                tears the story causes the carpenter to cry, and the carpenter’s faulty reparation
          of the writer’s bed, the old writer’s manuscript was never published and the story of his
          vision never told. Seen only once by the narrator, the missing manuscript provides
          evidence, according to Jonathan Stouck that 
                  we are meant to view the old writer as ineffectual
                  
               : consequently, in the place of the traditional storyteller and the master craftsman
          who listens and repeats the storyteller’s stories stand a book seen once but never
          published and an inexpertly repaired bed.The shoddy workmanship makes it necessary
            for the writer to use a chair to climb into this bed, but rather than aggravating the
            writer, the necessity makes the bed quite a special thing,
            and climbing into it gets 
              into [the writer’s] mind that he would some time die
                unexpectedly, after which he feels 
                     more alive
                     
                   than ever.
            
            The old writer’s unpublished, uncirculated book depends for its expression on the
          narrator, a figure who, standing on the threshold of the text’s technological divide, can
          connect the theme of The Book of the Grotesque to the
          procession of grotesques that constitute Winesburg’s nodes. Yet, as suggested above, the narrator positions himself as part of storytelling’s dying tradition. When he refers to Winesburg as 
                  our town
                  
               , he reveals that he, like the grotesques he describes, remains figuratively trapped
          in Winesburg. Additionally, and according to his own account, the narrator also suffers
          from a communicative disability: he is unable to interpret the 
                  art of storytelling
                  
                into anything approximating a master craft. Although the narrator claims in Hands, the first story following the prologue, that 
                  [t]he story […] is a job for a poet,
                  
                he emphasizes his inadequacy to the task: 
                  Perhaps our talking of [the hands] will arouse the poet who will
              tell the hidden wonder story […]
                  
               . The narrator’s own words are, he admits, 
                   but crudely stated. It needs the poet there
                  
               .
            The narrator’s efforts to overcome the grotesques’ isolation by establishing those links
          that connect them to one another and to Winesburg are undermined by his admission that he
          is more like the grotesques than not. Similar to the depletion of the traditional
          storyteller that follows from the emergence of information as a major mode of
          communication, the narrator is crippled in his effort to link Winesburg to the mode of
          communication he works to illustrate. George Willard, however, offers an antithesis. His
          job as Winesburg’s newspaperman makes him the recorder of the town’s significant episodes
          and enables him to implicitly predict Winesburg’s role in the information age Benjamin
          later identifies and describes.
            In contrast to the narrator’s inability to adequately express himself as a storyteller or
          poet, Willlard possesses a talent for composition. Within him, there is a 
                  secret something that is striving to grow
                  
                that gives him a 
                  place of distinction
                  
                in Winesburg.Here a parallel might be drawn between Willard and the old
            writer in The Book of the Grotesque. In the prologue the
            old writer is described as 
                     like a pregnant woman, only that thing inside him was not a baby
                but a youth. No, it wasn’t a youth, it was a woman, young and wearing a coat of mail
                like a knight
                     
                  . In this example, Willard functions as the writer’s heir, a modern,
            post-industrial counterpart to an artist from a bygone era. Identified by that
          secret something, by the idea that [he] would some day become a
            writer, Willard’s character conflates not the storyteller and master craftsman,
          a partnership that The Book of the Grotesque suggests is no
          longer possible, but the storyteller and journalist . In the context to which Willard belongs, a writer is no longer a masterly storyteller
          or a poet; he is instead the urban reporter and city newspaperman that Willard makes the
          object of his ambition. Willard prepares himself for his future career as a journalist by
          meeting Winesburg Eagle’s 
                  one policy,
                  
                to 
                  mention by name in each issue, as many as possible of the
              inhabitants of the village
                  
               .
            The policy, which predicts the social networks that today characterize many Internet
          users’ experiences, means that Willard can define Winesburg by constructing connections
 grotesques’ incidental and sought after listener and the implicit
          recorder of their experiences. Unlike the narrator, Willard can function as prosthetic ear
          and mouthpiece for the grotesques’ untold and untellable experiences. In Hands, for example, Wing Biddlebaum 
                  hop[es] that George Willard [his only friend] would come and spend
              the evening with him
                  
               ; in Doctor Parcival the doctor tells Willard 
                  ‘I have a desire to make you admire me, that’s a fact. I don’t know
              why. That’s why I talk’
                  
               ; in Respectability, Wash Williams tells Willard that
          he hates all women and that he will tell only Willard the reason why ; and in The Teacher,
          Kate Swift seeks to try to 
                  bring home to the mind of the boy some conception of the
              difficulties he would have to face as a writer
                  
               .
            Although critics have often considered Willard’s maturation and departure from Winesburg
          a symbol of the development and subsequent liberation of the artist who unifies the text’s
          poorly matching parts, he is actually only the collector and implicit circulator of the
          grotesques’ stories.Malcolm Cowley, Edwin Fussell, David Stouck, Walter Rideout, and
            Ralph Ciancio position Willard as Winesburg, Ohio’s central consciousness and
            explore Willard as the artist central to Anderson’s work. Each critic also notes that
            Willard’s development proceeds along lines similar to Anderson’s own.
          Unsurprisingly, however, this enables Willard to function as a more useful hub than the
          town itself. Through his work, he ensures that as long as the Winesburg Eagle provides a
          log of the town’s denizens, the grotesques cohere, even if only nominally, into a social
          group and community. Consequently, Edwin Fussell’s argument that Willard can only
            expose [the grotesques] as they really are
           because he can 
            joi[n] sympathy and understanding to detachment and
              imperturbability
           describes Willard not as the artist Fussell supposes, but as the reporter and
          journalist who does not
            
                  live the common passion,
(original emphasis) but who reports on it .
            Willard’s occupation in Winesburg ensures that he represents the only figure capable —
          mandated, in fact — to accommodate the excessive information that so handicaps the other
          characters. It is therefore only fitting that Willard’s departure from Winesburg,
          undertaken to 
                  meet the adventure of life,
                  
                turns on his hope of 
                  get[ting] work on a city newspaper
                  
               . In the urban environment Willard makes his goal, the civic journalist has replaced
          the inadequate storyteller, the failed poet, and the inept craftsman. The journalist,
          opposed to the artisans from whom he descends, trades in the currency of information, that
          which Benjamin suggests is, like the newspaper that features it, imminently disposable.
          Constantly expending the moment in which it was new because it demands superfluous 
                  explanation,
                  
                information obstructs and therefore threatens the value of meaning. Put another
          way, information, inherently excessive and therefore expendable, disrupts meaningful
          communication by necessitating explanation, clarification, and commentary. While Willard’s
          career aspirations adapt him to this proliferation, the narrator bemoans industrialism’s
          shift towards a culture defined by the information conveyed by a newspapers instead of
          first-person experience.
            According to Winesburg, Ohio’s narrator, the excess of
          information renders once-significant and substantial stories incomprehensible, and thus
          makes it difficult for the men and women of a later day to
            understand anything without understanding that [a] revolution has in fact taken
          place. The coming of industrialism, attended by all the roar and rattle of affairs, the
          shrill cries of millions of new voices that have come among us from overseas, the going
          and coming of trains, the growth of cities, the building of the interurban car lines that
          weave in and out of towns and past farmhouses, and now in these later days the coming of
          the automobiles has worked a tremendous change in the lives and in the habits of thought
          of our people of Mid-America . Perhaps
            ironically, Ingram suggests that 
                     [o]ne would expect to find such a passage on the editorial page
                of a Cleveland newspaper, but not in a short story
                     
                  .
            
            The narrator’s claim that industrialism’s propagation has destroyed what Benjamin calls
          the 
            artisanal form of communication
           of storytelling and made the town of Winesburg inscrutable suggests why The Book of the Grotesque, which enabled the narrator to 
            understand many people and things, exists only in the narrator’s memory. Instead of a published manuscript detailing
          a vision or dream from which all stories can be told, 
                  books, badly imagined and written […] in the hurry of our times,
              are in every household, magazines circulate by the millions of copies, newspapers are
              everywhere
                  
               . All men according to the narrator’s purview — both the 
            farmer by the stove
           and 
            the men of the cities
           — talk 
            glibly
           and 
                  senselessly
                  
               .
            Little symbolizes this early picture of information overload so well as that ubiquitous
          city newspaper to which Willard aspires. Today, social media critic Paul Gillin and his
          website newspaperdeathwatch.com attest to the inability of newspapers to compete with
          twenty-first-century information technology’s multiple and immediate distributions of
          data, but in Winesburg, Ohio newspapers offer an early
          analogue for the network.In many cases such data is also gratis, the cost of a
            computer and access to a network notwithstanding. Mikhail Bakhtin gestures
          towards this point, although certainly not in relation to Anderson’s text, in Problems with Dostoevsky’s Poetics. While Bakhtin examines
          polyvocal discourse,Castellucci Cox argues that analysts have often used polyvocal
            discourse theory to discuss the story cycle as a part of the tradition of more
            experimental modern novels . itself
          associated with the heteroglossia enabled by networks and hypertexts, his claim that
          newspapers offer a living reflection of the contradictions of
            contemporary society invokes the diverse nodes, multiple contexts, and
          transferential accruals of meaning that also characterize the network .See The Dialogic
              Imagination and Robert Glenn Howard.
            
            For Bakhtin, the newspaper’s polyvocal discourse demands the reader or user’s active
          participation in the construction of meanings and thus foretells the network’s promise to
          give every user a figurative voice . In Bakhtin’s
          favorable formulation, newspapers provide and therefore anticipate what Sproull and
          Kiesler describe as the network’s free exchange of
            information, a forum that both enables and requires discourse and debate.
          Willard, in Winesburg, Ohio, is suited to participate in this
          polyvocality: when he adheres to his newspaper’s one policy — recording as many names as
          possible in each newspaper’s issue — he gestures towards his aptitude for making the
          otherwise isolated grotesques assemble into a discourse rendered temporarily meaningful by
          the newspaper’s intermediary record. Notwithstanding Bakhtin's salutary description, however, the early analogue for the network represented by newspapers in Winesburg, Ohio offers another instance of a
          kluge. Indeed, aside from Willard and the names he writes on its pages, no other character
          in Anderson’s text appears to contribute to or read the newspaper. The Winesburg Eagle does not, therefore, provide a forum for the discourse and
          debate that strengthens interlocutors’ connections; instead, it characterizes the
          connectivity assigned by Anderson to a nascent network by its inability to assemble
          fragmented and otherwise monstrous or distorted individuals into anything more than a
          transitory community. The paper’s apparent departure along with Willard not only suggests
          its transformation into the city newspaper for which Willard hopes to work, but it also
          underscores every newspaper’s temporariness and transience.
            Such impermanence depends on the disposability that makes material the confrontation with
          meaning forced by the newspaper’s trade in excessive information. In Anderson’s text, this
          confrontation extends from Willard’s newspaper to his notepad and to the papers that
          belong to the grotesques. For example, although he carries 
                  a
              little pad of paper
                  
                in his
          pocket to record the stories passed on by his sources, Willard accumulates only the
          information that enables him to adhere to his paper’s superficial policy. More
          emphatically, in Paper Pills, the second story following the
          prologue, papers signify the disposability of information and the disarticulation of
          meanings from stories. In Paper Pills, Dr. Reefy writes
          
                  ends of thoughts, beginnings of thoughts
                  
                on scraps of paper
          that he stuffs into his pockets until they become trash. When
          Dr. Reefy takes 
                  handfuls of paper balls
                  
                and throws them at
          his one friend, saying, 
                  ‘this is to confound you, you blithering old
            sentimentalist,’
                  
                he seems to comment on the sentimentality of the expectation
          that papers contain any communicable meaning at all.
            Over time, the doctor, whose name joins a title indicative of health with a surname
          indicative of disease (
            reef
           refers to various diseases 
                  which make the skin scabby
                  
               ), has become unable to communicate his thoughts: meaningless to others and to
          himself, his words, in his pockets, harden into rubbish.Although Dr. Reefy finally
            unravels the scraps to, read to his wife, he afterwards crumbles them, 
                     stuff[ing] them away into his pockets to become round hard
                balls
                     
                   again, and his wife, the only one to whom he communicated his thoughts, dies only
            a year after their marriage . He constitutes one
            of Winesburg’s nodes, but Dr. Reefy adds neither his voice nor his thoughts to its
            network. Although the paper Willard carries in the form of the notepad in his own
          pocket suggests Willard’s adaptability to the future’s information age and therefore
          appears in contrast to Dr. Reefy’s disposable scraps, Willard’s newspaper (which does not
          attempt to tell its readers Dr. Reefy’s indescribable thoughts) functions instead as a
          similar symbol of superfluity. Expirable and daily consigned to scraps, the newspaper’s
          relevance must be renewed every day.
            The grotesques’ disposable papers, which oppose the old writer’s absent and unpublished
          book in The Book of the Grotesque, indicate the superfluity
          that makes communication meaningless in an information age and finds representation not
          only in these needless papers, but also in the needless appendages attached to the
          grotesques’ bodies. As indicated above, because it claims among its many meanings both 
            distortion
           (
            twisted out of shape) and 
            exaggeration
           (
            heaping or piling up
          ), the word 
            grotesque assumes the negative inflections of excess . Accordingly, the grotesques are marked
          as such by a corporeal mutation that indicates their collective inability to adapt to
          technological progression. The superfluity of hands in Winesburg,
            Ohio, for example, suggests the grotesques’ failure to navigate informational excess. As
          disconnected from meaning as those papers they write upon, hands distort the grotesques
          and disable them from offering more than empty gestures.
            The meaningless of those hands engaged in producing a meaningless record of information
          is embedded in the text at a semantic level: hand or
            hands appears 201 times in this 224-page text. Unsurprisingly
          however, given the community’s distance from its traditional agrarian past, few — if any —
          of these hands can be described as participating in significant craft or construction.
            Hands, the first story to follow the prologue, most
          effectively illustrates this point through the useless hands of Wing Biddlebaum. A teacher
          before he migrated to Winesburg, Biddlebaum once used 
                  the caress that was in his fingers [to] expres[s] himself
                  
               . When a 
                  half-witted boy […] imagined unspeakable things
                  
                and told his dreams 
                  as fact,
                  
                however, the teacher was driven to Winesburg. There, his fingers, 
                  forever active, forever striving to conceal themselves in his
              pockets or behind his back, came forth and became the piston rods of his machinery of
              expression
                  
               .
            Barred from teaching because of the non-generative sexuality his expressive fingers
          represented and unable to articulate the reasons, even to himself, for his disbarment,
          Biddlebaum attempts and fails to express himself with hands that paradoxically express
          too much and too little to Willard. When, for example, they once 
                  stole forth and lay on George Willard’s shoulders,
                  
                Biddlebaum hurried home, and Willard resolved never to ask about the conspicuous
          hands. Although they function like piston rods in
          the 
                  machinery of his expression,
                  
                Biddlebaum’s hands produce only silence and ensure his continued isolation. His
          hands, which as the story’s title suggests, are entirely disproportionate to his body,
          distort Biddlebaum’s body and suggest that those appendages, once an indispensable tool
          for both teaching and farming, are in Winesburg excessive and meaningless. See
            Robert Frost’s 1915 poem, The Death of the Hired
          Man
               
            
            Unlike the text’s beginning in The Book of the Grotesque, at
          its end, hands do not create even poorly constructed beds. Although Willard’s hands are preoccupied
                  [a]ll day
                  
                in writing disposable 
            little facts upon [his] pad about the grotesques whose hands are
              tied by the truths that trap them, his work produces information that ultimately
              appears unread
            .In The Storyteller, Benjamin argues that 
                     [t]he role of the hand in production has become more modest, and
                the place it filled in storytelling lies waste
                     
                  . According to Benjamin, 
                     storytelling, in its sensory aspect, is by no means a job for the
                voice alone. Rather, in genuine storytelling what is expressed gains support in a
                hundred ways from the work-seasoned gestures of the hand
                     
                  
                Willard’s notepad consequently anticipates both the place of the
          newspaper, for which it functions as precursor, and the activity hands occupy in the
          information-centric future of a post-industrial America. He replaces the narrator’s
          self-proclaimed clumsy effort at poetry with an urban journalism that depends on the
          ability to assemble the fragments — in the sense of broken and isolated pieces — from
          which newsworthy information springs.
            It is with this handiwork that Willard reenacts and reinterprets the grotesque’s
          inarticulate gestures. In filling his pad, Willard’s hands suggests both the hands that
          create the newspaper’s bylines and anticipates the hands that leaf through the newspaper’s
          pages and enable their reader to see the network of polyvocal babble on the page and
          therefore read the discordant conversations that constitute the community the newspaper
          obliquely represents. In this manner, while Winesburg, Ohio
          laments the disappearance of the craftsman’s skilled hands and the hands that work the
          soil in rural communities (as well as the corollary disappearance of the gestures that
          once augmented a story’s meaning), Willard’s hands act out an entirely new set of tactile
          activities. In fact, Willard’s hands assemble a kluge: while Anderson’s text indicates the
          newspaper offers a poor substitute for community, the newspaper to which Willard
          contributes does fill the void that traditional communities have left. Signifying a
          perhaps distressingly ugly technological progression, the newspaper also functions as the
          network’s early analogue: it anticipates the physical
            experience of the computer whereby the continual movement of fingers and hands
          extend not the ear (even the prosthetic ear Willard offers), as a poet or traditional
          storyteller would have it, but the eye .
            Its representation of the grotesques as both excessive and necessary to the future
          indicates that Winesburg, Ohio remains profoundly ambivalent
          about the concept of community it ultimately represents. Their interpolation into the
          expendable present signified by Willard’s notepad ensures a community but the community is
          transient, made only temporarily meaningful by the newspaper’s disposable immediacy and
          poised to become even more isolated and irrelevant as a result of Willard’s departure.
          Without this kind of kluge, however, the 
            gesturing figures, […] fragmented people, [and] unused
              lives
               
           of Winesburg would not even share the paradoxical distant intimacy and lonely
          connectivity  that makes them embody Shaviro’s
          description of the network’s Leibnizean paradox whereby those in the
          network are simultaneously connected and alone
               .
            
               Winesburg, Ohio, which begins with an unfinished map
          (illustrated by Harald Toksvig for the book’s first edition) that features unfinished
          streets and undelineated boundaries, suggests that Winesburg,
            Ohio is, like a network, a place that is no place.Critical comparison to
            Anderson’s hometown of Clyde, Ohio notwithstanding. Yet the nascent network named
          by Winesburg constitutes a trap. In fact (and in spite of Willard’s narrative status),
          neither the narrator nor Willard affects a complete escape from Winesburg, Ohio’s grotesquerie.Nor is it completely clear that the
            narrator and Willard are not themselves grotesques. Willard departs Winesburg in
          the last story, but the train conductor notes that a thousand George
            Willards have already undertaken his journey. He may have outgrown Winesburg and
            become taller than his father, but Willard has not
          appreciably advanced in intelligence, one looking at him would not
            have thought him particularly smart. Even the commencement of Willard’s journey
          is thwarted when he glances out the train and sees the train […]
            still in Winesburg. He departs, but as he does so he thinks not of his future,
          but of the Turk Smollet […] Butch Wheeler [….] Helen White.
          Ostensibly a background on which to paint the dreams of his
            manhood, Winesburg, in the form of the names still written in his notebook,
          attends Willard’s escape.In Images of Idiocy, Martin
            Halliwell claims that Sherwood Anderson views everyone as possessing a grotesque quality
            and 
                     sees the antidote to it in communal compassion and
                sympathy
                     
                  
               
            
            Indeed, the grotesques of Winesburg, Ohio — in their
          implicit sickness and their unboundedness from geography — illustrate the meaninglessness
          of escape and point to the pervasiveness of the network Winesburg, Ohio implicitly critiques.The sickness the
            grotesques carry may indeed be the sickness of nostalgia, which, according to the OED,
            can be regarded as a medical condition.
                The network
          brings the outside in and makes intimate what is otherwise distant; it, like Winesburg,
          captures users, making their escape […] nearly impossible 
               . It is consequently no accident that Willard’s
          incomplete flight from Winesburg merely reenacts the other grotesques’ attempts.Most
            notably Elmer Cowley who beats up Willard before 
                     [s]pringing aboard a passing train
                     
                  
               . Indeed, Willard, like all of the grotesques, returns to Winesburg if only
          by virtue of the fact the narrator calls forth and connects their stories .
            If, as Shaviro argues, the modern conception of the network is a system whose shape depends on the force of all the
            messages, as they accrete over time 
               , the
          shape of Winesburg, Ohio — formed by proliferating papers on
          which nothing of lasting meaning can be written and superfluous hands clumsily failing to
          engage in a new kind of labor — is the shape of a kluge. Although it is also appropriate
          to describe the network connected in Anderson’s narrative in terms of the grotesque and
          its denotation of unnatural, odd, or distorted shapes, grotesque
          hearkens back to an older form (grottesca,
               ‘a kinde of rugged vnpolished [sic] painters worke, anticke
            worke’), while a kluge both underscores the technology that yokes Winesburg to
          the information age, via the newspaper as an analogue of the network, and represents the
          accidentally-integrative role the urban journalist serves in the temporary communities he
          defines .
            Similar to the prologue’s badly-fixed, but nonetheless story-inspiring bed, a kluge
          emphasizes the awkward transition from a pre-technological past, rich in tangible
          connections and endemic identity, to a hyper-connected, networked future. Accordingly, the
          grotesques upon which the text centers are the awkward and alienated casualties of the
          post-industrial rise of information that makes the networks to come both necessary and
          inevitable. While the network ultimately envisioned in Winesburg,
            Ohio provides a stopgap measure that kluges together an unraveling community,
          the bandage affixed to the site of its communicative disease provides only temporary
          relief and does not enable restorative progression. Rather than celebrating the network’s
            heroic tones and countercultural ideology
          (despite its militaristic roots), the grotesques in Winesburg,
            Ohio embody a lamentation for information’s pervasiveness and the corollary
          degradation of more meaningful communication .
          Consequently, while Winesburg, Ohio suggests that the
          transition to the network as a dominant mode of contemporary organization is ugly, sick,
          and distressing, it also suggests that the transition is inevitable. An emblem of this
          transition, Willard transforms the old writer in The Book of the
            Grotesque: carrying uncannily close at hand the fragments of Winesburg, Willard
          redefines the meaning of a viral journalist to indicate the diseased nodes and alienated
          circuitry that enables the network’s connectivity.

         
