Title:  Impractical Applications
Volume:  005
Issue:  1
Date:  3 March 2011
Abstract:  
        
        The question of how we justify digital humanities to unknowing or
          skeptical audiences cannot be disentangled from how we justify studying the humanities in
          an era of anxiety and doubt regarding the pursuit of anything without supposedly practical
          aims. Answering these concerns requires not only rejecting the faulty assumptions on which
          they are based, but also bringing more information to bear regarding the connections
          between our work and the values, both practical (judged in terms of
          effects) and not (judged on its own terms) of the larger economy and culture in which we
          participate.
      
Full Body Text: 
DHQ's general editor, Melissa Terras, gave a rousing keynote at the Digital Humanities 2010
        conference at King's College, London, and by now people reading this may have their own
        impressions of the significance of what she said — even if you weren't there last July to hear
        it. The fluidity of these media makes it possible for me to pick up without paraphrasing,
        since the presentation is still there (at least as I write) for you to see on Melissa's
        site, at http://melissaterras.blogspot.com/2010/07/dh2010-plenary-present-not-voting.html.
        So it doesn't need to be a concern for me whether as a reader, you already have some
        developed idea of what you think of it, or don't. No one has missed anything.
After all, one of the themes of Melissa's speech — and of the keynote address given earlier
        in the week by one of the pioneers of our field (and a DHQ editor), Joe Raben, in receiving
        the Busa Award for outstanding lifetime contributions — is that the way in which communities
        (disciplines, universities) are constituted is now changing irrevocably under the pressure
        of networked social media. One of these changes is in openness and accessibility, to such an
        extent that we are now faced with an awareness of how every conversation is already ongoing.
        Whether insiders or outsiders, already committed members of the increasingly far-flung
        digital humanities community, or more distant colleagues or members of the public, we all
        have all the arguments always already before us, and the only thing we can assume with
        regard to prior knowledge is that our picture is still incomplete. In and out
        aren't about time and space anymore, only in how familiar we are with the questions Melissa
        and Joe were asking: what is/are digital humanities? Are we talking about one thing or many?
        How is it (are we) related to parent or sister disciplines in the humanities or otherwise?
        How do we propose to justify ourselves in a world of scarcity and challenge? Maybe you have
        heard the arguments and anxieties; you know these discussions are underway, and have been as
        long as any of us doing this can remember.Indeed as I write, further iterations have
          appeared online at http://www.hastac.org/blogs/cforster/im-chris-where-am-i-wrong and http://www.bogost.com/blog/the_turtlenecked_hairshirt.shtml, to mention only
          two. Or maybe not. Either way, there is no great need to recapitulate what can
        easily be found at the end of a link. Nor would it necessarily help, as there is no starting
        point without its antecedents.
What might be odd to the newcomer, however, is the uncertainty and disquiet apparent in so
        many of these accounts, just at a time when one might think we'd be hopeful and confident.
        It cannot help that one of the things we have in common with traditional humanities
        disciplines is the way these debates about definitions get caught up in larger
        conversations, both more philosophical and more vexed, sometimes going so far as to
        challenge the assumptions behind questions being asked, but never quite settling the
          case.So it is hard not to notice Stanley Fish in the New York Times: http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/10/11/the-crisis-of-the-humanities-officially-arrives/
          and earlier writings. Whether digital humanities have or should have any practical
        application at all is a question asked as often about English or Comparative Literature or
        Art History or Philosophy (I use proper nouns to indicate I speak also of departments and
        institutions, not only some committed pursuit of a subject, however one defines it). Our
        dilemma is that, on the one hand, we have sometimes felt unwelcome even in institutions
        where the humanities are studied, facing persistent questions, often from those we respect
        most, about what we are for and whether we belong. Yet on the other hand — this is some kind
        of irony — in society at large, and even from academic administrations on occasion, we have
        heard the same questions regarding the humanities in general. So the humanities are in
          crisis, under siege, etc., etc. Our supposedly begrudging or resisting
        colleagues, who challenge us to justify ourselves and explain how we belong at all, must
        themselves answer to people whose support they need in their turn.
These old, tangled roots suggest to me that no argument would be sufficient to prevail
        here, and that such critiques will be heard as long as anyone doing any of this stuff is
        around. Our habit of doubting ourselves, echoing our earnest but never conclusive efforts to
        address the misgivings of others, shows more than anything else how at home are digital
        humanists in the humanities. Indeed, we are perfectly capable of sustaining all sides of
        this debate without encouragement. Of course I speak as someone to whom this particular
        problem is merely academic (understand this word in a weirdly reversed
        sense), as I am not personally dependent, at least for the present, on academic funding,
        either soft or hard. As soon as the discussion
        became consequential, I suppose I might be reluctant to take issue with any administrator or
        committee charged with managing a budget or prioritizing line items. Their jobs are
        difficult enough, I imagine. Yet it is with considerable astonishment that I read accounts
        of Lord Browne's Report (again, this is easy enough for readers to learn about online if
        they don't already know too much) and its promise to make British universities more
          competitive (sic) by decimating funding for education in arts, language and
        literacy. Is this the way a great nation treats its children, I wonder? What would Dr Arnold
          think?Readers who wish to learn something of the opinions and influence of Dr Thomas
          Arnold (1795-1842), headmaster of Rugby, may consult any history of Britain in the
          nineteenth century, or for that matter a resource of their choice on the Internet.
        And of course, albeit without the same public discussion, the same thing is happening in the
        United States. Even at a remove, it is difficult to maintain a philosophical detachment in
        the face of all this.
So I do agree with Melissa that as practitioners of Digital Humanities (using another
        proper noun), we have to advocate for ourselves: we do have to make our point of view and
        our priorities known. This is in part because I also agree with Joe, that changes are
        inevitable, even that the university itself, at least as we know it, will soon be
        disappearing or at least undergoing a metamorphosis, humanities and all. If institutions of
        higher learning are likely to be unrecognizable within a generation, that makes exactly this
        moment critical for imagining and re-imagining what they, and we, are good for. But in my
        experience, there are conversations meant to elicit information and develop understanding,
        and then there are those whose goal is to seek justification for a position already staked
        out or a decision already made. Apart from surface resemblances (since the latter sort wants
        to be taken to be the former), these two species of dialogue really have nothing in common
        with one another; indeed the second kind may not be dialogue at all, but just a sort of
        ritual posturing. For seekers of truth, common understanding and comity, the trick is to
        recognize and cultivate the one kind of conversation, and not expend energy fruitlessly on
        the other, turning instead, if we can't abide by decisions we are presented with, to
        mobilizing a constituency. Which sort of discussion is this?
One fears it is too often the second kind. Which leads me to ask what is our constituency.
        Paradoxically, to answer this question, I think, requires that we go sideways, and imagine
        the first kind of dialogue, in more of a relaxed spirit — something like the conversations,
        say, that Socrates, the famous skeptic and iconoclast, might have had with his friendlier
        companions:

        
          
            Socrates
            So, Electra, I see your head is buried in that device in your hand even more than
              usual. Is there anything special there?
          
          
            Electra
            Looking up. Yes Socrates, lately my iPhone has been even more than
              usually attractive. I'm reading tweets about the conference in London I just came back
              from. I'm famous! People have been very complimentary about the paper I gave
              there.
          
          
            Socrates
            Tweeting, isn't that Twitter? I've heard of it. I have to admit a
              limitation to only 140 characters is an interesting idea for a communications medium,
              although I could certainly never manage it.
          
          
            Electra
            It forces you to be concise, Socrates, for sure, or at least it should. That can
              be very helpful at certain times especially.
          
          
            Socrates
            For example, if you were in a hurry, as you always seem to be. So you gave a
              paper? What about?
          
          
            Electra
            It was about this project I'm working on, analyzing philosophical dialogue. It was
              at Digital Humanities 2010.
          
          
            Socrates
            I have to say, that sounds right up my alley, but what do you mean,
                digital humanities? Is that like digital music or digital
              thermometers? (I think I can guess what you mean by humanities. As I recall, there
              were a number of Renaissance scholars called humanists, and many
              universities have programs or departments in the Humanities.)
          
          
            Electra
            Well let's see, my friend Melissa says I'm not allowed to say it's the
                intersection of blah, blah, blah....
          
          
            Socrates
            Melissa sounds smart. I agree that wouldn't mean much to me.
          
          
            Electra
            So take, for example, my project, Dialectical Imaginations: I'm using TEI to mark
              up a corpus of ancient texts of philosophical dialogue. Then I'm breaking the texts
              out, categorizing them on various axes, including speaker (Socrates, you appear a
              lot), authors, correspondences and echoes in theme and language, and so forth. I'm
              planning to build a browsable, searchable web interface –
          
          
            Socrates
            That's all very nice, and I'm flattered, but what you just said is complete
              nonsense to me. Besides, I wasn't asking what you did, but what digital humanities is
              –
          
          
            Electra
            Um, that's hard, sorry. Hrm looking exasperated for a moment, then
                brightening – I guess you'd have to start with the fact that in
              the digital humanities, most of our work is done with computers ... so
                digital music isn't really very far off ... except that working
              with digital text is a different thing altogether ... I'm marking up my
              sources using a customized schema I built –
          
          
            Socrates
            Ouch, you're hurting my head! Back up!
          
          
            Electra
            Um, well in working with text in digital form, we worry a lot about text encoding,
              and other esoteric topics –
          
          
            Socrates
            Tell me about it. I mean, you don't say.
          
          
            Electra
            Except I guess there are also differences from fields like computer science or
              electrical engineering. Unlike many other disciplines involved with computers, the
              questions we are asking are not only about how to innovate new ways of working with
              the machine or electronic data, but also how to keep asking the same questions we've
              been asking. Digital humanities projects are frequently closely tied to specific
              topics of interest in the humanities, like Italian Baroque painting or Bulgarian
              dialectology, or close readings of video games.
          
          
            Socrates
            I see, that sounds interesting. So, in your case, you're asking questions, about
              the texts you've collected, that any reader of the last five hundred years, or two
              thousand, might have asked, namely about how different philosophers or writers (Plato,
              Plutarch, Lucian or whoever – I assume these fine writers are all in your
              collection), how different authors of philosophical texts make words into ideas, ideas
              into voices, voices into characters – have you thought of studying
              dramatists too? I'm sure my friend Euripides would love to be included.
          
          
            Electra
            Socrates, that's great idea, thanks! I have to get that down. Thumbing into
                device.
          
          
            Socrates
            Although I have to say, it makes me wonder, what's the practical use of studying
              philosophers. In my experience, they tend to be somewhat ... shall we say ...
                partial, in their views? Although I guess it might shake one's faith in
              received ideas, and that's good.
          
          
            Electra
            Socrates, that debate has been going on for centuries, and you should know, you
              started it.
          
          
            Socrates
            Maybe, but everyone has regrets. I mean, it's not that I'd do anything differently
              given the chance again, but what good has it done?
          
          
            Electra
            Socrates! You, of all people, to be asking that question!
          
          
            Socrates
            I know, it's depressing, isn't it? But at least you're learning about computers.
              They're everywhere nowadays.
          
          
            Electra
            Yes, Socrates, it all goes together. And I admit my skills are very marketable
              right now, even in this economy. Apart from my digital humanities friends, who are all
              super-busy, about the only person I know my age who isn't either still in school, or
              looking for work, is a friend of mine who designs web sites. We're even talking about
              whether I can do some work for him.
          
          
            Socrates
            That's excellent. So, you have a lot of friends who are doing this too?
          
          
            Electra
            Well, not just friends blushing, but, yes, it's pretty cool. I've
              met all kinds of interesting people. It's not just about computers. It's about the
              network, as a communications medium, an entire community of scholars learning how to
              do these things. Some people are really amazing – and everyone is really
              generous with their time and expertise. Which you learn you kind of have to be, since
              there's so much to know, you become very dependent on others. That way it seems a bit
              unlike the traditional humanities, where work can be very solitary.
          
          
            Socrates
            I have to say that also sounds like good practice for the modern world. Learning
              to communicate! But doesn't it bother your traditional humanist colleagues? I mean,
              you claim to be doing what they are doing, but I bet you spend a lot more time with a
              computer than a book. Mind you, I'll be the first to acknowledge that one mechanical
              contraption may be no worse than another, but you have to admit, your methods are
              apparently quite different from theirs, and very complicated and mysterious to the
              uninitiated. I was going to ask you what TEI is, but I'm not sure
              I want to know.
          
          
            Electra
            Isn't that paradoxical: it's about as old-fashioned as you can get, and yet it is
              thought to have this threatening and destabilizing aspect. I won't deny it. But even
              in that way it's nothing new – just as you say, the humanities have always
              been doing this. Even more, digital humanities is all about a kind of literacy, over
              and above the immediate subject matter, and many of the things you learn have a very
              general application. Which is just like the humanities too.
          
          
            Socrates
            Yes, isn't that what the humanities is all about? Or at least, hasn't that been
              the claim? So digital humanities, like my friend Gertrude Stein
              used to say, isn't different, only more like it already was already.
          
          
            Electra
            You knew Gertrude Stein?
          
          
            Socrates
            Well not exactly, but I think it's safe to say she knew me....
          
        
      
Admittedly this is a fanciful scenario; and if discussions like this could ensure that
        programs in the digital humanities all had budgets into the future, things would be good.
        But there is that persistent anxiety, especially regarding the questions our two
        interlocutors circle around: not only whether DH is traditional or newfangled, but whether
        it is esoteric and insular, or practical and sociable. Notwithstanding the details, the
          stuffness of it, the paradox of the humanities has always been that, even or
        possibly especially at its best, a humanistic discipline has no evident practical use beyond
          practice itself. Certainly, there is literacy, and analytical ability,
          critical thinking, but why these should be the special dispensation
        of our disciplines to cultivate these things, and not equally essential to any true
        education, isn't entirely clear. We do not help matters when we respond only with a
        counter-critique, seeking to deconstruct the terms in which questions are asked, only to
        discover again the old lesson that at least when unbalanced by any compensating affirmation,
        critique tends to be demoralizing. Yet we also cannot justify ourselves entirely in the
        terms presented to us. An esteemed senior member of our community argued as much to me late
        in the conference in London. Trying to measure impacts is
          ridiculous, he said, alluding both to Melissa's speech and to the demands of its
        occasion. The minute we try to do that, we are playing their game, and have lost it.
        While this reaction, expressed in a moment of frustration or pique, may represent no one's
        actual policy, even the speaker's own, it is nonetheless clear, as soon as one starts to try
        to do so, how impossible it is to argue for our meaning and significance using only language
        in which meaning and significance have been reduced to terms in economic formulas, and how
        to acquiesce in the attempt gives up any chance of acknowledging the contributions we
        actually make.
However old this problem is, yet its face is changing as the humanities go digital, as
        methods and forms of work change under the pressures of technology and a newly
        interconnected society. While we must, and will, do so all the time, it remains problematic
        to submit the humanities – or the purported outcomes of studying them
        – to evaluation according to the set criteria of any system. A discipline like the
        study of literature or history is not a consumer product to be reviewed or rated on a scale
        of satisfaction, but a personal, intimate interrogation and testing of oneself, and an
        occasion for conversation, inasmuch as the humanities are an inquiry precisely into the
        values fostered by human culture, both historically and in the face of present challenges.
        In its richness and strangeness, here the digital humanities has a peculiar strength, at
        least for anyone who understands why one might want to be more than a consumer of a
        pre-packaged culture and history – why one might want to understand and
        participate in their creation, exploration, and transmission, in the definition and
        discovery of what matters.
Properly pursued, our activities are like their parent disciplines in one crucial respect:
        we create economic benefits only as side effects, much the way the output of a computer
        program is a side effect. But this does not mean that the economic benefits are not real and
        tangible. In particular, as Electra remarks, the technical skills we cultivate now claim a
        great deal of currency. But we don't do the work for the sake of the technology alone so
        much as for the sake of the technology in a humanistic context; and the economic benefits of
        our work will be indirect, unpredictable, without guarantees, often untraceable and
        unknowable, if only because they are sometimes too large and far-reaching to measure. A
        dramatic instance is in the way our efforts to develop text encoding standards over the last
        twenty years (including but not limited to the Text Encoding Initiative) have contributed to
        the foundation, development and growth of Internet technologies in general and the World
        Wide Web in particular. Practitioners of Humanities Computing, as it was then called, valued
        collaboration and sharing, and lamented the waste of their labor and ingenuity as their work
        decayed with obsolescent data formats; so they did something about it, which resulted, when
        joined with convergent efforts from elsewhere, in a communications platform open to the
        world. The bureaucrat who seeks only to rationalize slashing a budget may have no wish to
        learn anything about any of this. But any university administrator or department chair whose
        mission is actually to promote the program of higher education will surely take an
        interest.
The fact that these connections are invisible does not mean they are not there. The way
        forward is open to us, in other words, if only we traverse the links and assert the
        relations between our activities and programs, and the worthwhile efforts and positive
        trends in the world around us, both in practical terms (even when practical is code
        for reducible to a monetary abstraction) and more directly, in terms of pursuits
        worthwhile for their own sake. Making common cause, indeed, between the digital
          humanities, the humanities writ large, and the economy and culture that sustain them,
        is of the essence. In my own field, standards-based electronic publishing technologies, many
        of the most successful, engaged and influential innovators and practitioners have advanced
        degrees in fields like Comparative Literature, Linguistics, modern and ancient languages,
        Philosophy, and of course Library and Information Science. Our work, like so much else in
        the information economy, is both humanistic and technical, both
          hard (disciplined, focused, methodical) and soft
        (sensitive, alert, questioning and sympathetic). It is collaborative and community oriented,
        there being (as Electra notes) so much to know. And this is just as the humanities at their
        best have always been. The work makes its own claims and has value on its own terms, and it
        is part of something bigger, there really being no contradiction in this.
The digital humanities, to put it another way, has friends, more friends than are usually
        recognized. I submit that we should keep this in mind as we answer Melissa's call at DH2010
        to participate and be heard. It is always possible to bring attention back to the focus we
        share with endeavors outside the academy, which our projects and initiatives nourish and are
        nourished by: work interpreting, developing and using new and old media and old and new arts
        of rhetoric – so intertwined as to be inseparable – to say nothing of
        cultural and historical understanding. To whom, in an information economy, is this not
        practically relevant? Allies and constituencies, who can advocate in ways impossible to do
        for ourselves, are all around us, both within and outside the walls, in disciplines and
        fields of endeavor such as media production, design, information science, engineering,
        psychology and cognitive science, linguistics, sociology and social studies, social action,
        journalism, justice, and government. And why exclude the sciences and mathematics? To engage
        these parties is only to expose and formalize connections that are already there. This
        requires rejecting the politics of zero-sum.
As Electra recalls, Melissa told us to avoid describing our field as the intersection of
          (blah blah blah), and as far as presenting a compelling narrative goes, she makes a
        point. An intersection is not a thing, and we are surely a thing. Yet
        it is also the case that we come out of an energetic crossing and commingling of motives and
        interests. We are informed by the way human culture has always been networked, and becomes
        ever more so; and now we inform it in return. It is our attitude or motive that
        distinguishes us – to be engaged thoughtfully, with intelligence and empathy, just
        as medicine and engineering are humanistic to the extent they are empathetic
        and thoughtful. A nexus of transmission and reception like this, a site of feedback, is a
        point of power. The digital humanities is a place we can set a lever that can move the
        world.
