Title:  
               
Volume:  005
Issue:  2
Date:  21 June 2011
Abstract:  
            
               The Globe is All One: Wars I Have Seen as Proto-Network
                  Narrative charts Gertrude Stein's characterization of the human mind as an
               data-processor by tracing the conceptual correspondences between her writings and
               early information theory, including the work of Norbert Weiner, Claude Shannon, and
               Vannevar Bush. The article argues that Stein first sees language as data that human
               beings are compelled to parse in even the most contextless and semantically
                  noisy frameworks, which shapes the purpose and form of Stein's notoriously
               difficult prose poem, Tender Buttons; the ease with
               which meaning can be exchanged emphasizes the importance of the ways in which a given
               meaning is selected from a set of possible meanings rather than interpreted or
               revealed. While this may simply reiterate the mode of Tender
                  Buttons in different terms, the paper's crucial intervention is in its
               positioning of the chance selection of significance as the mode of signification that
               animates her wartime memoir Wars I Have Seen. Like words
               in the poem, political identity in occupied France is unstable and waits to be parsed
               in the act of encounters with others and with history. In her narrative's
               foregrounding of and experimental play with the conventions of memoir, Stein
               discovers the shifting nature of her main character (herself) in a series of
               ruminations and chance meetings; an early version of the network narrative emerges in
               the nodal structure of the story that undermines chronological and nationalist frames
               of signification.
         
Full Body Text: 

            The Globe is All One: Wars I Have Seen as
            Proto-Network Narrative

            
            
               
                  Organization is a failure and everywhere the world over
                     everybody has to begin again.
                  Gertrude Stein, My Last about
                        Money, 1936
               
            
            
               
                  When data of any sort are placed in storage, they are filed
                     alphabetically or numerically, and information is found (when it is) by tracing
                     it down from subclass to subclass…. The human mind does not work that way. It
                     operates by association. With one item in its grasp, [the human mind] snaps
                     instantly to the next that is suggested by the association of thoughts, in
                     accordance with some intricate web of trails carried by the cells of the
                     brain.
                  Vannevar Bush, As We May
                        Think, 1945
               
            
         

            
            In the final passage of one of her last brief essays, Reflection
                  on the Atomic Bomb (1945), Gertrude Stein figures atomic technology as an
               informational effect. Having insisted that she could never take any interest in
               something as destructive as all that (i.e. the atomic
               bomb), Stein implies that atomic military technology has drawn much
                  undue attention. There is no logical reason, she argues, for anyone
               to be scared of the atomic bomb, and if you are not
                  scared the atomic bomb is not interesting. Thus, as if to account
               sociologically for what must now be deemed merely pseudo interest, she
               writes, 
                  Everybody gets so much information all day long that they lose
                     their common sense. They listen so much that they forget to be natural. This is
                     a nice story.
                  
               
            
            The vagueness of Stein’s reference to information (information about
               what? Where does everybody get it?) throws into relief the sense
               of sheer quantity conveyed by the sentence. The apposition of the first
               and second sentences implies that it is by listening so
                     much
                that everybody gets so much
                  information. This great quantity of information, moreover, is what
               alienates one from constitutive elements of self, namely common
                  sense and being natural (human nature, perhaps?);
               according to Stein’s logic in this essay, this alienation of one’s
                  natural
               common sense leaves one susceptible to an overwhelming fear,
               which results in one becoming preoccupied with the atomic bomb. As if in an attempt
               to remedy this alienating effect, Stein redirects both the essay’s topic as well as
               its reader’s attention with her last sentence. This is a nice
                  story, she writes, indicating with what at first seems to be a
               non-sequitur, that neither a bombardment of information, nor its destruction of one’s
                  common sense, can undermine the cheerful, intractable,
               utterly human practice of narration.
            It would seem that, as long as there is a mode of narrative capable of comprehending
               and inoculating the human mind against modernity’s ever-widening informational flow,
               Stein fears no evil. In this paper, I argue that Stein’s last memoir of the war
               years, Wars I Have Seen (1945), is such a narrative, one
               whose understanding of the way that meaning can become radically uncertain in heavily
               syntactical modes of signification essentially performs in experimental memoir form
               the work that Tender Buttons (1914) had done in poetic
               form years earlier. I position Stein as presciently concerned with distinguishing
               meaning from what cyberneticists would come to describe properly as
                  information, and I demonstrate how Tender Buttons reaches the same
               conclusions about the relationship between the two as would the information theorists
               of the cybernetic era. Finally, I suggest that the story Stein tells in Wars I Have Seen is an early network narrative in that it
               searches for a form to express the nodal value of both individuals and nations at a
               time when global technologies (radio, world war) dramatically altered what it meant
               to be connected to the rest of the world. The memoir is not only about the experience
               of living in France during the occupation but also, on a metadiegetic level, about
               the need for narrative to adapt to modern forms of global connectivity, which are
               fostered as much by the wireless as they are by the patterns evinced by world war. In
                  Wars I Have Seen, Stein foregrounds the uncertainties
               of meaning and identity inherent in narrating the contemporary political and
               historical landscape as she experienced it during the Second World War. Stein’s
               anxious anticipation of the outcome of war is not the only thing that produces the
               narrative’s texture of uncertainty; Stein understands that the dominant ways of
                  seeing during World War II incorporate individuals and nations as nodes
               capable of having their identities switched on and off by networks of communication
               and power. Wars I Have Seen is thus Stein’s answer to
               the modern composition of the burgeoning information age. In it, semiosis is as
               contingent on immediate situation as the nouns of Tender
                  Buttons are on syntax and subjective associations with their surrounding
               words. Unlike the nineteenth century, whose science, politics,
               and literature saw the globe as a canvas of commodities to be controlled and
               stabilized, Stein finds the twentieth century (whose
               commencement she dates irreverently to approximately 1942) to be characterized by a
               global interconnectedness so thorough that the question is not how to stabilize
               meaning but how to maintain identity through a narrative of the informational
                  nature of contemporary experience.
         

            Cybernetics and Stein: The Problem Information
            The kind of rhetorical maneuver that Stein performs in her remarks about the atomic
               bomb would lift easily into the vernacular of our twenty-first century in which
               steady streams of news and entertainment cross the globe and travel into our homes
               and personal electronic devices along numerous channels of communication each and
               every day. In its current phase of morphogenesis, the dominant usage of
                  information signifies a powerful if ether-like substance.
                  Information can be invoked today as anything from a paradigm of
               economic development to a psychological bane. One need not cast out very far to find
               public figures aligning social and psychological ills, like job insecurity and
               Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, with the contemporary proliferations of
               information technology.Regarding concern in the labor market, one might witness
                  Alan Greenspan’s comment that the difficulty involved in the transition to a
                  high-tech industry was 
                     most evident in the rising fear of job skill obsolescence
                        that has induced a marked increase in experienced workers going back to
                        school — often community colleges — to upgrade their skills for a rapidly
                        changing work environment
                     
                  . Media scholar David Shenk, moreover, coined the phrases data
                     smog and information glut in 1997 to describe the
                  overwhelming psychological effects of information culture in the United States
                     . But what does it mean for Stein to diagnose
               her atomic age reading audience, subjected to so
                  much information and overly indulgent in habits of listening, with a loss
               of common sense and the failure to remember to be natural? What context shapes and expresses Stein’s recognition of
                  information as something capable of altering the mind without having
               to negotiate with the physical substrate of the body? Moreover, how can we
               characterize her gesture of singling out information as culprit for
               misapprehension? Is it condemnatory? Celebratory? I suggest that her remarks express
               a less tendentious (though by no means indifferent) investment in and awareness of
               the growing dependence of nations on communications technology to establish not only
               their power but also their identity. On one level, Stein’s stance of irreverence
               toward the devastating potentials of atomic technology, which she dismisses with
               edifying remarks about information, takes for granted the materiality of
               the bodies recently eliminated or injured by the atomic blasts in Japan; her naïve
               lack of interest in the atomic bomb enacts a secondary
                  vaporization of the corporeal subject. On another level, the
               attention she pays to the human mind also attests to
               anxieties about subjective composition that were contained by the discourses of
               science and technology at the end of World War II.
            If Stein invokes information as a figure capable of weaving minds and
               bombs, words and bodies, human beings and machines, into a complex network of
               signification, she adds a faint but prescient voice to the discursive chorus
               accompanying new techno-scientific practices which would produce a reified concept of
               information in the post-war era. In her nice story,
               Stein highlights a destabilization of the boundary separating communication
               technologies and human life — a destabilization that literary and historical
               narratives would later situate in the advent of the cybernetic worldview. The project
               of cybernetics and Stein’s (especially later) writing, moreover, reflect common
               cultural concerns and experiences situated in the changing scientific, military, and
               political practices of the Second World War. If the structure of literary narrative
               was altered by the cybernetic desire to view the human being as simply one module in
               a web of communication systems without stable hierarchy or linearity — i.e., in a
                  network, Stein’s prescient representation of this modularity begs to
               be understood as a part of an ongoing cross-disciplinary genealogy (rather than an
               anomalous preview of a movement that began with cybernetics and simply diffused over
               time into the field of Literature). 
         

            Genius to the Rescue
            As a response to the realization that human minds had begun to be inundated with
               information, Stein enacts in Reflection what, in one of
               her oft-cited lectures of the 1930s, she described as the essence of 
                  genius, of being most intensely alive
                  
               . That is, her essay demonstrates what it is to be at once
                  talking and listening, doing both things, not as if there were one thing.
               It is as if, she suggests, there were always at least an implied listener for every
               speaker and vice-versa, a dynamic communication channel formed by dialogue (even if
               intrasubjective) rather than just one thing. When, at the
               conclusion of her brief essay, she writes This is a nice
                  story, she retroactively imbues the text with a dialogic voice, proving
               that listening is not going on to the exclusion of telling. The
               combination of these two acts would seem to recuperate and relocate the source of the
               essay’s information from the news of the atomic bomb in Hiroshima and
               Nagasaki to the reflexive, highly self-conscious dialogism of her own literary
               modernism.
            In one sense, Stein’s essay succeeds in evading its own topic, subverting the
               referential function of writing by becoming a playful meta-commentary upon the
               essay’s narrative potential. For Stein, that is, to reflect on the atom bomb is to
               reflect on narrative — the subject she took up explicitly in her
               American lectures but was an implied theme of her writing generally. In a
               complementary sense, the essay denies the gruesome potency of atomic technology. As
               is well known, the United States dropped the uranium-fueled Little Boy on Hiroshima and then the plutonium-fueled Fat Man on Nagasaki within days of one another during the
               month of August, 1945. Tens of thousands of people were vaporized instantly and
               thousands more left injured and afflicted with radiation poisoning.The bombs
                  also inflicted long-term destruction on the surviving populations of Hiroshima and
                  Nagasaki in the form of genetic mutations, which has caused a high incidence of
                  leukemia to appear several generations away in descendants of the blasts.
            
            While disturbingly ironic, the dismissive tone of Stein’s Reflection also bespeaks a wish to render the atomic bomb a subject less
               formidable than allied newspaper and radio coverage had inscribed it in the public
               mind between the bombings and Victory Japan Day (August 15, 1945). Indeed, the text
               of the Japanese surrender figured the atomic bomb as an imminent and global threat to
               human life. By August 15th, Japanese Emperor Hirohito was prepared to surrender his
               country, which he did officially by broadcasting his intentions to the nation at
               noon. In the Imperial Rescript on Surrender, Hirohito
               noted the uncompromising pressure that the United States’ use of atomic weaponry had
               placed on the country’s attitude toward the proposed Potsdam Declaration, explaining
               that 
                  …the enemy has begun to employ a new and most cruel bomb, the
                     power of which to do damage is, indeed, incalculable, taking the toll of many
                     innocent lives. Should we continue to fight, not only would it result in an
                     ultimate collapse and obliteration of the Japanese nation, but also it would
                     lead to the total extinction of human civilization. 
                  (emphasis added)
                  
                While the military restricted the release of all information regarding the
               development of the bomb, news coverage following the attacks was
               controlled to bombard readers with the sense of the military
               campaign’s overwhelming strength. Governments in both the U.S. and Japan quieted
               questions about the mysterious disease x, symptoms of which
               would ultimately be diagnosed as radiation poisoning from atomic fallout, but stories
               of the bombs’ terrifying power were constructed and disseminated freely in Allied
               news reports. After the Hiroshima bombing, President Truman broadcast a message
               threatening utter destruction for Japan unless the country’s leaders surrendered
               unconditionally. The message, which would be excerpted in western news channels in
               the following days, reached Japan on the day of the Hiroshima bombing and stated that
               the U.S. was 
                  …now prepared to obliterate rapidly and completely every
                     productive enterprise the Japanese have....It was to spare the Japanese from
                     utter destruction that the ultimatum of July 26 was issued at Potsdam. Their
                     leaders promptly rejected that ultimatum. If they do not now accept our terms
                     they may expect a rain of ruin from the air, the like of which has never been
                     seen on earth.
                  
                The topic instantly glutted news channels.According to Venezuelan
                  journalist, Silvia Lidia González Longoria, on the day after the bombing of
                  Hiroshima, the words atom and atomic appeared in the
                     New York Times two hundred and nine times . Indeed, the subject of the atom bomb
                  exploded in what must be seen retrospectively as more than an
               extended metaphor; this news explosion was a sign of the strategy of fear tactics
               enabled by atomic power and international communications technology, a strategy that
               would pervade the Cold War era.
            A BBC news story of 9 August 1945 similarly conveyed an image of information
               bombardment: 
                  More than three million leaflets were dropped over the country
                     today from American aeroplanes warning the Japanese people that more atomic
                     weapons would be used again and again to destroy
                     the country unless they ended the war forthwith.
                  
                On whatever side of the war one found oneself, the ability to invoke instant
               and utter destruction on an entire nation in a bathetic downpour of printed leaflets,
               would be terrifying indeed. The image ironically deploys the print medium which had
               already been eclipsed by radio as the primary mode of national address; taken
               together, the images invoked by Roosevelt, of the obliteration
               of every productive enterprise of the nation as a whole, and the
               performative bombing of the land with a redundancy of print
               messages — on leaflets, as if to call to mind the
               individual-oriented practice of reading a book or newspaper — constitute a two-front
               psychological assault on both the agency of the collectivity and on that of the
               individual.
            The leaflet bombing was an accessory to the unprecedented
               display of power to end or sustain life of which the nation had just proven itself
               capable. And by deploying her theory of genius in Reflection, Stein refuses to be subjected to
               the message of awe and fear that news of the atomic blasts has recently spread. While
               it has been suggested that Stein’s ascent to celebrity status in the 1930s forced her
               to abandon genius as an heuristic model for writing, I
               contend that genius emerges here.For instance, in
                  her recent analysis of Stein’s controversial translation work for Vichy leader
                  Marshal Phillipe Petain, Barbara Will argues that the emergence of a public audience for Stein’s writing after the
                  publication of The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas
                  (1932) can help account for what appears, in the utterly passive syntax of the translations, to be Stein’s shift away from her 
                     complex sense of genius as a
                        guiding aesthetic principle
                     
                  . It appears uncannily in the form of Stein’s meta-narrative
               commentary, which defends her conception of the human mind as an autopoietic entity
               from the bombardment of dehumanizing information. Indeed, it is the mind’s ability to
               harness and assimilate the ever-increasing quantities of information flowing through
               widening channels of communications technologies for socio-biopolitical ends that
               constituted the most pressing intellectual problem for Stein at the end of her
               career.
            Though she often intimated her commitment to teaching her readers and audiences how
               to cultivate and maintain genius, she rarely indicated
                  why it was such a challenge to cultivate or what
               threatened its persistence. And as she waited until the last years of her life to
               explain the hypothesis of her literary experiment, so too would she wait until the
               last moment to suggest that the threat to genius was
               something the twenty-first century will readily recognize: information. Stein, whose
               humanism depended on the concept of genius, as she
               defined it, was like an early information theorist in that she was committed to
               understanding and elucidating the way in which the human mind makes sense of and uses
               information.
            The salient issue raised by considering Stein’s experimental writing in conjunction
               with the information theory of the 1940s lies in the way that both projects began to
               model communication on the constituent technologies of everyday practices: In Stein’s
               case, these were literary and artistic, and in Claude Shannon’s and Norbert Wiener’s,
               they were electrical and computational. But both would reflect a growing conception
               of life that no longer afforded the human being either a stable
               political or cultural identity or a relationship to the world based primarily on a
               notion of agency underwritten by volition and desire; to understand how messages were
               conveyed, whether verbally or electronically, entailed a notion of the
               sender/receiver already spliced into often invisible networks of signification. In
               the case of human sender/receivers, meaning was — for information
               theorists as much as for Stein — primarily a matter of how well, albeit only
               temporarily, one could stabilize the information flowing through those networks.
         

            Information = Uncertainty
            Stein, through her radical literary experiments like Tender
                  Buttons, and the cyberneticists, through their work to develop faster and
               more robust telecommunications lines (Claude Shannon) and smart anti-aircraft
               missiles (Norbert Wiener), discovered that the true nature of information was, in
               fact, uncertainty. Though it preceded her explicit recognition of the threat of
                  information to the organization of the human mind, Tender Buttons had already evinced Stein’s investment in
               understanding how communication functions meaningfully when communication channels
               lose most of the conventions that receivers usually rely on to stabilize semantic
               content. In Tender Buttons, she engineers words to make
               sense primarily at the level of syntax by defamiliarizing the reading conventions. In
               the first stanza of the first section, Objects, Stein
               offers her reader a clue about how to read the rest of the prose poem: 
                  
                     A CARAFE, THAT IS A BLIND GLASS
                     A kind in glass and a cousin, a spectacle and nothing strange a single hurt
                        color and an arrangement in a system to pointing. All this and not ordinary,
                        not unordered in not resembling. The difference is spreading.
                  
                  
               
            
            The capitalized heading preceding the paragraph pretends to draw the reader into a
               familiar hermeneutical process. It seems as if to say, The
                  paragraph will consist of the author’s description of the object referred to in
                  the heading. The familiar referential design instructs the eye (as
               traditionally do the titles of works in the pictorial arts, which of course heavily
               inflected Stein’s writing experiments) to regard the heading as the primary, or least
               ambiguous sign of the object being viewed by the author. Yet embedded in
               the heading sits a secondary heading, THAT IS A BLIND
                  GLASS, which denies the simplicity of that literary construct; the comma
               separating A CARAFE from THAT IS A
                  BLIND GLASS functions to yoke unambiguous name and ambiguous
                  description in a proximity canceling out the referential distance
               between referent and description, which the conventional heading purports to create.
               The relationship of the capitalized heading to the paragraph below, moreover, serves
               as overture to what Stein performs within the first line of the stanza: A kind in glass and a cousin, a spectacle and nothing strange a
                  single hurt color and an arrangement in a system to pointing. As Peter
               Schwenger has suggested in a reading that correctly challenges an interpretation of
                  Tender Buttons as a display of the senseless materiality of words existing on their own, a
               carafe is plausibly, in fact, a blind glass. Unlike its
                  cousin, the drinking glass, the carafe has a flared lip, which makes it
                  extremely difficult to drink from….The eye that is the
                  vessel’s opening has, then, a certain negative quality that might be equated to
                  blindness. The carafe, a vessel of cut glass, moreover, might
               produce the idea of its 
                  hurt color
                  
               . Yet one might also read this line as a comparison of a carafe to a
                  pitcher, rather than a drinking glass; a carafe often lacks the
               pitcher’s handle, which creates an oval hole when seen in side view. Like an animal
               of prey, the pitcher stands with one eye viewable along its profile. The carafe,
               then, looks like a kind of blind animal represented in glass. The
               overdetermined nature of the object in this stanza works to figure it as an arrangement in a system to pointing,
               nothing strange, and while unusual and unfamiliar,
               not unordered in not resembling what the reader
               expects to find in poetry. Like the WAY LAY VEGETABLE of Food, the reader must not rely on names in headings to
               remain stable referents. She can only suppose it is ex.
               That is, the reader can only suppose that the vegetable garden will be waylaid for
               any number of things, such as a visit from sam, or
               preparation for a meal; or the vegetable might be saved
               this ambush by a cake eaten before the vegetables can be
               picked and thus not harming the nervous bed rows for
               another day (yet another new mercy). Rooms, in which Stein no longer offers her reader the
               conventional headings, continues to suppose sense:
               If comparing a piece that is a size that is recognized as not
                  a size but a piece, comparing a piece with what is not recognized but what is used
                  as it is held by holding, comparing these two comes to be repeated. Suppose they
                  are put together, suppose that there is an interruption….Is there an exchange, is
                  there a resemblance to the sky which is admitted to be there and the stars which
                  can be seen. Is there. That was a question. There was no certainty. Fitting a
                  failing meant that any two were indifferent and yet they were all connecting
                  that.
            
            This passage outlines the processes involved in Stein’s theory of writing. The
               habitual repetition of an unfamiliar comparison of two words can produce qan interruption of the sense one or both of those words make.
               Words can exchange their resemblance to things 
                  admitted to be there, — abstract concepts, x-rays, or, like
               the sky, the vault of empty space which lacks particular location — for resemblances
               to things which can be seen and mapped (even if only as
               the trace of their, perhaps, now extinguished presence). Stein finds, in Tender Buttons, that no words or objects are so indifferent that they are exempt from the system connecting
               failing and fittings — as
               in the knowledge gained having tried on a dress in the wrong size. What Stein sees,
               when she looks at objects, food, and rooms, is the uncertainty underwriting the
               process of sense-making; like a question, the act of reference implies
               uncertainty.
            Three years after Stein invoked information in her essay on the atomic
               bomb, Claude Shannon would publish a theory of communication — one formulated in
               studies on telegraphic transmission by Bell Labs engineers in the interwar years — in
               which messages signified according to a similarly uncertain
               system to pointing.
               
                  The fundamental problem of communication is that of
                     reproducing at one point either exactly or approximately a message selected at
                     another point. Frequently the messages have meaning; that is they refer to or
                     are correlated according to some system with certain physical or conceptual
                     entities. These semantic aspects of communication are irrelevant to the
                     engineering problem. The significant aspect is that the actual message is one
                     selected from a set of possible messages. The system must be designed to
                     operate for each possible selection, not just the one which will actually be
                     chosen since this is unknown at the time of design.
                  
               
            
            In a sense, Shannon seeks to generate a mathematical system of communication akin to
               Stein’s theory of language. To ensure proper operation, the message, for Shannon, had
               to remain a question of possible selection, since at the time of
                  design, the electronic receiver could not know which would constitute the
               consequential bit of information transmitted. Shannon’s
               work drew from the technical definition of information,
               which, as I stated above, had been worked out by his predecessors at Bell
               Laboratories. In what may have amounted to a trivial decision, Hartley substituted
               the word information for what his colleague Nyquist had been referring
               to as intelligence to describe, in 1928, the matter which telegraphs
               transmit. Because it smacked less of a human capacity than intelligence,
                  information theory was born to produce a more sophisticated
               understanding of the way electronic media transmit messages and communicate with one
               another. Communication, until the advent of the information sciences, had been a
               matter of three basic problems: syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. The information
               theory that Shannon and Wiener would promulgate (however differently they would
               conceive of the relationship of information to entropy)
               restricted the concept of information to its stochastic sense,
               explicitly cleaving it from meaning. Thus, they narrowed down
               communication to the problem of syntax. Bracketing semantics for the specific purpose
               of emphasizing syntax allows for an accurate measure of information, which, in
               Shannon’s theory, constitutes all of the possible
                  messages which the receiver can select. The
               content of communication in this model is possibility to select. While one cannot
               say, despite her transgressions of conventional word usage, that Stein obviates or
               ignores semantics, it is fair to say that her use of syntax was self-consciously
                  informational, in the sense of Shannon’s theory of
               communication.
            That Stein and the cyberneticists demonstrate congruent theories of information
               belies the distance between experimental writing and scientific research at
               mid-century. This is not to say that there was collaboration or even recognition
               across the two cultures in this instance. In fact, the only recognition that Stein
               received from the sciences occurred when, in 1934, B.F. Skinner patently
                  diagnosed her with normal motor automatism in response to reading
                  Tender Buttons.This accusation was particularly
                  cutting because Skinner was essentially accusing Stein of exhibiting a condition
                  she had studied and described in experiments she published with Leon M. Solomons
                  in 1896 under the guidance of eminent psychologist, and her mentor, William James.
                  In her work on normal motor automatism, Stein described a behavior that would come
                  to be known as automatic writing. However, Stein not only
                  denied that she wrote in this mode but also claimed such writing to be impossible.
                  Unlike Solomons, Stein did not believe in automatic writing: 
                     There are automatic movements but not automatic writing.
                        Writing for the normal person is too complicated an activity to be indulged
                        in automatically
                     
                  . While the two sides might not have admitted it, however, Stein and
               the cyberneticists were essentially realizing, in parallel, that meaning owes as much
               (if not more) to chance association as (than) it does to predetermined organizations
               of signifiers and signifieds. In effect, Stein discovered the informational nature of
               the human mind, years before Vannevar Bush would declare, that 
                  [the human mind] operates by association. With one item in its
                     grasp, it snaps instantly to the next that is suggested by the association of
                     thoughts, in accordance with some intricate web of trails carried by the cells
                     of the brain.
                  
                It was with this Steinian, web-like, associational human
               mind that Bush envisioned his Memex, a machine and
               interface that would, more efficiently than any existing logical system, access the
                  record of all extant scientific knowledge. In describing the
               organizing principle of what now sounds uncannily like the modern personal computer,
               Bush’s verbal schema of the Memex could have as easily described the organizing
               principle of Stein’s experimental (not automatic) writing. 
         

            From Uncertainty in Language to Uncertain Times: Stein’s Network Narrative
            Stein’s informational treatment of language and meaning reemerged in prose as she
               searched for an appropriate form by which to describe global connectivity in the
               twentieth century. While Stein’s discovery of the informational nature of language in
                  Tender Buttons is primarily celebratory, when she
               applies the same principles of composition to the memoir form in Wars I Have Seen, her inscription of the uncertainty underwriting meaning
               becomes more ambivalent. Though less obviously experimental than Tender Buttons, Wars does not simply record
               Stein’s experiences in occupied France; the form and content of the text play
               irreverently with memoirist conventions of chronology, and the international cast of
               characters (including several Gertrude Steins) become progressively less well-defined
               as wartime collusions of power take shape through the exposition. Form and content
               commence conventionally, as Stein seduces us into taking her to be the subject of
               just another memoir in which she marvels both at the nineteenth-century project of
               discovering and thereby uniting the globe as well as at the sense of safety bestowed
               upon the world by the systematic observations of the evolutionist’s outlook. But as
               the narrative draws into the present, it becomes clearer that the subject of the
               memoir is really a question: How does one tell the story of the particular present in
               which Stein writes? I suggest that Stein’s attempt to answer that question
               constitutes an early network narrative in which temporalities and power structures
               become progressively less stable as frames of meaning. In the scenes she records,
               Stein loses frame after frame of both local and global reference until she shows that
               even she is no longer in command of her national, cultural, and political identity.
               Being part of a network narrative for Stein means submitting oneself to uncertainty
               not merely at the level of situational knowledge but more radically at the levels of
               history and identity (that is, socio-political history and personal history). 
            In the early pages of Wars, Stein calls the 19th century
                  the gradual domination of the globe as piece by piece by
                  piece it became known and became all of a piece…. The totalization of the
               globe through colonization, translation, assimilation, and electronic communication
               technologies, for Stein, characterizes the 19th century,
               which, however chronologically denoted, anachronistically includes the period of the
               two World Wars as well. Only in 1943 would she concede that the 19th century was coming to an end because [n]ow they
                  can do the radio in so many languages that nobody any longer dreams of a single
                  language, and there should not any longer be dreams of conquest because the globe
                  is all one…. For Stein, the century turns
               when geopolitical and technological mobilization make the globe a known object and
               render obsolete any dreams of a single language.
                Thus, according to Stein, being globally
               connected in the 19th century depended on the logic of uncovering what was covered,
               homogenizing what was heterogeneous, rendering all one.
            
            While Zamenhoff’s Esperanto may offer Stein a working symbol for the logic of 19th-century global connection, she spends the rest of the
               memoir mining her experiences in occupied France for a similarly objective correlative, as it were, for the logic of 20th-century global
               connection. The most consistent theme to emerge from her records, however, is
               uncertainty. On one level, Stein draws our attention to the uncertainty she and
               fellow French countryside villagers felt about what course the war would take, who to
               trust, and what the world would look like after the war. On another level, the
               uncertainty is about Stein’s ambivalent national affiliation and moments of
               alienation from her American and Jewish identities. Though Stein might have composed
                  Wars I Have Seen in the manner of a daily journal,
               her decision to foreground the instability of identity and the uncertain future of
               world events is strategic. Out of the ruins of late 19th-century certainty, Stein hopes to find that her ruminations, her
               encounters with French villagers, Vichy officials, and, finally, American GIs, will
               perform the pattern of identity-production and global contact characteristic of the
               yet unknown postwar world order.
         

            What’s At Stake
            At stake in approaching Stein’s memoir as a cultural inscription of the experience of
               a global network is the assumption that such experience did not demand a new
               narrative form until complex negotiations between what Manuel Castells calls the Net and the Self became the main source of meaning for
               individuals. Leaving this assumption untroubled encourages one to seek for the
               network narrative’s formal prototype, as it were, in postmodern texts like Thomas
               Pynchon’s The Crying of Lot 49 (1968) or the narrative
               production concurrent with the development of personal electronic devices in the
               1970s, 
                  in the United States, and to some extent in
                     California
                  
               . Stein’s Wars I Have Seen, as I will demonstrate,
               troubles this very assumption by documenting the rise of the network society before
               it consummated its relationship with the postwar era and the first tech boom of the
               late 20th century. For, if we take the form of Stein’s recorded experiences,
               observations, and meditations during the Second World War as seriously as her
               content, we behold a self-conscious record of a shift from a relatively stable,
               hierarchical system of global connectivity associated with the 19th century to a
               radically unpredictable, uncertain, shifting network associated with the 20th
               century.
            Reading Wars I Have Seen as a precursor to the modern
               network narrative also gives us a chance to relate Stein’s aggressively experimental
               formal strategies to the political collusion and conservatism that her critics have
               been surprised to find imbued in her later writings. This analysis is useful,
               therefore, not only for the attention it gives an archive usually considered out of
               bounds of network theory, but also for the way it frames Stein’s later work without
               conflating the semantic instability of poetics with reductive politics. Adaptations
               of Kristevan concepts to figure Stein’s experimental modernism as a performative
               disruption of the subjective stability of the word,Lisa Ruddick reads Tender Buttons in terms of Julia Kristeva’s concept of
                  presymbolic jouissance in Reading Gertrude
                     Stein: Body, Text, Gnosis (1990); Mary DeKoven likens Stein’s
                  experimental writings to Derrida’s deconstructivist poetics in A Different Language: Gertrude Stein's Experimental
                     Writing (1983). though useful in articulations of feminist
               poetics, have also fueled reductive political rhetoric. Stein biographer Ulla Dydo,
               for instance, appears to make a slippage from formal analysis to a celebratory
               equation of poetics and politics when she writes, 
                  Stein’s disembodied words inhabit the enchanted forest of
                        As You Like It, where figures join and part,
                     marriages are made and unmade, names and identities change naturally. Free to
                     change their referential ties, Stein’s texts are written in the language of
                     true comedy, where nothing is absolute, hierarchies are not respected, roles
                     and indignities can change, and the only authority is the wide democratic
                        freedom of the word that can move, make, and remake itself. 
                  (emphasis added) 
                  
               
               Disembodied words enjoy a conjugal freedom, in which a naturally
               endowed instability of identity translates into the wide
                  democratic freedom of the word. I would by no means disagree with Dydo’s
               claims that Stein’s poetics push against the boundaries of verbal convention to the
               extent that her words play with, more than they submissively respect, any hierarchies of order. But in glossing Stein’s poetics as a
                  democratic challenge to anything absolute (except, perhaps, for the absolute freedom of movement of the Steinian word), Dydo commits her reading to a
               literary theory which appears tenuous when confronted by the ideological differences
               animating the respective political agency of Dydo and her subject, especially
               considering the deeply entrenched political ambiguities of Stein’s historical
               situation during World War II.
            The way that Stein scholarship has developed since 1996, moreover, has especially
               vexed the question of what it means to see politics in Stein’s poetics. Wanda Van
               Dusen’s outing
               As one critic has called it; see 
                of the full text of Stein’s introduction to a series of translations that she
               made of Vichy leader Phillipe (Maréchal) Pétain’s speeches in the early 1940s, for
               instance, occasions a reconsideration of the ways in which Stein criticism has been
               polarized by the political and theoretical investments in her writing experiments.
               Van Dusen’s paper, published in Modernism/ Modernity in
               1996, focuses on Stein’s glorification of Pêtain in terms of American historical
               figures; Van Dusen reads Stein’s Introduction to his
               speeches as an expression of fascist leanings and nationalist essentialism, which
               challenges positionings of Stein as a theorist of
                  anti-patriarchal poetics. Van Dusen’s Stein writes in thrall
               to reified images of the national leader, for whom she willingly erases any trace of
               her Jewish and lesbian identity, and whom she allows to eclipse her antipatriarchal
               poetics in a fetishized image of the masculine war hero.
            As Van Dusen’s paper implies, it is almost as difficult to account for these
               radically different Steins, presented by the juxtaposition of the author of Tender Buttons and that of the Introduction, as it is to broach the distance between those who would
               redeem modernism’s revolutionary authoritarianism by dressing Stein in
               anti-patriarchal poetics and those who would prefer to anatomize her work as an
               example of the anti-Semitic, racist, imperialist modernism of a privileged woman
               obsessed with authority. Invoking the presymbolic or the
                  choral disruption of the symbolic register, then,
               circumscribes Stein’s writing with a formula in which mobile, disembodied words that
               act to dissipate the sense of subjective presence in the text are equated with a
               certain degree of freedom or agency. This renders a nuanced analysis of her political
               investments problematic at best.
            Barbara Will, who entered the conversation on Stein’s Vichy
                  collaboration in 2004, considers the alarming passivity of
               the translations themselves as the sign of Stein’s recognition of the
                  failure of writing to assure a space of subjective agency
                  (riant or otherwise). The literal renderings of French
               syntactical constructions which Will highlights in manuscripts of the translations
               attest, she argues, to a passivity implying the defeat of Stein’s genius
               and a reluctant submission to an overpowering figure of authority (as opposed to the
               fetishistic celebration Van Dusen describes).
            In 1999, John Whittier-Ferguson had made a stronger challenge to the portrait of
               Stein as the fascist mouthpiece swooning in the presence of French figures of
               authority. He claimed that Van Dusen assimilates the identity politics of the 1990s
               to the political climate in which Stein wrote, committing the same conceptual
               archaism characteristic of the fascist ideology she perceives inscribed in Stein’s
                  Introduction. Whittier-Ferguson would remind Van
               Dusen of the complex political landscape in the moment of French history in which
               Stein was ensconced, and he suggests that this complexity entails a meditation, prior
               to evaluation, on the different valence that the critical category of
                  politics possesses for Stein’s historical moment compared
               with that of a student like Van Dusen.Citing a weak sense of historical memory
                  as a the crucial fault in Van Dusen’s materialist analysis,
                  Whittier-Ferguson writes, 
                     …the very familiarity of Stein's failings to Van Dusen —
                        and the utter familiarity of the terms in which Van Dusen finds fault with
                        Stein — ...betray Van Dusen's by no means uncommon abridgment of time's
                        passing….The political ruler Van Dusen applies to Stein is calibrated for
                        1996: politics is a practice that begins and
                        ends with a forthright assertion of one's identity and involves a careful
                        measuring of one's socioeconomic, racial, and sexual positions vis-à-vis the
                        dominant sociopolitical order…. Even before we turn to Pétain and Stein, we
                        should understand that being a Jew in occupied France, rather than
                        encouraging a public declaration of solidarity with marginalized populations
                        or recriminations against France's puppet government, would have been more
                        likely to encourage Stein in her longstanding preference for avoiding risky,
                        public, political stands
                     
                  .
            
            In her reading of the introduction to the translated speeches of Marechal Pétain, Van
               Dusen sees Stein’s expression of national affiliation as reified and essentialized;
               Will and Whittier-Ferguson would like to comprehend her relationship to
                  nation as a more complicated condition of her writing during
               the forties. Building upon their inquiries, the analysis that follows suggests that
               Stein’s last memoir expresses the complicated condition of deriving meaning at a time
               in which not only national identity but also modernity itself became tenuous
               ontological categories. 
            The daily experience of living through World War II, with its unpredictable
               disappearances, incessantly shifting political boundaries, and increasingly prominent
               aural communications media (especially radio), destabilizes the structures of the
               material and cognitive environment in which Stein writes. Following
               Whittier-Ferguson’s continued work on Stein’s war writings, I agree that war must be
               understood as a conscious factor in Stein’s compositional theories and practices. One
               does not do enough merely to take war as a crucial context for Stein’s
               work. When reading her essay Paris, France (1940), for
               example, one must grasp that for Stein, 
                  … the phenomenon of war is a manifestation and a crucial cause
                     of the excitements and horrors of modernity. These excitements and horrors are
                     as much aesthetic and ontological as they are sociopolitical and military. And
                     in her intimate conjoining of the relations of war and art, Stein displays her
                     modernity every bit as much as she does in her gnostic, avant-garde
                     writings.
                  
                Similarly, Wars I have Seen comprises an intimate conjoining of the relations of war and art which,
               like her more gnostic, avant-garde experiments, seeks to
               divine and represent the mechanisms and processes by which the mind forms like a
               pearl around the grain of the word. But the experiences which Stein records in this
               memoir reveal that it is no longer simply art and words that circulate in
               unpredictable oscillations of pattern and randomness; rather, the categories by which
               one might define oneself during war — enemy, ally, American, French, German — begin
               to quake and crumble into pieces which Stein reconstructs into a network of
               significations and identities which admit of no rest, no comfort, no essences, only
               encounters with possibilities of meaning which can be neither anticipated nor
               stabilized. Departing from Whittier-Ferguson, however, I believe that Stein ceases
               simply to display[] her modernity; in Wars, Stein calls modernity itself into question.
         

            Wars Stein Has Seen
            By the time Stein wrote of her experiences in World War II, she had already
               interpolated war into her theory of the modern composition and
               its expression in the writing of the period. The First World War had accelerated the
               literary and artistic modernist revolution and had created conditions of aesthetic
               appreciation such that, as Stein said in her interwar lecture, Composition as Explanation (1926): 
                  ...we who created the expression of the modern composition
                     were to be recognized before we were dead….And so war may be said to have
                     advanced a general recognition of the expression of the contemporary
                     composition by almost thirty years.
                  
                War, that is, participated in the phenomenological production of the contemporary composition. It is important to note that,
               by composition, Stein signifies not how one sees the
               world or what there is out there to be seen, but rather what is seen. During World War I, as Stein
               explains, disillusionment with an older faith in reason and progress modulated
               knowledge production and accelerated epistemic change such that those who created the expression of the modern composition would
               gain recognition in their lifetimes.
            But if Stein’s 1926 lecture demonstrates the modern composition in terms of the
               systematic, rational process of explanation, her 1945 memoir
               demonstrates it in terms of the unpredictable, shifting knowledge and experience she
               accrues during her peregrinations through occupied France. Just as her prose poetry
               in Tender Buttons would work to foreground the
               conventions of sense-making by maximizing the indeterminacy of any particular object
               or description, Stein’s prose in Wars I Have Seen puts
               pressure on conventional temporalities and certain knowledge.
               She writes, 
                  …when I was a baby and then on to fourteen, the nineteenth
                     century was full on. In the nineteenth century, there was reading, there was
                     evolution, there was war and anti-war which was the same thing, and there was
                     eating.
                  
               
            
            Stein appears here to characterize time in terms of linear movements; she seems to
               say that the nineteenth century was a time when evolution came into vogue and
               sentiment about war was utterly conflicted. But that there was
                  eating
               then inserts into this equation a practice which, the reader suspects,
               cannot be temporally bound. For, though Stein may wish to emphasize here the
               intermittent scarcity of certain foodsFoods like butter and sugar were
                  unavailable to Stein and Toklas for periods of their stay in the occupied French
                  countryside. in occupied France, could there not be eating in the twentieth century? Indeed, by imbuing this
               temporal construction of the nineteenth century with the quotidian narrative of her
               personal history (which includes unremarkable habits like eating), Stein destabilizes
               the very temporal grounds on which she proposes to stand. She continues, 
                  When I was then I liked revolutions I liked to eat I liked to
                     eat I liked to cry not in real life but in books in real life there was nothing
                     much to cry about but in books dear me, it was wonderful there was so much to
                     cry about and then there was evolution. Evolution was all over my childhood,
                     walks abroad with an evolutionist and the world was full of evolution,
                     biological and botanical evolution, with music as a background for emotion and
                     books as reality, and a great deal of fresh air as a necessity, and a great
                     deal of eating as an excitement and as an orgy….
                  
                Stein connects emotional affect, geopolitical movement, scientific
               materialism, and aesthetic appreciation in a narrative that conflates the particular
               with the universal in a hybridization of nature and culture, bodies and textualities.
               Scientific paradigms determined what she saw and enjoyed as a child, when the world was full of evolution; books, music, and walking
               in the fresh air constituted her encounters with the
                  real world of narrative and emotion; and food was
               merely a diversion.
            The nineteenth century ends, moreover, not according to the dictates of conventional
               chronology, but rather, when the aestheticist worldview, which it represents for
               Stein, is killed by war: The world comprising music as a background for emotion and books as a reality is
               both Stein’s childhood and the 19th century (It was all that
                  between babyhood and fourteen), both of which, she suggests, have lived on
               borrowed time ever since: 
                  [T]he nineteenth century dies hard all centuries do that is
                     why the last war to kill it is so long, it is still being killed now in
                     1942…
                  
               . The war kills the century in part by forcing Stein to see how modernity in
               the 19th century comprised two practices: one that mingles science, literature, and
               human bodies, and one that sublimates all three into a developmental phase of the
               modern human subject.
            Though she mobilizes war to describe the anachronous temporal rift between the
               nineteenth and twentieth centuries, Stein also exposes the mutability of the
               narratives underwriting geopolitical military goals. The twentieth century begins,
               that is, when the global access of information through radio, undermines the
               narrative seduction of territorial conquest along with the idea of
                  progress which it entailed. For Stein, there was 
                  nothing more interesting in the nineteenth century than little
                     by little realizing the detail of natural selection in insects flowers and
                     birds and butterflies and comparing things and animals and noticing protective
                     coloring nothing more interesting, and this made the nineteenth century what it
                     is, the white man’s burden, the gradual domination of the globe as piece by
                     piece by piece it became known and became all of a piece, and the hope of
                     Esperanto or a universal language. Now they can do the radio in so many
                     languages that nobody any longer dreams of a single language, and there should
                     not any longer be dreams of conquest because the globe is all one, anybody can
                     hear everything and everybody can hear the same thing so what is the use of
                     conquering, and so the nineteenth century now in ’43 is slowly coming to an
                     end.
                  
                If the evolutionary goal of comprehending the variation and
                  speciation of living organisms constituted the
               nineteenth-century narrative girding aesthetic appreciation and territorial
               exploration to the projects of imperial expansion and colonial conquest, there should not any longer be dreams of conquest because the globe
                  is all one. Stein’s assessment of the causes of war may be naïve, however,
               by exposing this naiveté she implicates herself in an intellectual movement which
               sought evidence of a universal notion of humanity in deep structures; Freud’s
               unconscious, for instance, can be seen as a psychological Esperanto, a structure
               embedded within the mind which could facilitate an understanding of the processes and
               affects of every individual on equal terms. Now that they can do the radio in so many
                  languages, Stein writes, such deep structures have disappeared from the
               scientific and artistic narratives of the slowly-awakening twentieth century.
            If Stein displays translations between science, war, technology, and social
               experience, she does so to expose the absence of a new, 20th-century, narrative of
               purification. Without the ability to assimilate the goals of scientists, armies, and
               individuals into a single human category, Stein cannot maintain
               a sense of being modern. Rather, as she suggests by asking anybody can hear everything and everybody can hear the same thing so what is the
                  use of conquering[?], the natural correspondence between science, war, and
               technology no longer holds up to scrutiny. War persists, even as she writes and
               despite anything the nineteenth century taught her. Thus, the first feat Stein
               accomplishes within her memoir is to introduce her reader to the twentieth century,
               characterized as a temporality without a story.
            Stein exposes her version of the 19th-century master narrative (that progress and
               discovery will lead to Utopian civilization) to highlight its insufficiency as a way
               to represent or understand the unpredictable cultural and political circumstances of
               World War II. To compensate for this insufficiency, Stein, in the manner of James
               Joyce’s Ulysses (1922), invokes tropes of history and
               subjective development to characterize the present moment. She supports the
               chronological convention of the memoir by organizing her meditations on war according
               to successive periods in her life (hence, for instance, the above refrain when I was a baby and then on to fourteen...); but whereas
               the first few pages of the narrative appear grounded in the periodizing construct of
               the individual’s phases of life, the relative distance between past and present soon
               collapses under the pressure of Stein’s need to make sense of what she sees during
               World War II. The grounding construct of her narrative thus begins to look less
               clear. She writes, 
                  Mediaeval means, that life and place and the crops you plant
                     and your wife and children, all are uncertain….And now and here, it is like
                     that, you take a train, you disappear, you move away your house is gone, your
                     children too, your crops are taken away….So at fifteen there comes to be a
                     realization of what living was in mediaeval times and as a pioneer. It is very
                     near. And now in 1943 it is here….And here and now in 1943, now that the war is
                     coming to an end, everybody that is nobody knows whether there is or is not any
                     future and at fifteen it is like that everybody and nobody knows whether there
                     is or is not any future.
                  
               
            
             The uncertain state of being mediaeval characterizes both the present moment, in which people and
               things can vanish unaccountably. But it also characterizes the adolescent period in
               which everything is new and unknown to one, as to a pioneer. Stein subverts the narrative construct which gives priority to
               past experiences when describing present ones –the fifteen-year-old realization of what living was in mediaeval times is now
                  here in 1943 — by bringing two stories so very near that what stands out most clearly amid the
               uncertainty of both present and future is the rhyme near/here. That is, by looping back to the experience of uncertainty
                  at fifteen, Stein’s meditations on the present yield
               no further knowledge but lead her into an incessant cycle of reflexivity. In essence,
               Stein offers her reader a modernist narrative with a difference: She does not deploy
               deep history simply to create an encyclopedic frame for modern experience, but again
               shows how living through the war in occupied territory has undermined her ability to
               see the 20th century as a modern phenomenon.
            Like many of her contemporaries who were experimenting with narrative form, Stein
               worked against the grain of received genres. Without a narrative form capable of
                  purifying the admixtures of scientific and military
               interests, historical and personal temporalities, Stein’s memoir devolves into mainly
               a string of anecdotal stories about the direction of the war and the shape of the
               postwar world. But instead of submitting completely to the whimsical narrative
               hybrids of the contemporary composition, she punctuates the rumor and speculation
               with compensatory passages that exude strong (albeit spurious) certainty. For
               example, Stein’s narrative erupts into a strangely conclusive meditation on the
               uniqueness of national aesthetics. Deprived of letters and newspapers, she observes
               what she can about the world beyond her remote village in the Rhone Valley by tuning
               into her wireless. As if having found a new medium on which to base an expression of
               her present moment, she renders the cultural imprint that each nation leaves in its
               broadcast announcement: 
                  The English always begin with Here is London, or the BBC home
                     service, or the overseas service, always part of a pleasant home life, of
                     supreme importance to any English man or any English woman. The Americans say
                     with poetry and fire, This is the Voice of America, and then with modesty and
                     good neighborliness, one of the United Nations, it is the voice of America
                     speaking to you across the Atlantic. Then the Frenchman say, Frenchman [sic]
                     speaking to Frenchmen, they always begin like that, and the Belgians are simple
                     and direct, they just announce, radio Belge, and the national anthem, and the
                     Frenchman [sic] also say, Honor and Country, and the Swiss so politely say, the
                     studio of Geneva, at the instant of the broadcasting station of Berne will give
                     you the latest news, and Italy says live Mussolini live Italy, and they make a
                     bird noise and then they start, and Germany starts like this, Germany calling,
                     Germany calling.Stein used conventional spelling. In the context, I
                        presume these ungrammatical instances of Frenchman, which I find unevenly in copies issued by Brilliance
                        Books in 1984 and by B.T. Batesford Ltd. in 1945, to be editorial
                        oversights.
                  
                  
                England, America, Germany, Belgium, France, Switzerland, and Italy each, Stein
               claims, produces a distinct radio personality.
            In the distinctness of each national personality, we learn, lies a possible
               explanation as to why war persists even though the globe is all
                  one. After ventriloquizing the peculiar style in which each country
               announced it radio hour, she writes, 
                  In the last war I said that the camouflage was the distinctive
                     characteristic of each country, each nation stamped itself upon its camouflage,
                     but in this war it is the heading of the broadcast that makes national life so
                     complete and determined. It is that a nation is even stronger than the
                     personality of anyone, it certainly is so nations must go on, they certainly
                     must.
                  
                Reading the passage as printed, one notices a punctuational pattern: two
               complete sentences broken into thirds by commas. Despite the punctuational symmetry,
               the second sentence sounds rushed and lacks the logic and clarity of the first.
               However the second-to-last clause is read (it certainly is/so
                  nations must go on or it certainly is so/nations must
                  go on or it certainly is so [that] nations must go
                  on), the reader hears a fanatical enthusiasm for the overpowering strength
               of national identity.
            Though omitting punctuation is not uncommon for Stein, who is known for deliberately
               leaving syntax indeterminate, we might read her failure to indicate a pause here,
               before the phrases a nation is and so nations must, as the creation of a voice so excited that it forgets to
               accent its own words. It speaks, that is, in a manner Stein had come to know as
                  hysterical during her days studying under the tutelage of
               psychologist William James. James based his theory of split personality
               on Pierre Janet’s conception of hysteria — namely the
                  disintegration of ideas and functions, which, when united, form the personal
                  consciousness — and remained Stein’s mentor for years after she left
               Harvard Annex and then Johns Hopkins medical school. According to the study on Normal
               Motor Automatism that Stein published in the late nineties, hysteria is a disease of
                  attention
               . She and her colleague Leon Solomons had
               concluded that a large number of acts ordinarily called
                  intelligent, such as reading, writing, etc. can go on quite automatically in
                  ordinary people when adequately distracted. Such automatism or non-voluntary activity was often monotonous and marked by
               its 
                  perfect ease…smoothness…perfect characterlessness, and
                     unaccented pencil movement
                  
               . The second, unaccented, sentence of Stein’s
               passage on nations performs this hysterical logic, in which the excitement of
               realizing what makes nations so complete and
                  determined — or perhaps that they seem to be thus — draws the
               subject’s attention away from the act of representing her thoughts. 
            Polarizations of national identity, Stein shows us, are entailed upon the
               contemporary composition (the international network) no less than they were before
               the globe was all one. Indeed, the instability of
               national identity amid the dynamic international network of the 1940s becomes the
               dominant theme of the remainder of Wars I Have Seen. The
               Stein who waxes with hysterical impassivity about the
               strength, endurance, and determination (or determinacy) of nations is also the Stein
               who sees how the war has created shifting, international, political and economic
               networks.
            The bipolar manner in which Stein deals with the value
               of national identity in the latter pages of her memoir echoes the kind of concerns
               she had expressed in a series of short essays in 1936 (see Money,
               More about Money,
               Still More about Money,
               All about Money, and My Last about
                  Money, collected in ) about the value
               of an even more abstract concept: money. In fact, her concerns over the value of
               money resurface in Wars I Have Seen. But in contrast to
               the speculative manner of her 1936 essays, her thoughts on money in the spring of
                  1944The memoir advances chronologically throughout, and Stein intermittently
                  works the day and/or year of composition into her prose. Though quotidian, asides
                  like ...any way it is the first of May nineteen forty
                     four... and markers like [i]t is now nearly the
                     fifteenth of May do not undermine the argument that Wars is more than a daily journal since the fact remains
                  that Stein did edit the manuscript prior to publication. 
                come across as determined as the nations she
               hears in the radio broadcasts. Recounting a conversation she had with a friend about
                  after war, and the future organization of the world,
               Stein writes, 
                  ...I realized suddenly and completely, that really gold has
                     almost a religious quality it really has and that this is the reason it is
                     always the standard of money, it has to be. The reason why is this, it is the
                     only metal in the world that is of no use.... It is really marvelous that the
                     only metal in all this world of ours that is absolutely entirely and completely
                     useless is gold, and therefore it must have the mystic quality of aloofness
                     which makes which always will make it the standard of money.
                  
               
            
            Even if Stein had not directly read or heard the news of the upcoming international
               monetary summit that would take place at Bretton Woods, it is hard to believe that
               neither she nor the interlocutor with whom she discusses gold have gathered some
               sense of the debate about the planned postwar currency stabilization. American
               newspapers during the spring of 1944 were rife with rhetoric about the proposed
               rehabilitation of the U.S. gold standard. One New York
                  Times columnist wrote, 
                  The greatest single contribution that the United States could
                     make to world currency stability after the war would be to declare its
                     determination to stabilize its own currency...It could do this by balancing the
                     budget and by announcing that the dollar was no longer on a twenty-four-hour basis, and subject to every rumor,
                     but firmly anchored to a fixed quantity of gold.
                  
               
            
            Stein, like the Times columnist, is completely convinced that gold must be the standard of money. Stein’s
                  religious appeal to gold’s mystic quality of aloofness, and her causal fallacy (gold is the only metal in all this world of ours that is absolutely entirely and
                  completely useless, and so it must always be the standard of money),
               moreover, voices the kind of economic rumor that the gold anchor, according to the Times, would
               silence. Stein’s punctuationally hysterical desire to believe in the quality which makes which will always make [gold] the standard of
                  money, in fact, mirrors the leap of faith that government advisors were
               taking to advocate the rehabilitation of an international economy based on the U.S.
               gold standard. Making his bid for the gold standard before the House Foreign Affairs
               Committee, Princeton University professor Edwin Walter Kemmerer admitted that the
               gold standard had not truly been tested since 1914 even as he 
                  declared that no other currency system would so quickly
                     restore public confidence in the post-war world...
                  
               . Like Kemmerer and other contemporary advocates of the gold standard, Stein
               desires a vision of postwar stability; yet Stein’s hysterical wish to believe in the
               gold standard, like her intermittent conviction about the power of nations,
               represents her narrative disorientation in a century that has yet to reveal to her a
               story productive of stable social meaning.
            As Stein records her daily life following the landing of American troops on French
               soil, her experiences indeed challenge the complete and
                  determined, abstracted nation depicted in the
               particularity of the radio broadcast; the social and political network through which
               she circulates in occupied France frenetically switches on and off not only Stein’s
               national, but also religious identity. When Stein first hears of the landing, she records her excitement, marking the day with a
               fairly tenuous verbal suture: 
                  Well that was yesterday and to-day is the landing and we
                     heard Eisenhower tell us he was here they were here…and we are singing
                     hallelujah, and feeling very nicely, and everybody has been telephoning to us
                     congratulatory messages…
                  
               . Stein’s distracted conflation of Eisenhower and the troops confirms, even
               while it begins to fragment, the hysterical abstraction of the nations she hears in
               the radio broadcast –indeed Eisenhower’s radio announcement forces Stein to
                  conjugate the message in the singular and plural third-persons,
               respectively. Similarly, Stein’s ability to identify with the abstract voice of America begins to fracture as the troops draw
               inland. Stein considers the shortsightedness of the American troops who, having
               forwarded the request via the Swiss consul, wish to profile the population of her
               village, with a moiety of both indignance and amusement: 
                  We giggled and said that is optimism. Naturally American
                     authorities, not really realizing what it is to live in an occupied country,
                     ask you to put down your religion your property and its value, as if anybody
                     would as long as Germans are in the country and in a position to take letters
                     and read them if they want to.
                  
               
            
            The optimism at which Stein and Toklas giggle denies Stein the sense of miraculous safety the
               initial reports of their landing had represented (…we are
                  singing hallelujah, and feeling very nicely…). What strikes Stein as a
               funny sort of optimism illustrates the network’s power to switch on her national
               identity while switching off her Jewish identity.
            The local scale of Stein’s experiences, moreover, imperils even the global network’s
               vouchsafing of her ability to identify as American. To be sure, the American military
               forces have not yet made their way to her region of the countryside at this point in
               the narrative, and the fear of occupying German troops remains strong. The threat of
               German troops merges with the sense of safety promised by the imminent approach of
               the Americans during one of Stein’s encounters. On one of the many long walks which
               she records, Stein finds herself approached by a French woman who asks her about a
               package that her husband has found dropped, presumably by a war-plane passing by.
               Stein recognizes the item in question as a package of malted milk tablets and
               narrates the ensuing exchange: 
                  …I told her and she said is it good and I said yes for
                     children have you some and she said yes she had two, well I said eat one
                     yourself and if it is good give it to them it will do them good, I suggested
                     that she try it first, because I thought it might be something bad that the
                     Germans had put out to discourage the people with gifts from America.
                  
                Stein moves quickly from identifying the malt tablets as safe American edibles
               to suspecting them of being found war loot, poisoned by the Germans and dropped on
               the ground to carry out a kind of bio-terrorism based on fear tactics. Her suspicion
               sabotages another opportunity to imagine both the American troops and herself as
               bearers of safety. The possession of a national product, which in this case would
               endow Stein with a sense of national agency, is confounded by the awareness that even
               the values of indigenous consumables have become compromised in by the war.
            While Stein can momentarily afford to question the salubriousness of American goods, she notes how her fellow French villagers cannot.
               Following shortly upon her encounter with the malt tablets, Stein recounts her
               conversation with an old man who said he had seen a lot of American airplanes flying
               by that day. She writes, 
                  ...yes he said reflectively leaning on his farming implement
                     and I leaning on my cane, yes he said, we depend on America to pick us up out
                     of our troubles, we have always been friends we helped them when they needed us
                     and they helped us when we needed them, the English are all right but it is
                     America that we count on to take care of us to see we keep our colonies, to be
                     sure they will want naval stations and of course we will be pleased to have
                     them have them.
                  
                Despite Stein’s desire to mirror the old man, he leaning
                  on his farming implement and I leaning on my cane, her encounter switches
               back on her American identity. To be American in the current modulation of the
               political and economic network, moreover, means to possess monetary resources capable
               of stabilizing a fragmenting colonial, international economy. The desire to believe
               in the complete and determined quality of not only America, but also its economic robustness,
               has been transferred to the old man who has co-opted Stein’s desire to see American
               currency anchored by gold.
            Stein’s imagined co-optations of American products and anxieties (respectively, the
               malt tablets and the resurrected gold standard) foreshadow a scene that replays her
               uncanny orientation toward American identity. For, after the Americans have finally
               arrived in the region, Stein has returned to meditating on the differences and
               similarities between what she has seen in this war as compared with the last. And,
               now that the American army is in town, Stein begins a series of musings on what makes
               this army distinct not from the other national armies but, rather, from the American
               army which she saw in the last world war. Entrusted with the job of chaperoning the
               daughter of a French friend to meet the American soldiers, Stein again finds herself
               positioned to be the bearer of a distinctly American experience. The little girl in
               question has been praying every night to meet an American soldier and her mother asks
               Stein to help answer her daughter’s prayers. Stein gladly accepts her charge and, in
               considering the gift of chewing gum which Stein sees the soldiers give the little
               girl, records how proud she is that, in their particular sweetness toward children,
               this army is no different than the last. Yet upon cautioning the child to make sure
               only to chew but not to swallow the gum — for she would not, Stein guesses, be
               familiar with the peculiarly American product — Stein experiences a modulation of her
               own identity. For the little girl replies, 
                  Oh yes I know…How do you know that I asked oh she said because
                     when there was the last war my mother was a little girl and the American
                     soldiers gave her chewing gum and all through this war my mother used to tell
                     us about it, and she gave a rapturous sigh and said and now I have it.
                  
               
            
            In reproducing the kindness to children that had constituted Stein’s impression of
               the last American army, the soldiers of WWII inadvertently spoil Stein’s opportunity
               to represent herself as the bearer of a distinctly American product and experience.
               Thus, the story she would tell herself about herself as an American is
               subverted by a story passed down from mother to daughter, a generation which
               parallels the second generation of world war in the twentieth century. Indeed,
               Stein’s elision of the interwar period in describing the way in which the nineteenth
               century was slowly being killed from 1914 on proves a
               suitable transgression of conventional historical chronology; for the uncanny
               encounter with a deracinated cultural product, which Stein records here, had already,
               in a sense, been prescribed in the French mother’s American
                  experience instantiated when she was a child in the first war and
               reproduced in her child during the second.
            Stein closes her memoir with yet another performance of the desire to maintain a
               stable sense of national identity and a temporal partition between the past and the
               present. She meditates on what makes the soldiers of this war so different than those
               of the last, and in her last words she parodies the very notions of national
               determinacy and modernity that lured her into the untenable narratives she has
               attempted in vain to construct for herself. The American soldiers of this war, she
               notes, are interesting, optimistic, show a marked curiosity for new knowledge,
               whereas their World War I counterparts had been, to her view, rather dull, given to
               excessive drink, and suspicious of foreign habits. One of Stein’s French
               acquaintances suggests that it must be the cinema that has made them men of the world. Some of the soldiers themselves suggest
               that it is the radio (and especially the quiz shows) that convinced them that they
               might as well be intelligent rather than dull. Still others cite the country’s bold
               emergence from the depression as the source of their sureness, conversational savvy,
               and urbane poise. Stein, however, offers her own theory of what has produced the
               difference. She decides that the salient factor in understanding what makes these
               Americans so complete and determined, and so distinct
               from their predecessors, is their belated possession of a unique national language.
               As if to explain, Stein writes, 
                  I think of the Americans of the last war, they had their
                     language but they were not yet in possession of it, and the children of the
                     depression as that generation called itself it was beginning to possess its
                     language and in dominating their language which is now all theirs they have
                     ceased to be adolescents and have become men…they have become more American all
                     American, and the G.I. Joes show it and know it, God bless them.
                  
               
            
            Reducing the distinctness of Americans, and particularly
               those of this war, to linguistic phenomena, Stein mocks her very attempt
               to preserve nationality and modernity as absolute categories. Without being able to
               offer her reader a new narrative paradigm for the slowly awakening 20th century, Stein again exposes the insufficiency of the
                  19th-century narrative paradigm. While conquest and
                  domination provided the previous century with a way
               to purify the hybridized techno-scientific and military cultures of Europe and
               America into a single human
               
                  agon
               , Stein ultimately discovers that nationality and modernity, in the contemporary composition are all-together trickier and more
               transitory categories than they were for the 19th
                  century. If Stein’s relationship to chewing gum, malt tablets, and gold
               are any indication, the GIs will not be able to possess
               their new All American language absolutely.
            But does Stein leave the 20th century nothing but a deconstructed 19th century? No.
               By recording the bipolar relationship between identity and an ever shifting network
               of international political and economic interests, Stein gives her reader a glimpse
               of the mode of social production of meaning that would come to dominate the late 20th
               and early 21st centuries. Her very failure to devise a story that could cognitively
               partition the practices of international and temporal hybridization from those of
               purification, moreover, signals the passing of a modernist paradigm. If we return to
               one of Stein’s 1936 essays on money — again, I suggest that Stein’s concerns over the
               value of money are symptomatic of the author’s broader anxieties about globalization
               and cultural change — we learn that, even before the outbreak of World War II, Stein
               sees a paradigmatic narrative shift on the global horizon. Noting a contemporary
               tendency to value the machinery of industrialism over free will and thought, Stein
               writes, 
                  
                     That is the logical end of organization and that is where the world is
                        today, the beginning of the eighteenth century went in for freedom and ended
                        in the beginning of the nineteenth century that went in for
                        organization.
                     Now organization is getting kind of used up.
                     The virgin lands are getting kind of used up, the whole surface of the world
                        is known and also the air....
                     Organization is a failure and everywhere the world over everybody has to
                        begin again.
                  
                  
                Stein could sense that organization, the word she uses to
               represent the homogenizing and systematizing practices characteristic of 19th-century
               progress, was becoming an outmoded narrative paradigm. Only her personal record of
               daily life during the next war in occupied France, however, would reveal that to
                  begin again meant sacrificing a stable sense of
               nationality and modernity to the network narrative.
         
