Title:  Readies Online
Volume:  005
Issue:  3
Date:  12 September 2011
Abstract:  

            The research experiment described in this article, Readies Online, started as
               a database to make accessible a rare manuscript of important modernist poets and
               writers including Gertrude Stein, William Carlos Williams, Ezra Pound, F. W.
               Marinetti, Kay Boyle, Nancy Cunard, Eugene Jolas, and many others. Each of these
               contributors had sent works prepared for Bob Brown's machine, and he called the
               prepared texts readies. In the midst of building the collection of texts, the
               researcher realized that moving the texts through an electronic version of Brown's
               machine, or through the interface constructed on the website to simulate Brown's
               machine, changed how one read — even changed the essence of what one read. Speed,
               pace, direction, and visual cues took on new importance already apparent in reading
               printed texts, but not stressed. Punctuation now represented an illegible and
               non-representational, visual cue rather than a direct link to the phono-centric
               pauses and stops that are more commonly represented by punctuation. The futures of
               reading, and the use of new devices like e-readers, will have consequences for the
               definition and practice of what we call reading.
         
Full Body Text: 
Readies Online

            
               As a matter of principle, the book is illegible, and it calls for
                  or commands reading in the name of that illegibility. Illegibility is not a
                  question of what is too badly formed, crossed out, scribbled: the illegible is
                  what remains closed in the opening of the book. What slips from page to page but
                  remains caught, glued, stitched into the binding, or else laboriously jotted as
                  marginalia that attempt to trip over the secret, that begin to write another book.
                  What is illegible is not reading at all, yet only by starting from it does
                  something then offer itself to reading.
               
            
         
 In 1931, in the French Côte d'Azur village of Cagnes-sur-Mer, a group of expatriate
            avant-garde artists and writers gathered to try out a prototype of a reading machine
            built by Ross Saunders, according to the plans and designs of Robert Carlton Brown II
            (1886-1959), known to the avant-garde writers as Bob Brown. Brown, a bestselling writer
            and international publisher, was part of the modernist circles not just in the late
            1920's and early 1930's, but also since 1916 when he first started publishing his
            avant-garde poetry. After traveling the world for two years with the profits from his
            publishing empire, Bob spent a few years in Europe, mostly in France, publishing a
            handful of experimental books with prominent presses as well as with his own imprint,
            Roving Eye Press. 
After publishing two versions of his plans for the machine, Brown decided to invite the
            most distinguished expatriate modernist writers to contribute to a new volume, The Readies for Bob Brown’s Machine. The authors included in
            the original anthology included poets and writers like Gertrude Stein, William Carlos
            Williams, Ezra Pound, F. W. Marinetti, Kay Boyle, Nancy Cunard, Eugene Jolas, and many
            others. Each of these contributors was asked to send texts prepared according to Bob’s
            instructions in what he called readies style. Bob also transferred at least some
            of these texts on rolls of paper with one single line of text, and he prepared at least
            one other sample of a text printed in readies style to show to engineers who
            might build and manufacture the machine. He never found a manufacturer, but his dreams
            for a reading mechanism were similar to the eventual microfilm machines. Brown wrote to
            the inventor of microfilm and microfiche readers, worked with engineers, produced rolls
            of literary texts (such as one of the novel Candide) for
            his machine, and wrote to many admirers about his plans to produce the machines for a
            popular market. He later wrote to television producers trying to get them to produce
            poetry on television that would look much like a proto-Sesame
               Street with visual poetry. Because he never manufactured the machine, one
            could only read a poor and inadequate printed translation of these texts instead of
            reading them as readies for, and in, the reading machine. It was as if we had the sheet
            music to Sean Puffy Combs’s song Come with Me, but not the sampling
            machine or player to listen to it. Brown’s readies, like sampling in music, are
            inseparable from the machines used to play the texts.
I wanted to address that problem of recovering the previously un-publishable readies
            (because of the lack of a machine). This article is part of a series of my publications
            and research projects that concern my effort to re-publish and make accessible rare
            manuscripts associated with the machine, and to make Bob Brown’s remarkable life known
            to a wider public (and even to scholars who know only about the few years he lived in
            France). In order to publish works specifically prepared for Bob Brown’s reading
            machine, I decided the publication of the texts in the anthology should not simply
            consist of a printed text – even if those texts were a facsimile of Brown’s published
            anthology. Instead, the project would make these texts available online in a way as
            similar as possible to Brown’s presentation in the prototype of the machine. I began by
            constructing a database, using MySQL, to make these works accessible to a much wider
            audience. 
This strategy of using databases online to make otherwise rare texts widely accessible
            and searchable was in keeping with what we now call digital humanities research.
            What happened next, in the middle of building the database, was a recognition that
            moving the texts through an electronic version of Brown's machine — or through the
            analogous interface standing in for the machine and constructed on a website
            (readies.org) — did not simply present a database of searchable texts. Instead, it
            simulated how one might have experienced using Bob Brown's machine back in 1931 as if it
            was made in the twenty-first century. That is, the simple database and peculiar
            interface, changed how one reads; it even changed the essence of what one reads. Now,
            issues of speed, pace, direction, and visual cues took on new importance. Yes, these
            issues were already apparent in reading printed texts, but they were not stressed or
            highlighted as they became in the interactive interface. Mundane aspects of every
            literary text, like punctuation, now represented an illegible and non-representational
            visual cue rather than a direct link to the phonocentric pauses and stops that are more
            commonly represented by punctuation. Usually an em-dash, for example, cues a reader to
            pause, but in the readies, the em-dash cues the eye to increase the speed and skip to
            the next word. At high rates of speed reading becomes a visual experience without any
            sounding out words. Punctuation cues a reader’s voice, whether reading aloud or
            silently, but in the readies, the punctuation circumvents the voice to cue the reader’s
            eyes. Suddenly, the digital humanities effort looked more like a Derridean
            experiment in grammatological reading, or what Greg Ulmer would call an applied
               grammatology. That is, the project suggested a future of reading, that will
            involve new devices like e-readers, and will change the definition and practice of what
            we call reading and even introduce an electracy.
As the project progressed through iterations, I published critical editions of two other
            experimental works by Bob Brown designed explicitly for his reading machine. Those
            critical editions appeared as part of a series edited by Jerome McGann and Nick Frankel
            on literature by design, and they strengthened my appreciation that visual
            non-phonocentric design might form the basis for literary meaning and a marginalized
            aspect of literature. My publications received much attention because they corresponded
            with the release of a number of new (or newly improved) e-readers. The New York Times Book Review published an essay that discussed my ongoing
            research and mentioned one of the new critical editions. That essay also included a link
            to my reading machine, and on one day I received five thousand hits to the website and
            many more over the course of a few weeks. The reading machine on my website offers an
            e-version of what Bob Brown's machine proposed, in one iteration, in the late 1920s and
            early 1930s. He called the texts prepared for the machine readies. The texts
            running through the machines on my website include some of the readies produced for
            Brown's machine by modernist poets and writers. 
 As the project continued to attract interest, I published a series of other articles
            and chapters and continued to do biographical research on Brown’s life and his machine.
            In the early 1930’s, the beaming out of printed text over radio waves and the televisual
            poetry that Brown predicted and advocated for had an absurd air of science fiction,
            which has led many to read Brown’s plans for the machine as simply an art-stunt. In
            support of that view, in 1931, Brown wrote in enthusiastic hyperbole, similar to the
            style of other avant-garde manifestos of the time, about the machine's potential to
            change reading forever. For those interested in the digital humanities now, Brown's
            research on reading seems remarkably prescient in light of the phenomenon of
            text-messaging (with its abbreviated language) and electronic text readers. You are no
            doubt reading this article online with the words beamed out tele-matically. And Brown's
            practical plans for his reading machine include precise details that evoke both
            steampunk design and Kindle: 
               Extracting the dainty reading roll from its pill box container
                  the reader slips it smoothly into its slot in the machine, sets the speed
                  regulator, turns on the electric current and the whole 100,000, 200,000, 300,000
                  or million words spill out before his eyes [. . .] in one continuous line of type.
                  My machine is equipped with controls so the reading record can be turned back or
                  shot ahead [. . . ] magnifying glass [. . .] moved nearer or farther from the
                  type, so the reader may browse in 6 point, 8, 10, 12, 16 or any size that suits
                  him.
               
             Brown's reading machine was designed to unroll a televistic readie in the
            style of modernist experiments; the design also followed the changes in reading
            practices during the first quarter of the twentieth century. Gertrude Stein understood
            that Brown's machine, as well as his processed texts for it, suggested a shift toward a
            different way to comprehend texts. That is, the mechanism of this book, a type of book
            explicitly built to resemble reading mechanisms like ticker-tape machines rather than a
            codex, produced at least for Stein specific changes in reading practices.
On the one hand, the inspiration for Brown's machine certainly includes Duchamp's
            machines and poetics. Artists like Raymond Roussell built their own Surrealist reading
            machines relatively soon after news of Brown’s reading machine appeared on the scene. It
            seems fitting that Brown would call the processed texts the readies, explicitly alluding
            to talkies and movies, and implicitly to readymades. In light of his own claims in
               The Readies to do for reading what Pablo Picasso did for
            painting, or what James Joyce, Gertrude Stein, and e. e. cummings did for writing, one
            might call Bob Brown the Marcel Duchamp of reading. The fascination with machine
            aesthetics among the avant-garde was very much of the moment in June 1930. In an issue
            of the modernist magazine transition, in which Brown
            announced his machine, the magazine's editor, Eugene Jolas, declared, The mechanical surrounds us like a flood. The machine and its relations
               to man is doubtless one of the major problems of the age. Ever more accelerated
               becomes the tempo, ever more whirling are the pistons, ever more violent is the
               influence of this titanic instrument upon the thoughts and acts of man (379).
            The context of his literary and artistic tastes and writings make it easy for even the
            best critics, and sometimes for Brown himself, to think of the project only in terms of
            the modernist revolution of the word and as a stab in the dark at
               writing modernly.
         
On the other hand, Brown seemed to consider his machine and the changes to reading in
            much more practical and even commercial terms like microfilm than like Duchamp’s
            toy-like machines. Unlike microfilm, in Brown’s machine the text would roll out in
               one continuous line of type. The magnifying glass,
            spools of one line of type, electric current, controls and regulators all seem both
            quaint and futuristic. Using his machine one could see microscopic
               type on a movable tape running beneath a slot equipped with a magnifying glass and
               brought up to life size before the reader's birdlike eye. One could also
            control the speed, bringing the usual relaxed pace of reading up to the fast modern
            speed of the day.
 Whether avant-garde provocation or patent-pending application, the printed form of the
            readies used punctuation marks as visual analogies, and this essay seeks to examine that
            aspect of textual production usually effaced in tagging, digital humanities databases,
            and in phonocentric readings of texts whether online or not. Readies function as a
            printed analogy for what reading will feel and look like spinning
               past the eye out of a word-machine, and, in that sense, em-dashes on a
            printed page are, for Brown, a crude attempt to simulate motion.
            How does digital humanities account for motion in texts and reading? How does one tag
            motion? How does one include motion in a concordance? These are not simply avant-garde
            provocations, but practical questions that digital humanities must begin to
            confront.
 In Brown's readies, the em-dashes have a visual equivalent in the cartoon action lines
            that sometimes alternatively indicate light, surprise, or inspiration (Eureka). They are
            also synonymous with the xxxxxxxx of redacted texts. In either case, instead of
            punctuation serving a phonocentric system, those marks now serve a visio-semantic system
            much like the system of visual poetry. The style of preparation and reading of these
            texts led, counter-intuitively, to modern realist novels by James T. Farrell and in
            Brown's own You Gotta Live! In those cases, it did not
            break with realist illusion, but it suggested the condensed, rapid, and cartoonish
            qualities of the dark gritty urban novel often of crime and detection. The staccato
            could find itself as a speaking style even as it suggested the visual equivalent of
            flickering images One of the ongoing debates about visual poetry concerns whether the
            marks on the page should serve the voice, serve to represent what a voice speaks, or
            should explicitly visual poetry have no syntactic alphabetic translation ; that is, the
            poems, like Bob Brown’s work, have no alphabetic equivalent nor a syntactic structure
            that one can decipher from the visual (and possibly moving) marks on the page (see for
            example, Drucker 1996, 120). Is writing a slave to speech? Are there poetic and
            aesthetic effects that have no translation in speech? The visual poets set out to write
            poetry not intended to represent an author's voice, but to directly imprint a process
            and a visual aesthetic that has no equivalent in speech. This poetry demands a tactical
            visceral literacy. Among the avant-garde poets who prepared texts for Brown's machine,
            F. W. Marinetti sent a visual poem, titled Words in
               Freedom/ Marinetti’s poem pointed to one lack in the particular machine Brown
            conceived. One section of Marinetti’s poem, Olfactory
               Poetry, only suggested smells when the words were read as representations of
            odors rather than as olfactory objects. The machine did not cue a sense of smell, but if
            Marinetti prepared his poem today perhaps he would use some digital equivalent to a
            scratch-and-sniff design.
In Brown's Readies, punctuation marks become visual
            analogies. For movement we see em-dashes (––) that also, by definition, indicate that
            the sentence was interrupted or cut short. These created a
               cinemovietone shorthand system. The old uses of punctuation,
            such as employment of periods to mark the end of a sentence, disappear. Reading
            machine-mediated text becomes more like watching a continuous series of flickering
            frames become a movie. The reader’s ability to recognize punctuation marks as analogies
            for cinematographic zooms, close-ups, and special effects also allows the scenes in the
            Readies to function as an allegory for the process of reading in the age of machines.
            Readies sought to illuminate the form of a process rather than the form of a medium.
            Mechanical poetics (like Marcel Duchamp's descriptions of an impossible fourth
            dimension) magnify reading as a cultural technological medium without a single essential
            form. Using punctuation in this way as a visual score rather than as a set of cues for
            reading aloud problematizes traditional literary interpretation. Precisely because
            punctuation marks usually function to guide the voice to read prosody, the use of
            punctuation as an analogy for motion and other optical effects moves reading from an
            interpretation of words in connection with an author's voice toward an interpretation
            that emphasizes design, visual aesthetics, and movement. Readies do not efface
            expressivity, but they put the tone of voice in doubt. That kind of visual pun logic was
            common at the time in works by such artists as Marcel Duchamp and the Surrealists.
            Duchamp, a formative influence on Brown's experimental and visual poetry, designed,
            built, and found readymade machines that suggested one could build or plan a machine
            that would never produce the same result twice. They also parodied the conception of
            machines as being only in the service of efficiency, reproducibility, and market
            economies. Does Brown’s machine simply parody microfilm machines as an elaborate art
            stunt?
 The em–dashes do not make the prepared texts, or readies, easier to read or more
            accessible, rather those marks change the very rules and constraints of what constitutes
            reading. The visual punctuation suggests the 3-D sculptural apparatus involved in
            reading and a precursor to future reading machines — perhaps not hand-held, but spatial,
            sculptural and dependent on the place for the reader's body. In describing how to read
            digital poetry, Roberto Simanowski describes the process of transforming text into a
            post-alphabetic object that allows for both reading and playing with a text . One discovers a similar process in the
            readies only when using my e-version of Brown's machine because only then does the
            reader move the text at a pace that changes the printed text from representational to an
            object of perceptual presentation. Without using the machine, the most noticeable
            aspects of the texts concern their representational meanings. The visceral object-ness
            of reading as a process is left undiscovered until one uses the simulation. Without the
            machine, the printed readies are, in many cases, unremarkable. When one uses the
            machine, the readies are about the process of reading. In that machine-reading, the
            illegible aspects of reading, like the perception of speed, pace, directionality (those
            usually implicit aspects of reading a printed or pdf) become foregrounded Now, using the
            machine one notices un-translatable visual effects of pace; for example, moving the text
            at a high rate of speed creates an optical illusion in which the text direction seems to
            reverse. This sort of effect is outside the realm of thinking of reading only in terms
            of literacy and representation. Literacy depends on thinking of decoding in terms of
            alphabetic and syntactic equivalents, and dismissing any other stray visual marks
            as illegible. 

            
            An image of an interface to the Reading Machine
         
The electronic project described here began as a mere supplement for my publications and
            research on Brown. From the initial motivation, work on the project led first to a way
            to think about databases, interfaces, and mechanized procedures as alternatives to the
            dominant processing technologies and procedures, and later to a realization that one
            could simulate reading and experiences much as one simulates running with a Wii Fit; one
            could experience alternative constraints to the dominant print-based styles of reading —
            alternative styles and processes (like reading from a scroll) usually only described
            rather than demonstrated in scholarly studies. So, the Brown machine simulation became a
            prototype for a series of simulations on other reading situations both in the past and
            in potential futures.
 To better illuminate this important moment in literary history, and to avoid the
            problem that Brown identifies as using printed analogies to crudely simulate movement,
            the online simulation moves beyond the goal of making accessible and available the works
            published as readies. I began to suspect this other theoretical aspect when I consulted
            with Michael North, one of the leading authorities on modernist literature and on Bob
            Brown's work. North suggested, in terms of my simulation project, that the computer was
            the machine; so, we did not need to draw a picture of a machine in the machine. The
            machine should scroll the text. Finally, unlike Simon Morris, the British
            publisher and artist whom I had consulted with about the machine a few years ago, North
            thought I should model my machine closely on Brown's readies and machine. Morris thought
            the machine we built should look to Brown for inspiration, but not be modeled closely on
            the readies. N. Katherine Hayles, a leading scholar of electronic literature, asked me,
               Did Bob Brown build the reading machine or just imagine
               it? My answer was that the evidence of the works he produced for a reading
            machine and his patent proposals for the machine make the answer ambiguous. Was it
            analogous to a ticker-tape machine or a microfilm machine? There is evidence for both
            and perhaps some combination of these two types of reading machines. That ambiguity of
            the model of Brown’s machine also makes building an actual machine a challenge – perhaps
            an impossible challenge – a challenge of making a representation, an analogy, a metaphor
            for a provocation meant to unsettle our facile and received ideas about reading,
            analogy, and representation itself. This was no simple task.
 In thinking about the implications of how the machine compiles, cites, and indexes a
            database of texts, one might overlook other issues, like motion and optical illusions,
            that we usually do not include in databases. How does one cite the pace of a reading? Is
            it something that applies only to specific uses and readings and therefore is not cited
            as part of the text itself? To answer this question, I needed to better appreciate how
            citation is normally handled in printed on paper literature rather than in the age of
            machine-reading. I turned to the definitive source for the consensus view of how to cite
            literary works, the MLA Handbook.
 As the epigraph from the MLA Handbook makes clear, how one
            accesses a text becomes a necessary component of the text's contours at the very least
            for the dominant citation system in the humanities. In that situation, the type of
            reading (a genre of reading procedures) and the mechanisms used to read are no longer
            secondary to the essence of the word, page, or book. The Modern Language Association has
            recently amended their guidelines for the style and format of the Works Cited
            section. The word Print must now follow some of the references,
            indicating that the dominant textual medium is not the printed text. The word
               print follows books printed on paper, bound, and published (see
            the MLA Handbook, 7th edition, 2009, 126-128). The change
            is relatively recent, and appears in the 7th edition of the MLA
               Handbook and the third edition of the MLA Style
               Manual (2008-09). The guideline for authors to specify which medium they cite
            from seeks to recognize the increasing diversity and importance of non-print media.
            Considering the increasing prominence of journal services like JSTOR or Project MUSE
            (subscription services that make available journal articles and other scholarly material
            online in electronic format), and the fact that sometimes these Web editions may vary
            significantly from print editions of the same text, the MLA wanted to make it as clear
            as possible where and how readers retrieved cited documents, and to account for any
            apparent discrepancies. How you read changes the type or genre of reading practice.
In the preface to the latest edition of the Handbook, the
            current Executive Director of the MLA, Rosemary Feal, remarks that in the 1977 MLA Handbook the instructions stressed that using fresh black ribbon and clean type are essential and that
            edition of the Handbook also advised against using thin paper except for a carbon copy. Feal notes that 
               in just thirty years, there has been a dramatic shift in the way
                  we conduct research, find primary and secondary materials, process information,
                  and prepare a paper for submission
               
            . Mentioning typewriter ribbon as the index of the shift suggests that the shift
            concerns production of manuscripts and publications rather than the change in how we
            read and access texts that the new Handbook addresses in
            the discussion of the formatting of the Works Cited section. The works cited must now
            indicate how one accessed or read particular texts, not indicate how those texts were
            produced (but the Preface does mention that parts of the handbook assume 
               that all students write papers using word-processing
                  software
               
            ). The distinction is crucial — adding Print or Electronic in a
            bibliographic record is not indicating anything about how the text was written,
            prepared, or published originally, but rather in what medium it was read. The inclusion
            of that one word changes how we cite texts. No longer do we cite its means of production
            (publisher, author, date, etc.) alone. We now must cite the means of consumption: we
            cite the technology or the type of reading machine (e.g. printed book device, DVD,
            microfilm, etc), and that small inclusion shifts the ground of reading and suggests two
            aspects of the readies.org project that are easily missed. One must now include the word
            READIES after a citation of a text from that site, and one must recognize a fundamental
            difference in reading readies in the machine online and reading only the transcript in a
            printed collection. The texts are different – the meaning, look, affective impact,
            ideological positioning, and genre are different. Perhaps, in the future, scholars will
            think of reading (or how we consume texts) as having genres in the way that we readily
            accept genres of a text’s production. Scholars will specialize (and have already begun
            to specialize) in the machines used to read. Instead of focusing on periodization,
            genres of production, or languages of literature, the digital humanities are opening the
            door (and readies.org leading the way) to appreciating genres of practices and their
            comparative readings, for example, reading a phrase spray painted on a wall versus on
            readies.org. The readies.org project demonstrates one genre of reading, and it also
            demands specialized interpretive perspectives.
 Other critical perspectives, like reader response approaches, stress the importance of
            the reader, but with the new requirements from the MLA the entire profession of readers
            (professional readers of the modern languages) makes reading an ontological aspect of
            the works cited. Reading now has genres, and the future of digital studies will include
            the study of these genres and their corresponding poetics in the way that literature
            programs study the genres and poetics of texts (e.g. romantic sonnets, realist novels,
            modernist visual poetry, etc.). What seemed bizarre, creative, or beyond the structure
            of a text has now become a widely accepted and crucial aspect of a text's structure.
            Elsewhere I have coined the term infrastructuralism to highlight the new
            importance of the apparatus — not a singular apparatus like the cinematic one described
            in ideological film theory, but rather varied and multi-modal access machines (e.g.,
            e-readers, web-readers, search engines, indexing bots, DVDs, iPads, etc.).
 The key discovery is that how one reads a text (the machine one uses) is part of the
            works cited, not separate from it. Reading is always already mediated by machines, and
            therefore, always already virtual, simulated, artificial, and dependent on the illegible
            mechanism supporting it. As the opening epigraph by Jean-Luc Nancy explains, the
            binding, glue-marks, the bookbinders markings, and other illegible aspects of the book's
            apparatus make reading possible. Reading is always already depended on the illegible. In
            the age of e-reading devices appearing (and changing) regularly, the illegibility of
            these delivery systems (i.e., the props for reading) have a more obvious stress and
            exposure. There is no direct reading outside of technology, and the current interest in
            digital access technologies will open a field of reading different from the histories of
            reading in the West to examine how the access technologies become essential aspects of
            the texts themselves. What is the difference between the book and its support
            (paper,computer screen or vellum, etc)? Or, put another way, how does reading change the
            database (in books, online, or some other medium)? Digital humanities research focuses
            on the infrastructure of texts, but almost exclusively on databases rather than on
            reading interfaces. Much of the research focusing on databases assumes the medium and
            interface apparatus as a neutral ground, and depends on a monolithic idealized reader. 
 Throughout the last decade through the current day, much digital humanities research
            has examined and used databases; in fact, one might argue that the database is the
            foundation and goal of digital humanities. In the database driven research, of which
            readies.org is certainly a part, digital technology allows not only for expansion of
            concordances, but also, and more importantly, for new types of tagged, hyperlinked, and
            radiant texts. The term database-driven and database are more metaphorical
            than literal structured data. Databases changed the experience of reading, and that
            change served as the initial focus on the readies.org project. In Radiant Textuality: Literature after the World Wide Web, Jerome McGann
            locates the rise of these new types of database driven reading practices as occurring in
            the context of a resistance to advances in processing texts; he explains that [i]f
               certain features of the new information technologies have overtaken us – for
               instance, the recent and massive turn to word processing – more advanced developments
               generate suspicion
            . The readies.org project began as a way to mine the
            archive of materials related to modernist poetry, but as Peter Stallybrass, in a special
            issue of PMLA on databases in the humanities, explains,
               if database has been an incitement to the use of archive, it has changed our
               relation to the ownership of knowledge. And he continues: 
               One of the most radical aspects of database is its power to
                  separate knowledge from academic pres­tige and from its attendant regime of
                  intel­lectual property. Scholarship, as traditionally conceived, has maintained
                  its prestige partly through its privileged relation to the protec­tion and
                  retrieval of scarce resources. Now, however, millions of people who cannot or do
                  not want to go to the archives are accessing them in digital form. In addition,
                  digital information has profoundly undermined an academic elite’s control over the
                  circulation of knowledge.
               
            
         
Readies.org, starting as a simple database project, demonstrates an advanced word
            processing and makes an alternative form of reading available outside of academic
            publishing systems; that is, the project is available on the web without the protection
            of the rare and scarce texts. Stallybrass sees this simple situation of access as
            intensely creative, and he connects it to a necessary step in Shakespeare’s creativity.
            The databases will also reveal the extent to which the gatekeepers
               are themselves trespassers who do, perhaps unconsciously, what Shakespeare
               de­liberately and shamelessly did in the construction of his poems and plays. He
               appropriated for his own use what he read or heard, as can readily be seen in his
               most famous soliloquy; Stallybrass goes on to list many variants of to be or
            not to be — for about 25 years before Hamlet appears . He cites Mary Carruthers’s argument that
               having inventory is a requirement for invention.
             Not only does this statement assume that one cannot create (invent)
            without a memory store (inventory) to invent from and with, but it also assumes
            that one’s memory-store is effectively inventoried, that its matters are in
            readily-recovered 
               locations
                ( as quoted in )
            . The scholastic tradition taught students to organize 
               one’s reading as a database. In this pedagogy, reading is a
                  technology of inventorying information to make it reusable
                ( as quoted in )
            . The readies.org project makes reading into an inventory process; it allows
            everyone to simulate the creative genius’s process, who, like Shakespeare, could quickly
            choose among texts, process them, and produce startling results.
The shift from database to simulation begins in thinking about the
               inventory, since the use of the inventory is not originality, but rather
            a simulation of invention and discovery. One might argue that there is never a base-line
            invention, but rather more or less fertile inventories. Readies.org, at the locus
            between database and simulation, suggests how reading has a usually effaced visual
            aspect that opens a generative practice of discovery. One needs to run a simulation with
            the inventory to produce the simulation. Put another way, in Radiant Textuality, Jerome McGann argues that the general field of
               humanities education and scholarship will not take the use of digital technology
               seriously until one demonstrates how its tools improve the ways we explore and
               explain aesthetic works — until, that is, they expand our interpretational
               procedures
            . The expansion of interpretational procedures to
            include simulated reading experiences, as in the readies.org simulation, allows for
            students to conceive ideas all at once in simulation rather than 
               relying on step-by-step sequential processes that auditory
                  learning styles favor
               
            . He asserts that the inclusion of both processes advances comprehensive learning,
            and readies.org all at once-ness adds a non-logocentric or illegible aspect to
            interpretation; one easily missed, dismissed, or ignored without the reading machine.
            McGann stresses that learning to interpret literature through
               visual methods is a skill of increasing importance in a world where images have the
               capacity to dominate and direct human behavior. The visual aspects of
            readies.org enter the database-driven digital humanities much like a Trojan horse or
            Pandora’s box: once the databases’ interface allows for movement, inventory practices,
            and the non-logocentric visual, then reading and interpretation change; the foundation
            of the digital humanities changes too.
 McGann calls for a move beyond conceptual analysis into the kinds of knowledge
               involved in performative operations — a practice of everyday imaginative life
            . His discussion seems to borrow from a modernist
            visual poet-publisher-and-inventor, Bob Brown, whose reading machine now appears on
            readies.org. McGann writes that [Texts] are not containers of meaning or data, but
               sets of rules (algorithms) for generating themselves: for discovering, organizing,
               and utilizing meanings and data,
            . And, in doing so, he suggests that one could use
            a machine (perhaps the machine on readies.org) to not just present a direct and
            transparent representation of a text, but to move that text through a set of algorithms.
            In doing so, one would discover aspects of reading usually effaced by the demands of
            literacy and representation. The online readies machine of readies.org moves the texts
            through a set of algorithms (both in the preparation of the texts by eliminating
               unnecessary words, inserting the em-dashes, and in the variable speed and
            direction available in this online machine), performing precisely this move away from
            the direct and transparent representation of a text. In the same PMLA mentioned above, McGann explains the relationship between database and
            interface. 

            No database can function without a user interface, and in the case
               of cultural materials the interface is an especially crucial element of these kinds
               of digital instruments. Interface embeds, implicitly and explicitly, many kinds of
               hierarchical and narrativized organizations. Indeed, the database — any database —
               represents an initial critical analysis of the content materials, and while its
               struc­ture is not narrativized, it is severely con­strained and organized. The free
               play offered to the user of such environments is at least as much a function of
               interface design as it is of its data structure.
            
         
Again, what he describes moves close to the notion of what I am calling a simulation in
            readies.org (the online reading machine began as a database); the machine demonstrates
            this physical narrativization of the absolutely particular reading practice of each user
            and each specific reading (using the machine). If database is a base onto
            which we put things that are given (data), then simulation involves imitating and
            building models; the online reading machine (readies.org) builds a model, imitates a
            machine, and sets data in motion using a specific algorithm of constraints, much like an
            OULIPO experiment. The database sets the stage for simulations, but without thinking of
            the new role of the humanities as a ground for simulations of creative genius,
            invention, and discovery. The inventory is available every time we log on, and simply
            takes a few clicks to set the data in motion as a simulation. The reading machine
            simulation makes the user aware that reading is not simply decoding a meaning. Instead,
            reading depends on an inventive visual and physical activity. The demands of literacy
            usually discount the physicality of reading making it part of an invisible apparatus My
            research in the reading machine also involves a database, but the consequence of
            building this peculiar database led to an investigation of the next major aspect of
            research on the experience of reading: simulation of reading or moving reading away from
            literacy and toward something more like an athletic ballet or acrobatic display, a
               cirque du lecture. Of course, pretending to read is like pretending to
            pretend, it immediately challenges the binary between real authentic modes of reading
            and simulated, or artificially constrained, models of reading. The distinction between
            pretending to read in a certain way using the readies machine online and actually
            reading is a false distinction that has been deconstructed repeatedly: 
               To pretend, I actually do the thing: I have therefore only
                  pretended to pretend
                (Vincent Descombes, 1980,
                     137, discussing and loosely paraphrasing Jacques Derrida's writing on
                  Levinas and Bataille, but universally attributed as a direct quote from Derrida in
                  collections of quotes and blogs)
            . The reading machine online asks the user to perform, pretend, and simulate
            reading even as the user does the real activity we call reading. It allows for what
            Patricia Clough would call the absolutely particular affective (as opposed to the
            general abstracted subject positioning usually found in discussion of the politics of
            reading practices); she explains that digitization fundamentally changes the idea of
               recording and transmitting, and now ideological interpellation and subject
               disciplining can no longer be the centerpiece of an understanding of sociality, even
               though disciplining and socializing go on. It would seem necessary that we add to an
               understanding of sociality the modulations of the affective background
            . Readies.org demonstrates, and implicitly argues in
            those absolutely particular performances, that reading depends on the modulations of
               the affective background before and beyond subjective interpretation, as well as
            on a physicality of eye twitches, enervations, and constant rapid movements. 
 We usually associate electronic simulations with physical activities like driving,
            flying, or guitar playing. We also associate simulations with social systems, urban
            planning, or athletic activity, and products like Wii and Sims suggest a visceral
            interaction with databases of information. In the humanities, walk through simulations
            of ancient buildings, art museums, plans for cities never actually built, or historical
            events like world's fairs are now commonplace. The reading machine online asks the user
            to consider that sedentary reflective Apollonian thing we call reading as an acrobatic
            inventive thrill ride. Instead of rolling your eyes, the machine rolls the text by
            forcing the user to engage muscles atrophied in literacy, waiting to experience the
            visuality of reading in which serifs, dashes, and (( stray punctuation set in motion an
            animated cartoon of what reading will look like from the viewers of the future. In the
            1950’s, Bob Brown suggested to a television producer a children’s program that would
            animate letters and words, and, although the ideas was quickly rejected, animated
            letters and words later made up much of the content in programs like Sesame Street, The Electric
               Company, and Between the Lions. The reading
            machine, beyond Brown’s hopes, animated the words in absolutely particular ways with
            each use; so, if the goal was to use the machine as a tool for teaching generalizable
            linguistic rules of literacy, then it certainly failed. Now, more than fifty years since
            Brown passed away, the machine suggests aspects of an emerging literacy, different every
            time, affective-physicality, and visual non-logocentric reading; it is more APP or game
            than animated cartoon version of reading.
 In the midst of building the online reading machine simulation/analogy for a machine
            built in 1931, and preparing the database of readies texts, the art-stunt (but
            nevertheless prescient and practical) aspects of everyday reading became obvious. Speed,
            pace, direction, and visual cues took on a new importance that was already apparent, but
            not stressed, in printed texts. When Bob Brown published his proposal for a reading
            machine, he had been thinking about it for nearly 20 years. He thought of the reading
            machine as a tool to inventory all literary and non-literary texts. What he did not
            fully realize is that he also suggested that one could simulate an unfamiliar reading
            practice [one that might have worked to increase the rate of reading or frustrate it]
            using something like a reading machine; that simulation is precisely what my online
            machine suggests. The reading machine set in motion the next great stage of humanities
            research: using simulations (of reading) to study alternative reading practices — past,
            future, or imagined.
