Title:  Mining for characterising patterns in literature using
                    correspondence analysis: an experiment on French novels
Volume:  011
Issue:  2
Date:  22 May 2017
Abstract:  
                
                This paper presents and describes a bottom-up methodology for the detection of
                    stylistic traits in the syntax of literary texts. The extraction of syntactic
                    patterns is performed blindly by a sequential pattern mining algorithm, while
                    the identification of significant and interesting features is performed at a
                    later stage by using correspondence analysis and by ranking patterns by
                    contribution.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Computational stylistics
                 Computational stylistics is a form of computer aided literary analysis, that
                    aims to extract significant stylistic traits characterising a literary work, an
                    author, a genre, a period… Computational stylistics shares similarities with
                    computer aided authorship attribution; indeed stylometric methods have begun to
                    be developed in order to identify the most likely author of a text of unknown
                    attribution (see  for a discussion). 
                The term stylometry ( for a history of
                    the concept) could and has been used as a hypernym for both disciplines; the
                    commonalities lie in the method. Having chosen a set of texts, some measurable
                    properties are identified, and texts are mined for such properties or features.
                    Features can be very diverse.
                 Very basic features are traits such as the number of sentences in a text, the
                    number of words in a text, the average number of words in a sentence, average
                    word length, punctuation frequency. Other features are more properly linguistic,
                    relating to vocabulary size of a text (lexical richness), frequency of function
                    words, frequency of Part Of Speech (PoS) tags or PoS n-gramsAn n-gram is a
                        sequence of n contiguous elements, in this case of n contiguous part of
                        speech tags., syntactic complexityFor a list of syntactic
                        features that can be extracted from parse trees see ., etc. Obviously some of the higher
                    level features require either manual counting or a reliable NLP tool to perform
                    the annotation. 
                 Once features have been selected and counted, each text can be seen as a vector
                    that contains for each feature the counts of such feature in the text itself.
                    The different texts to be compared constitute a matrix such as the one
                    represented in Table 1. Counts can be in absolute or relative terms.
                    Normalization is recommended when the sizes of the texts are different.
                    Nevertheless one should consider that smaller texts have generally a higher
                    internal variability; thus it is recommended not to compare texts of too
                    different sizes and sometimes experiments are carried out on selected samples of
                    equal size. 
                
                    Example of a matrix containing the counts for three possible countable
                        features.
                    
                        
                        Feature 1
                        Feature 2
                        Feature 3
                    
                    
                        Text 1
                        30
                        15
                        6
                    
                    
                        Text 2
                        403
                        30
                        515
                    
                    
                        Text 3
                        305
                        149
                        58
                    

                

                 Several methods can then be used to measure and compare the texts based on the
                    frequencies of the features. They generally rely on vector distance measurements
                    that allow one to identify whether two texts show the same behaviour with
                    respect to the selected features. In Table 1 for instance it is evident that
                    Texts 1 and 3 show similar distributions, despite the difference in scale, as
                    they have roughly the same proportion of Features 1, 2 and 3, while Text 3 shows
                    a totally different behaviour, with a higher count for Feature 3 than for
                    Feature 1 and 2. 
                 The similarity of methods notwithstanding the purpose of computational
                    stylistics is profoundly different from the one of authorship attribution.
                    Indeed attribution methods aim to identify unconscious traits in the work of a
                    given author, that give him/her away and that are for this reasons normally
                    defined as fingerprints. The basic features listed above (such as
                    word or sentence length), together with function word distribution, have so far
                    proved to be very efficient fingerprints. It is possible that such traits
                    persist in a single author somewhat independently of the kind of text he/she is
                    writing, even aside from literary production in a strict sense (so for instance
                    they could be traced in his/her personal letters). 
                 On the other hand literary style is something that an author masters in a more
                    conscious way. It is possible that different works by the same author may show
                    different stylistic traits, although others may be found in all of his/her
                    works. Generally speaking, we can assume that more complex linguistic features
                    are used in a more conscious and controlled way and thus when some of them are
                    strongly over-used or under-used in an author with respect to others, this may
                    be taken as a possible stylistic trait. 
                 Moreover, authorship attribution can be clearly framed as a classification
                    problem (who is the most likely author of text A given a bunch of candidates)
                    and indeed it is applied as such not only to literature but also in forensic
                    contexts. Computational stylistics is an open-ended problem  that consists in identifying such traits as are most
                    distinctive of a set of texts, with respect to other ones. Thus from the
                    computational point of view, computational stylistic methods are framed as
                    algorithms that rank linguistic features in a given text based on measures of
                        interestingness. 
                Clearly such measures are more difficult to evaluate in terms of the accuracy
                    measures commonly used in information retrieval. A debate is currently on going
                    on whether computational stylistic methods should be a way to radically change
                    the methodology of literary criticism and make it more scientific. The
                    influential book by Ramsay, Reading Machines. Toward an
                        algorithmic criticism
                     tells us that it may but needn’t be the case. 
                 The method presented in this paper extracts and ranks interesting
                    differences in the use of syntactic structures from a given set of texts, and
                    will be illustrated by comparing four novels by four different authors. It is
                    therefore an exploratory algorithm - based on a set of freely available
                    computational tools - that aims to provide an aid to literary scholars without
                    fundamentally changing their normal method of analysis. For this reason it
                    should not be applied to discover completely new facts about literary style, but
                    rather to substantiate (or disprove) known factsThe same consideration
                        holds for other similar exploratory approaches, as was pointed out by Franco
                        Moretti in a recent lecture at the Sorbonne, Paris, 2015.. More
                    specifically, the qualitative analysis of results that is presented in the
                    second part of this paper constitutes an evaluatory test bed as well as a help
                    for computer scientists and NLP specialists to fine-tune their methods. 
                 This is not an uncommon scenario in today’s computational stylistics research;
                    it can be compared to the early stages of historical linguistics, when
                    researchers established their comparative method of genetic reconstruction on
                    Romance languages, for which in fact the antecedent (Latin) was available. Only
                    the possibility of independently verifying their methods on an attested source
                    could establish the correctness of comparative methods and allowed researchers
                    to subsequently reconstruct other proto-languages for which no attestation was
                    present (Proto-Germanic, Indo-european). 
                 This caveat notwithstanding, we believe that our methodology, alongside other
                    similar approaches, can already be useful for specialists, who can find
                    confirmation of known facts and thus substantiate their claims with more data.
                    With the added value that such algorithms are able to easily process large
                    quantities of text, and can thus be applied to that part of literature that
                    Franco Moretti  calls the archive (as
                    opposed to the canon), notably to works whose lower literary
                    prestige and high number make computational methods more attractive. 
            

                Computational stylistics
                 Works investigating the lexical differences between authors using stylometric
                    techniques are common in the literature; generally, studies count and compare
                    individual lexical elements (see some examples on Shakespeare and other
                    playwrights in , among many others) or lexical
                    patterns (or bundles, as in ). Similar techniques
                    are applied to the study of genres and of literary trends in a historical
                    perspective, in works that often go under the headwords of Distant
                        Reading
                     or Macroanalysis
                    . Finally, the sampling of the most frequent words
                    in a set of texts is at the basis of some of the most widespread techniques for
                    authorship attribution, such as Burrows’s Delta  and
                    its later re-implementations . 
                 Sometimes collocations are extracted and analysed with concordancing tools  and then compared to a norm corpus (this is the
                    approach normally followed in the corpus stylistics tradition since the seminal
                    works by Geoffrey Leech). In other cases dimensionality reduction methods are
                    used to graphically represent the differences between texts by projecting on a
                    bi-dimensional space the distances between the vectors representing the texts.
                    Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS), Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and
                    Correspondence Analysis (CA) are often used for this purpose , and are implemented in several tools for
                    stylistic analysisMost well known stylometry tools offer methods for
                        dimensionality reduction and plotting (Signature, JGAAP, TLAB, stylo for R,
                        ...) but they often work on word count matrixes only, or they do not allow
                        for finer result manipulation, which is the advantage of the method
                        presented in this paper. For a general introduction on the use of PCA to
                        stylistics see ; for an example among many
                        others of the application of MDS to authorship attribution see .. Such methods are interesting
                    because they allow the researcher to verify a priori assumptions on the
                    similarity/distance of different texts by observing the clusters that appear on
                    the graph. Moreover some of these techniques (PCA and CA) allow for the visual
                    representation on a graph of the features that are more associated with one text
                    than to the other ones. 
                 When working with a small number of pre-selected features, a commonly used
                    technique which gives the user insight into the decision process that the
                    algorithm used to produce the visualisation is the so called bi-plot (see Figure
                    1 for an example). 

                
                    Exploring US Presidential Inaugural Addresses. A piece of whimsy about
                        text and context. An example taken from the documentation of the software
                                TLABhttp://tlab.it/en/allegati/esempi/inaugural.htm. We thank the
                            TLAB developers for granting permission to use their plot in this
                            publication.
                    
                

                 As you can see from the plot, texts are represented in the bi-dimensional space
                    together with the selected features. The visualisation places the features in
                    the space near to the texts they are more strongly associated with. This means
                    that the researcher can easily identify which features are more responsible for
                    the differences between texts. Also, the relative positioning of the features
                    with respect to each other is indicative of the possible meaning that the
                    representation takes along the two axes. The labels in blue outside the plot on
                    Figure 1 are the interpretation that a human may give of the bi-dimensional
                    distribution of the features. 
                 Such visualization methods play a very important role in that they allow the
                    researcher not only to confirm or discard a given a priori classification, but
                    also to explain the reason why this is the case. In this sense, alongside
                    hypothesis driven studies, they can also provide a tool for investigation and
                    analysis that is more in line with common practices within literary criticism. 
                 Clearly such techniques can be used not only to study the authors' lexicon, but
                    also to try and detect syntactic differences in style. Reliable parsing is not
                    always available, and may work less well on literary texts even for English;
                    nevertheless syntactic patterns in the form of PoS n-grams or constructions can
                    be easily obtained, as PoS Tagging is nowadays available in many languages and
                    domains. 
                 The two main options when trying to port multivariate analysis to syntax are the
                    following: 
                        either a top down approach to feature selection is chosen thus
                            identifying a priori a limited set of syntactic structures (for an
                            example see, among others, );
                        or bottom-up pattern extraction algorithms are used, which allows for
                            an open ended set of features.
                    
                

                 These two scenarios mirror a distinction introduced by  between paradigmatic approaches,
                    focussing on the counting of categories, and syntagmatic approaches
                    targeting the combinatorial properties of language. 

                 Clearly the second option is more in line with the idea of an exploratory tool
                    and gives us some hope of being able to use such techniques in the future to
                    discover new facts about literary texts. Nevertheless pattern extraction
                    algorithms (such as sequential pattern mining, which we shall present in the
                    next paragraph) are known to produce a huge amount of patterns, and thus large
                    vectors, even for small portions of text. Thus bi-plots, that are so useful for
                    exploration, become unreadable due to the projection of thousands of features.
                    In the following sections of this paper a feature ranking method is presented
                    that aims to overcome such impediments, thus allowing researchers to conjugate a
                    bottom-up feature selection procedure and an exploratory visualization of the
                    results. 
            

                The methodology
                 The proposed methodology is based on the exploitation of two different
                    techniques, sequential pattern mining and correspondence analysis, followed by
                    an interpretation of the results, and is subdivided into 5 steps: 
                        data annotation
                        pattern extraction
                        pattern filtering
                        correspondence analysis and visualization
                        pattern extraction
                    
                
                 Data is first segmented into sentences, then syntactical categories are
                    annotated by using a freely available tool, TreeTagger , ;  for the French
                    tagset used here). Example 1 shows how a French sentence is annotated: 
                        Le livre est sur la table.DET:art - NOM - VER:pres - PRP - DET:art -
                            NOM - SENT
                    
                
                 On the PoS tagged text sequential pattern mining is applied, namely a data
                    mining technique introduced by  in order to
                    extract interesting characteristics and patterns in sequential databases.  in their study have shown the value of using
                    sequential data mining methods for the stylistic analysis of large texts. Our
                    extraction tool, EREMOSEREMOS  was developed
                        by the ACASA team at LIP6 in Paris, and is available via a web interface at
                            http://eremos.lip6.fr.
                    (Extraction et REcherche de MOtifs Syntaxique), allows for the extraction of: 
                        - sequences of full or simplified PoS tag sequences (DET:art - NOM -
                            VER:pres vs DET - NOM - VER)
                        - with or without the insertion of lexical elements (Le - NOM -
                            VER:pres vs. DET:art - NOM - est)
                        - with or without gaps (DET:art - NOM - VER:pres vs. DET:art - [*] -
                            est)
                        - of any given length (normally up to 5 positions including
                            gaps)
                    
                
                 Patterns are extracted with their counts. Three types of filtering are applied;
                    one is based on threshold settings. Users can set an absolute threshold,
                    filtering away, for instance, patterns with frequency less than, say, 5 in a
                    text; or a relative one filtering away, for instance, patterns that do not occur
                    in at least 1% of the sentences. Finally automatic filtering is applied in order
                    to eliminate patterns that are included in another one. So, for instance, if we
                    find the following results: 
                        Pattern 1: DET - NOM - VER - PRP - DET = f. 50
                        Pattern 2: DET - NOM - VER - PRP = f. 50
                     we can deduce that all instances the shorter pattern only occur in the
                    context of the longer one and Pattern 2 can be thus be filtered away. 
                 This extraction method has been tested on several corpora such as theatrical
                    plays, poems and novels. According to the size of the corpora and the settings,
                    this extraction method can produce up to 10,000 patterns that can be seen
                    globally as a syntactic description of the text. This method therefore is meant
                    to bypass the feature-selecting phase. The researcher doesn’t need to
                    pre-compile a list of possible syntactic sequences that may differentiate one
                    text from the others. Patterns are extracted bottom-up and blindly. Obviously a
                    large quantity of such patterns will be insignificant for stylistic
                    differentiation as they have probably the same frequency in all texts. 
                 Thus correspondence analysis is then performed as follows: 
                        pattern vectors from all texts under analysis are imported into one
                            big matrix
                        patterns that are not present in one text are assigned zero by
                            default, (smoothing is also possible)
                        the matrix may or may not be normalised, transforming absolute
                            frequencies into relative ones.
                        correspondence analysis is performed using the FactoMiner tool for R
                                
                        contributions are extracted for each pattern
                        filtering of pattern is performed
                        plots and result tables are printed
                     The last 3 points are crucial and require further description. 
                 Correspondence analysis (CA) is a dimensionality reduction technique developed
                    by Jean Paul Benzécri (, ) that is well known and often used in digital
                    humanities and textual analysis . The main advantage
                    of using CA with respect to, say PCA, and in using an advanced tool such as
                    FactoMiner to perform it rather than some of the commonly used stylometry GUIs,
                    is that the complete results of the analysis are available in a series data
                    structure. Two tables contain the coordinates to project both the texts and the
                    patterns into the plot, respectively. These allow for a selective printing of a
                    subset of patterns on the plot; moreover the proximity of a pattern to any of
                    the texts can be easily calculated by Euclidean distance, thus allowing for the
                    automatic identification of patterns more strongly associated with one text than
                    to the others. 
                 The third is the most important result table for our methodology and contains
                    the contribution of each pattern on the two axes; contribution is
                    defined as the actual contribution of that pattern to the overall displacement
                    of the position of texts in the resulting plot. If a pattern is strongly
                    overrepresented in a text with respect to the others, it will contribute greatly
                    to the displacement of the text in the bi-dimensional space. Thus, the average
                    contribution on the two axes of this pattern will be higher than the one of
                    other patterns that have more or less the same frequencies in all texts.
                    Subsequently, contribution can be used as an interestingness measure to rank
                    patterns. 
                 Finally the extraction tool EREMOS is also equipped with an instance retrieving
                    method; that allows researchers to see all instances in the text corresponding
                    to any given pattern. This latter feature is also very important as experts can
                    verify the evidence in texts and map the automatically identified patterns to
                    the actual linguistic structures that such patterns are in fact mirroring. 
                 We shall see with an example how this works practically. The current discussion
                    is not intended to be a thorough critical analysis of the chosen texts, but it
                    aims only to show what possible uses experts may make of the data. 
            

                An experiment: four classic French novels
                 In order to show how the methodology works in practice, four classic French
                    novels were chosen: 
                        Victor Hugo, Notre Dame de Paris
                        Honoré de Balzac, Eugenie Grandet
                        Gustave Flaubert, Madame Bovary
                        Emile Zola, Le ventre de Paris.
                    
                
                 The idea is to compare these four 19th-century works of fiction in order to
                    extract differentiating stylistic traits, without any a-priori targeted
                    structure. In the present experiment, for simplicity, a basic configuration is
                    chosen for EREMOS, extracting patterns 
                        from 3 to 5 positions
                        of simplified PoS tags
                        without gaps
                        without lexical elements.
                     In this configuration, EREMOS is basically working as a 3-4-5grams
                        extractor.Current research is ongoing with domain experts to identify
                        which is the most useful configuration for EREMOS. Thus possible
                    patterns from example 1 may be: 
                        Pattern_1Patterns are assigned an identifier, as it would be
                                difficult to deal with their full description in CA plots.:
                            DET - NOM - VER
                        Pattern_2: VER - PRP - DET - NOM
                        Pattern_3: DET - NOM - VER - PRP – DET
                     When performing CA with the basic settings, Figure 2 is what results. 

                
                    Corresponding analysis on the four selected novels with basic
                        setting.
                    
                
                 As you can see, the large amount of patterns makes the plot unusable and the
                    position of the tests themselves in the plot invisible. 
                 Using one of the settings provided by FactoMiner we are able to produce a more
                    readable Figure 3, where patterns are unlabelled and printed in grey with
                    partial tran sparency. 
                
                    Plot with partially out-shadowed patterns. In the image patterns are
                        unlabelled and represented in grey, while texts are represented in black. 
                    
                

                 Figure 3 shows us a clearer picture. Novels (here labelled with the names of
                    their authors) are diverging on the two axes. 
                 To understand the positioning of patterns and texts in a bi-plot the metaphor of
                    a magnetic field can be used. The majority of patterns are concentrated in the
                    centre, because they are equally attracted (represented) in all texts. On the
                    other hand some patterns are strongly attracted (over-represented) by just one
                    text and are repulsed by the others, positioning themselves at the extremity.
                    Others are equally attracted by two texts only, positioning themselves somewhat
                    in between. Moreover the force of attraction is not the same. Some patterns seem
                    to be stronger in pulling a text towards them: so for instance in our
                    case Balzac and Zola are less central. This can be interpreted in the sense that
                    such texts have stronger characterizing features than the other two. 
                 By using the figures produced by FactoMineR, we can go further, and actually
                    remove the cloud of central patterns, while retaining for further analysis those
                    patterns that are most contributive in terms of the displacement of the texts
                    over the two axes. Figure 4 shows for instance a plot displaying only the 10
                    most contributive patterns. Moreover, by combining contribution and proximity,
                    it is possible to select, among the patterns with high contribution, those that
                    are nearer to one text than to the other three. 
                
                    Top 10 most contributive patterns resulting from CA. 
                    
                

                 First of all let us see the aggregated resulting table, which provides the
                    results of CA in a textual way. In Table 2 the ten most contributive patterns of
                    the analysis are printed. For each one, the author they are mostly associated
                    with is indicated. This is calculated by measuring the Euclidean distance
                    between the position of each text and the feature, and choosing the nearest
                    text. 

                
                    Top 10 most contributive patterns. Compare with Figure 4.
                    
                        Contrib. rank
                        Pattern ID
                        Pattern
                        Novel/Author
                    
                    
                        1
                        Pattern_1211
                        NOM - ADJ - PUN - DET - NOM
                        Zola
                    
                    
                        2
                        Pattern_1028
                        VER – NAM - PRP
                        Balzac
                    
                    
                        3
                        Pattern_1025
                        NOM – PRP – VER – DET - NOM
                        Balzac
                    
                    
                        4
                        Pattern_1023
                        PRP – NAM – VER
                        Balzac
                    
                    
                        5
                        Pattern_1210
                        DET – ADJ - NAM
                        Zola
                    
                    
                        6
                        Pattern_503
                        NOM – PUN – KON - PUN
                        Flaubert
                    
                    
                        7
                        Pattern_1209
                        PUN – DET – NOM – ADJ - PUN
                        Zola
                    
                    
                        8
                        Pattern_1208
                        DET – NOM – ADJ – PUN - DET
                        Zola
                    
                    
                        9
                        Pattern_1018
                        VER – DET – NOM – PRP - VER
                        Balzac
                    
                    
                        10
                        Pattern_1207
                        VER – PUN – VER - PRP
                        Zola
                    

                


                 Moreover, a simple algorithm can be used to extract the top 5 most contributive
                    patterns for each novel, namely the top 5 patterns that are more associated with
                    each text. 
                 
                        for a in authors: 
                            for p in listOfPatternsOrderedByDecreasingContribution: 
                        n = getNearestNovel(p) 
                        add p to listOfPatterns[a] 
                        if listOfPatterns[a] has length = 5: 
                            exit 
                Algorithm 1: procedure to extract 5 top contributive patterns for each author. 
                 By running Algorithm 1 we can extract the following lists of patterns, which we
                    analyse in the following paragraph in detail. Notice again how the ranks of the
                    first 5 patterns of Hugo are much higher than the others. This means that such
                    patterns have a lower contribution. 

                
                    Top 5 most contributive patterns for Zola’s Le ventre de Paris.
                    
                        Contrib. rank
                        Pattern ID
                        Pattern
                    
                    
                        1
                        Pattern_1211
                        NOM - ADJ - PUN - DET - NOM
                    
                    
                        5
                        Pattern_1210
                        DET – ADJ - NAM
                    
                    
                        7
                        Pattern_1209
                        PUN – DET – NOM – ADJ - PUN
                    
                    
                        8
                        Pattern_1208
                        DET – NOM – ADJ – PUN - DET
                    
                    
                        10
                        Pattern_1207
                        VER – PUN – VER - PRP
                    

                
                
                    Top 5 most contributive patterns for Balzac’s Eugenie Grandet.
                    
                        Contrib. rank
                        Pattern ID
                        Pattern
                    
                    
                        2
                        Pattern_1028
                        VER – NAM - PRP
                    
                    
                        3
                        Pattern_1025
                        NOM – PRP – VER – DET - NOM
                    
                    
                        4
                        Pattern_1023
                        PRP – NAM – VER
                    
                    
                        9
                        Pattern_1018
                        VER – DET – NOM – PRP - VER
                    
                    
                        11
                        Pattern_1016
                        PUN – VER – PRO - PRP
                    

                
                
                    Top 5 most contributive patterns for Flaubert's Madame Bovary.
                    
                        Contrib. rank
                        Pattern ID
                        Pattern
                    
                    
                        6
                        Pattern_503
                        NOM – PUN – KON - PUN
                    
                    
                        20
                        Pattern_364
                        NOM – PUN – KON - ADV
                    
                    
                        31
                        Pattern_ 362
                        PUN – ADV – PRO - VER
                    
                    
                        35
                        Pattern_ 289
                        PUN – KON – DET – NOM - PRP
                    
                    
                        42
                        Pattern_ 327
                        PUN – KON – PUN - PRP
                    

                
                
                    Top 5 most contributive patterns for Hugo's Notre Dame de Paris.
                    
                        Contrib. rank
                        Pattern ID
                        Pattern
                    
                    
                        80
                        Pattern_ 31
                        NOM – KON – DET – NOM - PRP
                    
                    
                        85
                        Pattern_ 27
                        KON – PRO - NOM
                    
                    
                        184
                        Pattern_ 520
                        PUN – KON – VER
                    
                    
                        185
                        Pattern_ 833
                        NOM – PUN - KON
                    
                    
                        339
                        Pattern_ 190
                        ADV – ADJ - KON
                    

                

            

                Analysis
                 As we can see from Tables 3 to 6, the analytic results confirm the intuition
                    derived from the plot. Zola and Balzac are associated with the most contributive
                    patterns, namely with patterns that are strongly over-used in their respective
                    novels. Among the top 10 only one is associated with Flaubert and none with
                    Hugo. In fact, the first five patterns in order of contribution that stands
                    closer to Hugo (Table 6) are ranked 80 to 339, while all other novels have
                    associated patterns in the first 10 positions. 
                 Is it possible to say that Balzac and Flaubert show a more syntactically marked
                    language? In order to do that, we need to analyse more closely the instances for
                    each pattern, and see if the differences in the pattern frequencies are due to
                    stylistic reasons or to other more epiphenomenal facts. The phase of analysis is
                    very important because superficial formatting differences in the text may
                    sometime cause errors of tagging or simply push the frequency of some
                    insignificant patternsThus in the first phases of an analysis, CA can help
                        even in checking that corpora are correctly prepared and normalised.. 
                 In what follows some individual patterns among those extracted for each novel
                    are discussed. 
                
                    Zola
                     Pattern_1211 is very distinctive of Zola’s Ventre de
                            Paris. It occurs 188 times in this novel and close to none in
                        the other ones. Typical instances of this pattern are sentences like: 
                    
                        [1211_A] Elle parut l' âme , la clarté vivante , l' idole saine et solide de la
                                charcuterie ; et on ne la nomma plus que la belle Lisa
                                .[1211_B] Il était venu de
                                Vernon sans manger , avec des rages et des désespoirs brusques qui
                                le poussaient à mâcher les feuilles des haies qu' il longeait ; et
                                il continuait à marcher , pris de crampes et de souleurs , le ventre
                                plié , la vue troublée , les pieds comme tirés
                                , sans qu' il en eût conscience , par cette image de Paris , au loin
                                , très -loin , derrière l' horizon , qui l' appelait , qui l'
                                attendait .
                    
                     From the analysis of such instances it becomes clear that this pattern is
                        used in descriptions and enumerations [1211_A]; it is also very used in
                        parenthetical phrases [1211_B] with the function of free adjuncts with
                        adverbial function, namely modifying the verb (here marcher, walk). Such phrases could be rewritten as normal
                        prepositional phrases introduced by avec
                        (with), but the author shows a strong preference for this structure. 
                     The same can be said of Pattern_1208 and Pattern_1209, which is often a
                        concatenation of 1211: 
                    
                        [1209_A] le ventre plié , la vue
                                    troublée , les pieds comme tirés , ...
                                [1208_A] le ventre plié , la vue troublée , les pieds comme tirés , ...
                            
                    

                     Pattern_1207 also seems to be an expression of the same preference of Zola's
                        for implicit clauses to modify the verb and express manner. 
                     Notice how all these patterns contain punctuation elements, often commas.
                        The style of Zola is dry, effective, with frequent use of parentheticals
                        rather than explicit forms. 
                    
                        [1207_A] Il marchait , dormant
                                    à demi , dodelinant des oreilles , lorsque , à la hauteur
                                de la rue de Longchamp , un sursaut de peur le planta net sur ses
                                quatre pieds . 
                    

                     Instead the second most important pattern for Le ventre
                            de Paris - Pattern_1210 - is associated with a very specific
                        linguistic structure, namely with the modification of proper names, mostly
                        those of women. Here the feature identified seems more lexical than
                        syntactical, probably Zola is trying to recreate the jargon of the Parisian
                        populace, with people often being called with nicknames. 

                    
                        [1210_A] la petite Pauline ...
                                [1210_B] la belle Normande ...
                            
                    

                     The analysis thus seems to be in line with the received idea of Zola’s
                        intentionally choosing a realist style that should represent the reality of
                        with authenticity and in an objective way. 
                
                
                    Balzac
                     A first look at Eugenie Grandet’s patterns
                        tells us that Balzac has a somewhat different style, with a preference for
                        verbal structures and preposition, thus of explicit structures rather than
                        implicit ones. 
                     The first pattern is strongly associated with dialogical structures, which
                        are very frequent in this work:
                    
                        [1028_A] dit Grandet en .. [1028_B] reprit Charles en .. [1028_C] dit Eugénie en .. 
                    

                     The same can be said of Pattern_1016, which is used mostly to (post-)
                        introduce direct speech: 
                    
                        [1016_A] Bonjour , Grandet , dit
                                    -il au vigneron[1016_B] Mademoiselle , dit -il à
                                Eugénie
                    

                     Pattern_1025 is associated with two structures, both subordinate
                        infinitives, with an explicative value (1025_A) or to describe co-occurring
                        events (1025_B). 

                    
                        [1025_A] Depuis le classement de ses différents
                                clos , ses vignes , grâce à des soins constants , étaient devenues
                                la tête du pays , mot technique en usage pour
                                    indiquer les vignobles qui produisent la première qualité
                                de vin .[1025_B] A cette
                                observation , le notaire et le président dirent des mots plus ou
                                moins malicieux ; mais l' abbé les regarda d' un air fin et résuma
                                leurs pensées en prenant une pincée de tabac ,
                                et offrant sa tabatière à la ronde : Qui mieux que madame , dit -il
                                , pourrait faire à monsieur les honneurs de Saumur ? 
                    

                     Pattern_1023 is used in phrases containing proper names, often place names
                        in the function of modifiers of a noun. 

                    
                        [1023_A] L' Histoire de France
                                    est là tout entière.[1023_A] Les habitants de Saumur étant peu révolutionnaires,....
                            
                    

                     Pattern_1018 shows a main transitive verb with its object and an implicit
                        subordinate phrase. Like Pattern_1025, it is used to better specify actions
                        or events. Notice that basically this type of pattern constitutes the
                        counterpart to those used by Zola, who prefers the verbless forms of
                        predicate modification. With a little imagination we could write Zola’s
                        version of [1018_B] as something like “Grandet, la bouche fermée, regarda sa
                        fille”. 

                    
                        [1018_A] Charles tendit la main en
                                    défaisant son anneau [1018_B] Grandet regarda sa fille sans trouver
                                un mot à dire . 
                    

                     Thus Balzac’s style is more verbose, more explicit. The use of preposition
                        to introduce phrases or clauses is important to highlight the relationship
                        between head and modifier. It makes sentences less difficult to interpret.
                        Balzac is considered the father of realism, but he aimed at a broader and
                        more popular audience than Zola’s, (for financial reasons as well as for
                        artistic ones). His style reflects possibly this necessity, as well as the
                        time constraints of his immense production. 
                
                
                    Flaubert
                     All of Madame Bovary's patterns contain
                        punctuation. The five patterns all capture the same phenomenon, notably the
                        fact that Flaubert’s punctuation allows the comma to intervene before the
                        conjunction as in: 

                    
                        Le soir , quand Charles rentrait , elle sortait de
                                dessous ses draps ses longs bras maigres , les lui passait autour du cou , et , l' ayant fait asseoir au
                                bord du lit , se mettait à lui parler de ses chagrins : il l'
                                oubliait , il en aimait une autre ! 
                    

                     Patterns indicating a certain style in punctuation should always be taken
                        with a grain of salt, since punctuation in the edited version does not
                        always reflect the choice of the author, but may be submitted to editorial
                        guidelines. Nevertheless Mangiapane highlights the rhythmical rather than functional role that punctuation has
                        in Flaubert. Indeed, from the rhythmical point of view, in the given example
                        the commas mark the breathing pause that is present before as well as after
                        the conjunction “et”. 
                
                
                    Hugo
                     As was presented before, Hugo’s work is less syntactically marked than that
                        of the others. The patterns that do show some overrepresentation in Notre Dame de Paris are simple syntactical
                        structures rather than complex ones. 
                     Two of these patterns (Pattern_31, Pattern_27) are absent in Zola and
                        Balzac, but are shared with Flaubert. Pattern_31 is the longest. It seems to
                        be used mostly in descriptions of places, which are very rich in the
                        historical novel of Hugo, and help the reader to enter into the world of
                        medieval Paris. 

                    
                         [31_A]Au centre de la haute façade gothique du
                                Palais , le grand escalier , sans relâche remonté et descendu par un
                                double courant qui , après s' être brisé sous le perron
                                intermédiaire , s' épandait à larges vagues sur ses deux pentes
                                latérales , le grand escalier , dis -je , ruisselait incessamment
                                dans la place comme une cascade dans un lac ..
                            
                    

                     Pattern_27 is often used in structure subordinate clauses that show a
                        preference for demonstrative pronouns to underline situations. 

                    
                         [27_A] Ajoutons que Coppenole était du peuple ,
                                et que ce public qui l' entourait était du
                                peuple . [27_B] Et songer que ce
                                    peuple avait été sur le point de se rebeller contre
                                monsieur le bailli , par impatience d' entendre son ouvrage !
                            
                    

                     Pattern_520 and Pattern_833 are shared with other authors, though slightly
                        overrepresented in Flaubert. Here too the punctuation variant found in
                        Flaubert emerges, though not as strongly. 

                    
                        [520_A] Quasimodo se plaça devant le prêtre , fit
                                jouer les muscles de ses poings athlétiques , et
                                    regarda les assaillants avec le grincement de dents d' un
                                tigre fâché .
                    

                     Pattern_190 finally is used in comparisons and descriptions. 

                    
                        [190_A]Qui est aussi fraîche et aussi gaie que si elle était veuve .
                    

                     By this analysis, the style of Hugo seems to emerge as full of lively
                        descriptions, simple, personal, engaging, and popular just as we know it
                        from literary tradition. 
                
            

                Conclusion
                 We presented a detailed outline of a methodology for the extraction of syntactic
                    patterns in texts and for the measurement of their interestingness in a corpus.
                    The results suggest that this methodology bears substantial promise as a
                    hermeneutical instrument offered to experts in the literary domain to
                    investigate style in texts and to extract interesting stylistic features. For
                    this reason both EREMOS, namely the tool required to perform the pattern
                    extractions, and the R scripts used to perform correspondence analysis on such
                    extractions have been released and made available to the communityPlease
                        visit http://eremos.lip6.fr and
                            
                            https://github.com/francescafrontini/CAforEREMOS for further
                        information.. 
                 Other interestingness measures besides correspondence analysis have been tested,
                    which are based on the distribution of the patterns in different parts of the
                    same text , as well as on the comparison of each
                    text to a reference corpus . Such measures give
                    partially comparable results to the method presented here, which is based on the
                    cross-comparison of texts by means of correspondence analysis and on the ranking
                    of interesting patterns by contribution. However the latter is particularly
                    useful in that it not only extracts the most interesting patterns for each text,
                    but also provides information on shared patterns and on the fact that some texts
                    are less marked, or less characterised than others. 
                 New experiments using this methodology on a number of other texts have been
                    carried out; in particular parallel researches have studied the syntactical
                    aspects of characterization in Molière's plays (,
                        , ).
                    Furthermore, we have tested its application to tasks of authorship attribution,
                    by contrasting a collection of original and apocryphal short stories attributed
                    to Robert Challe . The development of the tool came
                    about through close contact with experts in literary criticism who were asked to
                    give advice on the extracted patterns. Results show how features that have been
                    independently identified by literary scholars as characterising a text or a
                    group of texts can be automatically extracted with the proposed method. 
                 A further interesting domain of application could be the study of
                        pastiches, namely texts that imitate and/or satirise the style
                    of an author or a genre. Finally and most importantly, further research will be
                    necessary to compare the kind of stylistic traits emerging from the use of
                    syntactic patterns for correspondence analysis with those emerging when using
                    lexical features, in order to see what differences these two linguistic
                    dimensions can capture on the same group of texts. 
            

                Acknowledgments
                 This research was supported by French state funds managed by the ANR within the
                    Investissements d'Avenir programme under reference the ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02 and
                    by an IFER “Fernand Braudel” Scholarship awarded by the Fondation Maison
                    Sciences de l'Homme. We thank the anonymous reviewers of GDDH 2015 and DHQ for
                    their helpful comments. 
            
