Title:  Collaboration in Digital Humanities Research –
                    Persisting Silences
Volume:  012
Issue:  1
Date:  04 April 2018
Abstract:  
                
                 Collaboration has become a hallmark of Digital Humanities (DH) research.
                    Nonetheless it remains under-discussed and for those not deeply engaged in DH a
                    bit of a mystery. Drawing on recent DH work and publications that engage with
                    questions of DH collaboration in different ways (e.g. 
                    
                    ), we analyse three types of DH collaboration:
                    1) human-human interactions; 2) human-machine/material interactions; and 3)
                    machine/material-machine/material interactions. We argue that engagement with
                    collaboration processes and practices enables us to think through how DH tools
                    and practices reinforce, resist, shape, and encode material realities which both
                    pre-exist, and are co-produced by them. We suggest that understanding these
                    entanglements facilitates a critical DH in which academic hierarchies and
                    disciplinary preconceptions are challenged.
            
Full Body Text: 
Collaboration has become a hallmark of Digital Humanities (DH) research , with scholars either actively engaging with various
                parties across and outside of the university or becoming increasingly aware that
                this is what they should be, or are at least expected to be, doing. In the European
                survey on scholarly practices and digital needs in the arts and humanities , for example, seven out of ten Digital Humanities
                researchers said they often or very often engage in
                collaboration. Nonetheless, or perhaps because of this generalized
                practice,collaboration has become increasingly taken for granted. However, we would
                like to suggest that it remains under-developed in both theory and practice,
                particularly with regard to partnerships that occur between academic and
                non-academic (typically technical) collaborators and between human and non-human
                actors (which, we argue, might productively be thought of as collaborators in the
                co-production of certain resources and forms of knowledge). Collaboration in DH
                research has not been ignored,See, for example, 
                    
                    . but it is still under-discussed in the field,
                particularly with regard to its diversity and subtlety. This can lead to particular
                kinds of omission in the discourse around collaborative projects. 
We were reminded of this during 2014-15 when we co-edited two volumes on Research Methods for Digital Humanities – one on
                    reading digital data ,
                the other on creating and curating such data . The aim of these volumes was to capture some
                sense of the range of research methods that contribute to the Digital Humanities. We
                therefore asked our contributors to discuss the research process of actual DH
                projects they had undertaken, and expected that many of the chapters would include
                some discussion of the collaboration processes integral to that work. But, to our
                surprise, despite the fascinating accounts of DH research we received, we were
                largely met with silence, and even active resistance, to this topic. When we tried
                to elicit more sustained accounts of collaboration, one contributor emailed the
                following: The way I/we see it, DH is not a method. It is an
                    explorative field of research where we use digital tools and materials to
                    revisit and map out new ways in the motley field of humanities, with its many
                    different disciplines, often described as a big tent. We try to capture some of
                    this richness in our chapter by addressing central methodological issues we see
                    in different practices in [our disciplinary field]. Going into technical detail
                    in one project is not in our interest, and we do not think it will be useful for
                    the readers of your book to get a detailed technical account when entering a
                    field of constant technological development. What we focus on is rather to set
                    forth more longlasting opportunities and challenges. (Email communication to
                    Griffin and Hayler, 5/6/2015) We cite this not as a criticism of our
                        contributors, but rather as an example of what is, to us, a surprisingly
                        common stance amongst DH practitioners. We certainly have
                some sympathy with the view that DH is not simply a method, or set of methods,
                though some processes and practices have come to typify the field as it stands. The
                contributor above reinterpreted our request for more detail on the nature of their
                collaborations as meaning a ‘detailed technical account’ which they did not want to
                provide. When we wrote the introduction to Research Methods for
                    Creating and Curating Digital Data in the Digital Humanities we
                therefore noted: 
                    As all the contributions to this volume indicate, digitising
                        and curating digital data is a collaborative effort involving multiple
                        disciplines, skills and tools… [but] the engagement with technicians,
                        technology experts, and technologies is often left unaddressed...Indeed, it
                        can be surprisingly difficult to get experienced researchers to discuss this
                        dimension of their work.
                    
                 How, then, might one promote a rich discussion of collaboration? A useful
                approach can be found in Marilyn Deegan and Willard McCarthy’s collection Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities
                . The contributions to this volume provide an extremely
                varied range of interpretations of what it means to
                collaborate, that also offers at least a partial index of the
                academic cultures within which such interpretations are made. We therefore take the
                diversity of approaches of our own two volumes, alongside those in Deegan and
                McCarty’s text, as our point of departure. In this article we do three things: we
                begin with a brief typology of collaborations within the Digital Humanities and then
                analyse the terms in which the types of collaborations we identify tend to be
                discussed by DH scholars, emphasizing the present limits of the discourse whilst
                also highlighting existing best practice. We conclude by exploring some reasons for,
                and ways in which, more nuanced descriptions of collaboration become silenced, and
                by re-emphasizing why such rich elaborations of collaborative research are vital for
                scholarship and pedagogy in the Digital Humanities. Throughout, we suggest that
                paying attention to the complexities of collaboration in DH research has the
                potential to a) broaden the community base, b) strengthen its presence in
                universities, c) demystify its processes, and d) further build an (at times
                posthuman) understanding of how different actors, human and non-human, come together
                in DH collaborations. This last point establishes what we might also more deeply
                learn from studies of collaboration: knowledge is very rarely, if ever, produced by
                individual human beings; coproduction is the typical experience and we politically,
                pedagogically, and practically need a better language for articulating this reality. 

                Typologies of Collaboration
                Collaboration, as a topic, is both normalized and widely discussed by many
                    fields. It is also a practice that is continuously engaged with, either directly
                    or indirectly, by all scholars, since their work a) dialogues with other work
                    and hence with other scholars, and b) near ubiquitously relies on computers for
                    searches, production, storage, and retrieval. In this section we therefore do
                    not claim uniqueness in terms of collaboration underpinning DH, but rather
                    address some of the features of collaboration that have specific salience for
                    DH. We highlight this because the image of the lone Humanities scholar,
                    frequently referenced in discussions of DH collaboration 
                    
                    , is receding as research funders
                    increasingly call for collaborative research projects, In February 2016,
                        the Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) of the UK, for example, had
                        a call for Research Grants – Early Careers which
                        specifically states that The Research Grants Schemes are intended to
                            support well-defined research projects enabling individual researchers
                            to collaborate with, and bring benefits to, other individuals and
                            organisations through the conduct of research. This scheme is not
                            intended to support individual scholarship. (at http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/funding/opportunities/current/,accessed
                        5/2/2016). as universities in many countries continue to, or start
                    to, base scholars in research clusters, centres, or similar groupings, and as
                    the impact agenda of the Research Excellence Framework
                    (REF) in the UK See http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/innovation/impacts/, accessed 5/2/2016, for
                        details. demands engagement One may, of course, legitimately
                        ask whether or not such engagement constitutes collaboration; the point here
                        is that being a lone scholar is largely no longer an option. with
                    stakeholders and partners beyond the immediate academic context. The
                        mooted Knowledge Exchange Framework (KEF) would only intensify this further.
                        See https://www.gov.uk/govenment/new/universities-and-science-minister-calls-on-universities-to-do-more-to-commercialise-research-and-innovation,
                        accessed 30/10/17, for details.
                
                Collaboration has thus gradually come to be a demand, if not an explicit
                    necessity, for Humanities scholars, even as many types of research audit,
                    including the REF, consider their work predominantly in terms of individual and
                    individualized outputs. Such tensions offer one reason for the necessity of
                    addressing collaborations at this time, not least in fields such as Digital
                    Humanities where collaboration is considered, by many, to be a prerequisite. 
                Collaboration is a complex, intersectional activity in which multiple forms of
                    co-working often occur simultaneously, even as they are differentially
                    privileged, acknowledged or, as in some instances, not acknowledged at all. Such
                    practices of coworking might include:
                
                    Various kinds of disciplinary, and cross-disciplinary, collaborations,
                        e.g. with colleagues in the same field, with colleagues from a different
                        field within the same knowledge domain, or with colleagues in a different
                        knowledge domain. 
                    Collaborations, as above, with people who are not colleagues, both inside
                        and outside of the university.
                    Collaborations across different locations: co-locational, in different
                        places within the same culture, or in different places in diverse cultures
                        (academic, national, international etc.). 
                    Various intensities of collaboration: e.g. close-continuous;
                        close-intermittent; superficial-continuous; superficial-intermittent;
                        one-off or repeat; etc. 
                    Different kinds of collaboration between human and non-human actors (this
                        latter typically being machines (hardware) and/or processes (e.g.
                        software)). 
                
                Such collaborations may also be described in terms of specific dimensions such as
                    communication patterns. Clay Shirky , for example,
                    suggests three types of communication patterns particularly associated with
                    online interactions and which might be used to identify types of collaboration: 
                
                    Point-to-point, two-way (as in a Skype call). 
                    One-to-many, outbound (as in newsletters). 
                    Many-to-many, two-way (web fora and other online group discussions).
                    
                
                To this list one might also add many-to-one, inbound (for instance in
                    crowdsourcing), and possibly others. Shirkey’s typology is based on human-human
                    interaction, where each set is defined by the number of contributing actants
                    involved and the direction of the most prominent flow of information. In
                    contrast, Timothy Butler and David Coleman  put
                    forward five fundamental models of collaboration, defined instead by how
                    information and knowledge are generated:
                
                    Library (a few people place material in a repository, many draw on it). 
                    Solicitation (a few people place requests, many respond e.g. a Request for
                        Proposal system, or crowdsourcing). 
                    Team (a small group working together on a project). 
                    Community (e.g. a Community of Practice). 
                    Process Support (systems that support repetitive workflows). 
                
                By focusing on the production, rather than just the spread of knowledge, Butler
                    and Coleman introduce the potential for explicitly including non-human actants
                    in models of collaboration. 
                Typologies, such as those above, are useful in elucidating specific aspects of
                    Digital Humanities work. They provide a theoretical, analytical framework for
                    thinking about collaboration rather than mapping its entangled realities. Here,
                    we would like to propose a different typology, designed to capture not just the
                    communication or generation of knowledge, but rather a meta-level focus on all
                    manner of interactions between actants in digital contexts. Such interactions,
                    as outlined, are direction neutral and allow for discussions of the travel of
                    information along any or all routes between collaborators. In this way,
                    interactions can be divided into:
                
                    Human-human interactions 
                    Human-machine/material interactions 
                    Machine/material-machine/material interactions
                
                Of these three types of interaction, the first and the second are discussed most
                    often within analyses of DH collaboration, though we would argue that their full
                    complexity is frequently overlooked. The third is, currently, the least
                    discussed, but requires further development in response to various new
                    approaches to materialism across the Humanities. Below we expand on each in
                    turn, focusing on the particular frame of academic DH research. It is worth
                    noting at the outset that this is an idealized framework; collaborations often,
                    maybe always, transgress the divisions shown above, with non-human actants
                    influencing human-human collaborations, which then reshape the non-human sphere
                    in turn. Collaboration, as we conceive of it, is truly entangled, developing
                    over time in ways which are complex to track. The proposed typology, therefore,
                    does not describe every collaboration, but rather elements that might appear in
                    every collaborative act. 
            

                Human-Human Interaction 
                Human-human interaction may refer to researchers and other partners who are
                    collaborating in producing and/or farming data in a joint
                    project, or to the connection between those who have produced Digital Humanities
                    resources and these resources’ end users (we see it as valuable to view such
                    interactions as collaborative precisely because they can result in the
                    co-production of knowledge). Collaboration between human actors is always
                    affected by the experiences and backgrounds from which such actors join the
                        collaboration Standpoint theory, for example, concerns itself with the
                        fact that researchers’ positionalities impact on the kinds of research they
                        do, how they do it and in consequence the outcomes of that research (see
                            
                        )., and in academic work this is
                    typically most clearly seen in disciplinary divisions. In Being the Other, for example, Melissa Terras discusses the
                    relationship between Humanities scholars and their collaborators from Computing
                    or Engineering Science working on DH projects .
                    Terras argues that in such cross-disciplinary collaborations, 
                        individuals...often find they are the
                                Other
                        
                    , i.e. they experience a profound sense of their own difference as their
                    work is defamiliarised – they are no longer normal. With
                    both sides destabilized in this manner, there comes 
                        the need for the construction of roles and
                            responsibilities that allow their skill sets to be admitted to a working
                            team
                        
                    . The team thus often needs to be built from first principles, emphasizing
                    the skills that brought the collaborators together whilst minimizing the
                    friction of competing disciplinary norms (and, indeed, establishing new norms
                    that future collaborations may benefit from deploying). For anyone experienced
                    in interdisciplinary collaboration, there is little that is surprising here, and
                    yet such experiences of alterity, and its legitimate and frequent challenges,
                    are often forgotten or left unarticulated, rendering them as a surprise for each
                    new generation of scholars who might therefore reasonably feel that they, alone,
                    encounter such difficulties. 
                 Terras’ notion of otherness has strong resonances with
                    feminist methodological work from the 1980s and 1990s where questions of
                        what counts (what knowledge, what skills, what
                    experience etc.) were key to debates about the status of women in the academy
                    and in knowledge production (see e.g. 
                    ). Underlying such questions of what
                        counts are (often deep-seated) inequalities, more or less
                    consciously acknowledged hierarchies of knowledge, method, and practice that
                    have led Willard McCarthy to suggest that true collaboration within a group
                        happens rarely because it requires an un-boss’,
                    someone, according to McCarthy, who is primus inter
                        pares, i.e. an actor able to make calls on what is valid
                    and yet able to step back and allow others to lead and act as the work demands
                        . This is no easy task. 
                The very notion of a primus inter pares indicates power differences,
                    and therefore issues of leadership and of equality which also deeply troubled
                    feminist research when the discipline of Women’s or Gender Studies was seeking
                    to establish and legitimize its work in academia (just as DH has been doing, in
                    its current form, since around the turn of the century). The early feminist
                    demands for the recognition of equality within knowledge production were very
                    much concerned with the inclusion of women in the academy (e.g. ); the recognition of the co-production of knowledge
                    between researchers and those researched , and an
                    attendant reduction in the assumptions of power differences between these; and
                    the inclusion and support of diverse research methods and processes. In a
                    similar fashion, most of the current debates in the Digital Humanities about
                    status, being the other, inclusion, legitimation, and
                    support revolve around status markers and power differentials between different
                    kinds of knowledge workers, and in particular between a) those who are
                    Humanities scholars and those who come from a technology or engineering
                    background, and b) academic and non-academic partners (there can be, and often
                    are, overlaps between a) and b)). 
                In No Job for Techies, for example, John Bradley
                    discusses how the construction of technical staff as support
                        services tends to figure these staff as occupying marginal or
                    secondary roles (the secretaries or services providers – in
                    feminist terms – of DH), and the diminutive term
                        techie frequently reinforces that relegation . Bradley addresses this tendency directly
                    in terms of power, arguing that in software development the need to involve the
                    external user in software design constitutes a model form of power sharing that
                    is often ignored . Unsurprisingly, given
                    the emphasis on individual research publications in the UK, Bradley argues that
                    one way to change entrenched power structures within the Digital Humanities is
                    by 
                        getting status for [technicians’ work] by framing it in
                            the context of doing research...[i.e.] reporting the results by writing
                            about them
                        
                    . He himself reported directly on the 2008 Research Assessment Exercise
                    and on the research outputs that King’s College London
                    submitted, even though there was no separate panel for Digital Humanities (as
                    was also the case for Women’s and Gender Studies in their beginnings, and was
                    again the case in the most recent such exercise in 2014). The desirability of
                    submitting to such exercises in order to gain status is certainly up for debate,
                    but here we want to focus on the fact that Bradley’s discussion of power
                    differences among staff involved in DH projects explicitly recognizes status
                    differences and inequalities between academic and
                        professional staff (his terms) as one of the central
                    issues in DH collaboration. This may also work the opposite way, for instance
                    when technical staff are the experts that understand how to
                        translate a potential project into digital form, not
                    least as the requirement of complex digital work becomes the norm in research
                    projects, with masculinized tech workers dominating institutional discussions,
                    and commanding spending decisions, over a feminized academic class (not least as
                    these gendered differences often manifest as gender differences). 
                Bradley’s discussion of alt-ac
                     jobs constitutes another articulation on this
                    topic, showing how DH workers can become marginalized through the denigration of
                    certain kinds of expertise. Power differentials may manifest themselves in
                    myriad ways. Bradley’s fundamental point holds across them all however: power
                    structures both within and beyond the immediate interactions can lead to the
                    work of one or more collaborators being reduced or going uncredited, and to the
                    detriment of their institutional and subject standing.
                It is important to realize that one way in which such differences can be
                    articulated is by remaining silent about their processes, thus side-lining, or
                    invisibilizing, certain categories of workers in DH or academe more broadly;
                    silence is also a form of articulation – it speaks. This is a point that we will
                    return to. 
                In different terms, Julia Flanders explores the power dynamics in human-human DH
                    research practices, suggesting that 
                        collaboration...is always understood to carry with it
                            some kind of sacrifice, a trade-off between autonomy and synergy
                        
                    . The vocabulary which characterizes her essay, from
                            sacrifice to the intensif[ication
                        of] the concessions we make to the demands of the social
                        contract and the voluntary submission
                    
                        to norms of behavior and constraints on
                            our freedom of action
                        
                     Emphasis added., further contribute to the sense of an
                    agonistic relation . This is confirmed in Flanders’
                    assertion that DH is 
                        a domain...where we see, locked in
                                struggle, the drive towards absolute consistency and
                            technical processability on the one hand, and the drive towards critical
                            independence and disciplinary debate on the other
                        
                     Emphasis added.. Given this agonistic relation, Flanders
                    suggests that 
                        our instinct may thus be...to treat disciplinary debate
                            as the opponent: something that needs to be eliminated or ignored in
                            order for collaboration to proceed
                        
                    . But in this drive we might also (often) find the loss of exactly the
                    diversity across disciplines which makes collaborative work so desirable – the
                    same friction which produces hierarchical thinking, factions, and the need for
                    McCarty’s primus inter pares might also be marshaled,
                    instead, to produce the new thinking required to solve a problem or spot the
                    absences produced by particular knowledge domains’ norms and traditions. Such
                    solutions might well end up contributing to the very consistency and
                    processability that their necessary friction is so often positioned as
                    inhibiting. Flanders’ own response, to move beyond a survival-of-the-fittest
                    model of approaches to intellectual labour, is to try to define 
                        the precise role of dissent within our collaborative
                            ecology
                        
                    . We would endorse this approach. By increasing the understanding of what
                    each discipline offers to the collaboration through rather than
                        despite its difference, otherness becomes a tool for
                    potentially overcoming technical, theoretical, and/or creative problems. Brian
                    Rosenblum and Arienne Dwyer report positively about their collaboration in
                        Copiloting a Digital Humanities Center: A Critical
                        Reflection on a LibrariesAcademic Partnership
                    . Although fully aware of the cultural differences
                    between the library as a service provider and being an academic as
                    research-oriented, they cite the differences between them as enabling them to 
                        brainstorm creatively, problem-solve efficiently, fill
                            in each other’s disciplinary knowledge gaps, and alternate taking the
                            lead on any given activity
                        
                    .
                Where Flanders looks at human-human DH collaboration in terms of a
                    quasi-evolutionary social politics, Geoffrey Rockwell discusses it as a relative
                    challenge, 
                        not, I believe, to traditional individual research, but
                            to the organization of professional scholarship in general
                        
                    . Writing from a North American context, he distinguishes between
                        the professoriate and amateur
                        researchers (terms redolent of earlier notions such as the
                        gentleman scholar), proposing that 
                        while we never believed that the professoriate should
                            have special legal privileges, we have acted as if we were a special
                            caste of intellectual worker who should be supported by society and
                            protected with administrative mechanisms like tenure
                        
                    . Such a statement, which also articulates power differentials of the same
                    order as those discussed above, seems somewhat surprising in 2017. In describing
                    the supposed challenge that will occur when 
                        the distinction between the professoriate and amateur
                            researchers…blur[s] as more and more research is shared through social
                            media
                        
                    , Rockwell inadvertently (we assume) re-asserts the power and status
                    differentials that he regards as being threatened. The reader feels transported
                    back in time when Rockwell claims that 
                        crowdsourcing projects provide structured ways to
                            involve the growing numbers of well-educated amateurs with time on their
                            hands. . . Such projects . . . provide educated amateurs with a
                            meaningful way to use their leisure time
                        
                     – in other words, a form of rational recreation as
                    advocated in the 19th century to contain and control unruly workers and amateur
                    researchers. Far from recognizing a challenge to the standing of the
                        professoriate, this manner of speaking reproduces
                    certain conventions with regard to who is expected to have power and who is seen
                    to be any knowledge production’s final arbiter and owner. Rockwell, overall,
                    endorses co-production with the crowd, but established,
                    arboreal hierarchies remain the norm over more rhizomic understandings of the
                    generation of work. One might put a very simple question: if research could not
                    be produced without the crowd, does it make any sense to diminish their
                    contribution, or to see the academic as working in isolation and merely
                    facilitated by an instrumentalized general public, the crowd figured as a
                    neutral tool (i.e. something put to predictable ends with no effects of their
                    own)? We discuss the (im)possibility of neutral instrumentalization below in the
                    section on machine/material-machine/material interactions, but, as Gabriel
                    Wolfenstein’s chapter on crowdsourcing shows (see below), it is a mistake to
                    view the crowds that are sourced as un-invested or as purely, or neatly, a means
                    to a research end . 
                Thinking through another aspect of the ways in which power structures can be
                    written into co-production, Melissa Terras’ work on otherness in DH  is also amongst the most forthcoming in discussing
                    the vicissitudes of DH collaboration. As she writes: 
                        I have encountered my fair share of disasters. Shall I
                            be honest? Things have gone horrendously wrong, often between
                            individuals who are supposed to be working closely together
                        
                    . Terras suggests that: 
                        Most failures in projects...stem from a lack of
                            communication. Perceived slights of status or disputed ‘ownership’ of
                            published outcomes have ruined what promised to be an interesting and
                            fruitful working relationship. Those employed to do complex
                            computational tasks have not had the desired skill set after all,
                            meaning deliverables are not delivered.
                        
                     What Terras brings out here is that power hierarchies not only shape
                    research, but that they are able to do so by pressuring collaborators into
                    promising too much, or blinding them to the complexity of projects that rely on
                    still-new methods and practices. 
                Terras is the only writer in Deegan and McCarty’s collection who explicitly names
                    the disasters that might occur in human-human interactions in DH research: 
                        There was research which had to be abandoned after
                            months of statistical analysis because a party forgot to mention a
                            dataset that should have been included...There was the time when the
                            research assistant set out to sabotage a project because she did not
                            believe in a professor’s expertise, and the one about the research
                            assistant who suddenly left because the pressure was too much, taking
                            passwords with them.
                        
                     In recounting these anecdotes, Terras shows a willingness to be honest
                    about the challenges and failures of human-human collaboration, the
                    documentation of which is both rare and yet absolutely necessary in order to
                    move collaborative research forward. In their Taboo:
                            Sex, Identity and Erotic Subjectivity in Anthropological
                            Fieldwork Don Kulick and Margaret Willson (1995) discuss that
                        soliciting contributions on this topic was difficult, and in particular from
                        those who remain the most privileged in most cultures: 
                            The only ones for whom we were repeatedly called on
                                to justify the volume were heterosexual men, many of whom responded
                                with suspicion or even hostility. The only people who actually tried
                                to talk us out of doing the book (usually with the
                                    think-of-the-damage-this-will-do-to-your
                                    careers hex) were all heterosexual males
                            
                        . In a similar manner, in Collaborative Research
                            in the Digital Humanities, it is a woman who names some of the
                        issues that arise in DH collaboration in concrete terms, rather than as an
                        abstract scientific issue. Griffin has related experiences when co-editing a
                        volume on The Emotional Politics of Research
                            Collaboration: contributors were reluctant to discuss issues
                        such as blame; several contributors sought reassurances that writing about
                        collaborations would not damage them; some senior colleagues said that they
                        did not want to be written about. Altogether it proved a revealing
                        experience regarding the difficulties academics have with speaking about
                        collaboration. The more that potential collaborators can learn from
                    previous work, the more likely their own chances of success, and this learning
                    cannot come from solely positive stories; the negative results of work slowed,
                    distorted, or abandoned may have just as much to tell collaborators as the
                    documentation of successful projects. Hence our desire, expressed above, for our
                    own collections on research methods to include the realities of the work
                    undertaken. 
                Terras’ litany of what can go wrong can seem depressing, and her assertion that
                        The biggest issue…with many ambitious digital humanities projects...is
                        the lack of identifiable outcomes at the close of a project which were
                        promised at their start is, in some respects, deeply worrying . But, whilst we did not find the lack of
                    identifiable outcomes that Terras describes in the volume we edited on Research Methods for Creating and Curating Data in the Digital
                        Humanities
                    , that volume’s contributions did also
                    indicate that not everything always went to plan. Mats Deutschmann, Anders
                    Steinvall, and Anna Lagerström’s chapter on Raising
                        Language Awareness Using Digital Media: Methods for Revealing Linguistic
                        Stereotyping, for example, details how voice manipulation through
                    voice morphing software (intended to manipulate the way that participants read
                    subjects’ gender) always sounded artificial and thus made it difficult to know
                    if participants’ responses to the voices that they heard were due to the
                    particular characteristics of a voice, such as sounding
                        female/feminine, or to the
                        unnaturalness or artificiality of the voice’s tone . This is an important finding, not only because
                    it points to a key issue in technological embodiment, namely how to make the
                    non-human seem convincingly human, but it also highlights that a significant
                    proportion of DH research is currently exploratory in nature, both in its
                    research questions, but also in its emerging methodologies and technical
                    requirements. Hence Deutschmann et al’s findings cannot be described as
                        negative or as leaving them with nothing to
                        show for their efforts. Rather, they offer (in a similar way to
                    Terras) a particular result in a chain of work that may eventually lead to
                    better voice morphing technology and hence to better ways of teaching people
                    about the effects of the particularities of voice on the hearer. 
                Where discussions of interactions in DH research between human colleagues reveal
                    some of the tensions and power struggles between peers from diverse disciplinary
                    backgrounds, such struggles can be less immediately obvious when collaborations
                    are more remote, as in the context of crowd-sourcing, or when producing DH tools
                    or databases for end users who may remain completely unknown to these products’
                    producers. Like a number of contributors to Collaborative
                        Research in the Digital Humanities, Susan Hockey (2012), in Digital Humanities in the Age of the Internet: Reaching Out to
                        Other Communities, takes a research assessment-driven view of these
                        outreach activities, where reaching out to
                        wider society and 
                        developing links with a broader range of
                            organisations
                        
                     is construed as a means of academic survival. Highlighting the expense of
                    large Digital Humanities projects, Hockey uses the phrase indirect
                        collaboration to describe the re-usability
                    of data and tools produced in the academy that find application and use outside
                    of that space, although she also argues that 
                        the humanities computing community has not been
                            particularly good at promoting its activities beyond academia
                        
                    . 
                There is a way in which, in the neoliberal terms that Hockey’s chapter itself
                    uses, what she writes about are derivatives: asynchronous
                    uses of data and tools by a wider, hence unknown, public.
                    This form of collaboration is cast as a supply-and-demand structure where
                    academics act as producers and wider society (amorphously
                    construed) as consumers. There is no immediate interaction except via the
                    machine, i.e. this collaborative mode pushes at the boundaries of human-human
                    contact, though we would argue that such contact is mediated by the
                    secondary and simultaneous human-machine/material interaction rather than wholly
                    replaced by it; in terms of the use of tools to produce knowledge, there is a
                    useful sense in which the producers of the tool and the end user co-produce the
                    final output, with the producers’ share of the input being hugely variable
                    across different projects and tools. This also further reveals that our typology
                    of interactions does not describe research activity in mutually exclusive terms
                    – interactions between actants nearly always overlap and coshape one another,
                    for example where academic transdisciplinary partnerships intersect with
                    interactions with technicians recruited to facilitate such new collegiate
                    research and the equipment that they bring to such tasks. 
                Somewhere between the intimacies of collegial collaboration that are most often
                    discussed and the distanced collaborations described by Hockey sits
                    crowdsourcing. As Gabriel Wolfenstein has argued, knowing your
                        crowd is key; here collaboration is about the give and take
                    between researchers and researched, or knowledge owners . Wolfenstein offers an illuminating account of
                    how the project Living with the Railroads See
                            https://www.historypin.org/project/42-railroads/, last accessed
                        9/2/2016, for details. required sustained engagement with the rail
                    fan community, guaranteed well beyond the lifetime of the project, in order to
                    gain access to the materials held in the community. This investment was achieved
                    by inviting several rail fans onto the Crowdsourcing Trains Advisory Board.
                    These members, and the wider fan community, were then encouraged to act both as
                    sources for core material for the project and as end users. This virtuous circle
                    was both enabling and productive, but it required long-term commitment outside
                    of the explicit project parameters. One might wonder to what extent there is an
                    appetite for this kind of commitment amongst academics who may not regard
                    crowd-sourcing as the collaborative co-production of research, but rather as the
                    potential to draw on existing communities as an instrumentalized resource, i.e.
                    as another tool for getting research done and nothing more. 
                In considering discussions of human-human interaction in DH research
                    collaboration, it is noteworthy that concerns frequently relate to status,
                    primarily the relative status of collaborators in terms of pre-existing
                    disciplinary and functional hierarchies, the standing of those people within
                    their research communities and collaborations, and the perceptions of such from
                    outside. For UK academics, collaboration is often filtered through the lens of
                    the REF which, in many respects, does not favour collaboration. In this
                    environment, technicians and non-academic partners can be constructed as
                        second-class citizens, the feminized servants of the
                    collaboration process who simply facilitate the real
                    academic work. But such attitudes may well contribute to the kinds of failures
                    that Terras describes and are, if nothing else, inaccurate.
                Collaboration is fraught, achieved against and despite odds . Such odds include, inter alia, the reliability of
                    those with whom one works. The realities of skillsets requirements are also
                    always coupled with collaborators’ views of their and their co-researchers’
                    social standing and relative merits, and all of this is further intensified by
                    the realities of a neoliberal research landscape (which might be thought of as a
                    prickly and jealous collaborator in its own right, such is the profundity of its
                    effect on final outputs) and the still-present support of colleagues and
                    co-conspirators. Such factors, positive and negative, could be expected to be
                    less evident in the human/material-machine collaborations to which we now turn,
                    but non-human actants, as we shall see, are also never neutral – they bring
                    their own frictions. 
            

                Human/material-machine collaboration 
                Since the late 1970s, we have seen the gradual emergence of new materialisms,
                    developed from (most explicitly) Bruno Latour’s and Steve Woolgar’s Laboratory Life
                    , Latour’s Science in
                        Action
                    , Donna Haraway’s Simians,
                        Cyborgs and Women 
                    , and Andrew Pickering’s The
                        Mangle of Practice
                    . This has continued with , , , and . There have also
                        been increasingly object-oriented approaches such as , , , and . For an overview
                        of the field see Rick Dolphijn and Iris van der Tuin’s collection New Materialisms: Interviews and Cartographies
                        . The questions asked by Latour’s
                    networks of human and non-human actants, Pickering’s mangle of humans and their
                    tools, Haraway’s cyborgs, Jane Bennett’s entangled vibrant matter , and what Karen Barad terms the
                        intra-action of humans and matter have dramatically
                    changed perceptions of materiality and nonhuman agency in human affairs . There is now an increasing recognition of how
                    materiality shapes and circumscribes human action in entangled processes and/or
                    complex systems, rather than human-machine/material intra-action being a one-way
                    street with humans exclusively setting the direction. With work in DH exploring
                    tools alongside texts, we argue that an understanding of machines as
                    collaborators in knowledge production, and an awareness of the impacts of
                    materiality on such production, becomes a disciplinary as well as philosophical
                    concern. Materials and machines materialize; new materialisms conceive of matter
                    as exhibiting agency  and resonate with
                    posthuman philosophies aimed at moving an understanding of human action from
                    impositions of human will on inert stuff to contexualized and contingent
                    processes in intra-action with lively matter. Such recognition challenges any
                    understanding of collaboration as a solely human activity; it demands that we
                    conceive of the agency of the material/machine, a fact to which DH scholars pay
                    some, but still limited, attention. This is evident, for instance, in Cecilia
                    Lindhé et al.’s chapter for us on Curating Mary
                        Digitally, concerned with the question of how medieval
                    representations of Mary might be effectively remediated digitally . Lindhé et al. accept N. Katherine Hayles’, and
                    others’, assertion that 
                        the remediation and organization of knowledge shapes
                            our thoughts and actions
                        
                    , and for that reason the team wanted to move away from a simply mimetic
                    reconstruction of representations of Mary. Instead they decided to 
                        direct attention to physical interaction and to the
                            materiality of the work
                        
                    , substituting mimesis with the creation of digital interfaces that
                    reacted to their viewers’ movements. Whilst this approach shifts attention from
                    the work as product to the work as a text produced in the process of viewing, it
                    does not inherently move away from attributing the primary or dominant agency to
                    the human. The reproductions are seemingly given some active role, but it is the
                    viewers’ movements that determine what is seen; the performance aspect of the
                    exhibition grants the material a secondary agency that remains subsidiary to the
                    human viewer. Lindhé et al. offer a great model of the kind of approach that can
                    lead to matter being made more obviously vibrant in the digital display of
                    artworks, but in this work the object’s most visible agency remains parasitic
                    off human input. Such an approach was important for the team since they
                    explicitly wanted to privilege the aesthetic and humanistic over the
                    technological, following Johanna Drucker’s injunction not to be overwhelmed by
                    computational methods, or to grant them primacy .
                    Lindhé et al.’s work shows how digitization can be deployed in producing new and
                    conscious efforts to reframe materiality, but it also signals the continued
                    struggle over how the human and the material might be integrated, or conceived
                    of as integrated, without having to hierarchize their roles. In any interaction
                    there may always be a dominant actant (or actants); in Latour’s terms, they are
                    equally actors even if they do not act equally. The challenge comes in
                    materializing the real agency of actants which are not human such that we might
                    better realize the complex roles that they can play in the co-production of
                    knowledge and experience. 
                Non-human agency has increasingly made its way into Digital Humanities work
                    concerned with the effects, typically on reading, of the materiality of media.
                    The work of Hayles (
                    ), Kirschenbaum ,
                    and Hansen  has been hugely influential in this
                    regard, setting the terms for why a richer understanding of materiality might be
                    important for DH. For our purposes here, such understanding may refer to the
                    collaborations between the producer and the tools of production, the producer
                    and the digital product, or between the product and its user.
                Matt Hayler, for example, uses the resistance to the new materiality of ereading
                    devices, such as the Kindle and the iPad, to underpin a
                        postphenomenological See e.g. .
                    philosophy of technical practice in his Challenging the
                        Phenomena of Technology
                    . In our collection on reading digital data, Hayler
                    explores the particular relevance of materiality to DH research into reading,
                    from hyperlinks producing specific kinds of reading practices on screen to the
                    distinctive physicalities and entailed effects of paper and electronic page
                    spaces . In the case of hyperlinks, the digital text
                    acts on the user, inviting her to engage physically by clicking and scrolling,
                    and mentally by encouraging rhizomic or networked, as opposed to linear,
                    readings. Hyperlinks challenge the default grammars of the book-bound context
                    and promote novel forms of engagement that co-shape the ways in which the human
                    reader responds to the text – as Hayler states, hyperlinks are reminders of the
                    possibilities for connection inherent in every written word. 
                In discussing the raw materiality of the printed or pixelated page, however,
                    Hayler joins Hayles, Kirschenbaum, and Hayles in assessing how the materiality
                    of each medium can significantly structure the reading experience without
                    requiring a more obvious human interaction such as the following of a link.
                    Hayler shows how media, far from being parasitic on human agency, in fact
                    structure the agency of their users, altering their sense of their potentials.
                    In identifying the histories of the use of pages, with their inherent tendency
                    toward promoting e.g. linearity and fixity, and the newly forged histories of
                    screens, with their tendency towards promoting networked and transient
                    information, Hayler shows how materiality might become bound up with the content
                    of the writing itself in producing meaning, something which feels particularly
                    weighted at a moment of transition between two significant forms. By exploring
                    such entanglements of matter and meaning we can better understand how all texts
                    are co-shaped by a reader, a script, a medium, and a context, each of which
                    possesses its own meaning-making histories. Whilst reading remains a human-led
                    pursuit, there is a posthuman reshuffling of agency here, removing the human
                    from the centre and re-invisioning the reader as a co-constructor of meaning.
                    Hayler ends by suggesting that 
                        digital technology is becoming humanized: made subtle,
                            not jarring, truly deep, not ghostly or shallow, and
                            meaning-rich
                        
                    . Humanization is here conceived of as reducing difference (which echoes
                    the reduction of otherness between academics in different fields, or between
                    academics and technicians (or crowds), in the human-human interactions discussed
                    above), the recognition of sameness, not just in the comparison of digital text
                    with print’s cultural caché, but also compared to the extent and depth of its
                    material agency and its parity with the human in being an actant in the
                    entanglement that produces the text to be read. That issue of material devices
                    as legitimate and agential actants is central to a full understanding of
                    human-material/machine collaboration.
                In The Object and the Event: Time-Based Digital Simulation
                        and Illusion in the Fine Arts, Stephen Hilyard discusses the
                    creation of simulations through digital tools . This
                    chapter analyses two distinct forms of collaboration between human and non-human
                    actants – that between an artist and her digital tools, and that between a
                    digital object and its viewer. The former collaboration, however, is couched in
                    terms of subservience (of the tools to the maker), and the latter reveals the
                    digital object to possess agency only in relation to its being viewed, creating
                    a psychological and/or physiological reaction that the viewer cannot escape.
                As traditionally conceived, the artist, as authority and meaning-maker, remains
                    both in control of her tools and her deployment of them in the manipulation of
                    the viewer. The idea of the tool as an object that the user deploys in order to
                    achieve a particular end is a conception of intrinsic subsidiarity; in the
                    manufacturing of the artistic simulations that Hilyard describes, hardware and
                    software provide a service. Hilyard explores such manipulations in the context
                    of the realistic simulation of impossible effects, from the uncanny
                        valley of images of close-to-but-not-quite real humans to the
                    visually accurate rendering of things that could never exist or act as they do
                    outside of the simulation, things that trick the viewer with a blend of
                    photorealism and the subversion of physics. This sets up a classic fine art
                    paradigm where authority accrues to the artist as maker: the digital tools are
                    just that, and in being seen as subservient to the user, as instrumentalized
                    matter, their own agency is neglected. Similarly, the viewer is seen as being
                    worked upon by the art work rather than entangled with it in the co-production
                    of meaning, an interesting inversion of the hierarchy of human and object as
                    opposed to its flattening – to understand objects as entangled, we argue, is not
                    simply to reverse extant understandings (such that humans become slaves to their
                    artefacts sometimes), but instead to appreciate how agency might always flow
                    back and forth, with humans impacting on technologies and the ways in which they
                    might be deployed, and technologies impacting on their users such that the
                    outcome of use is not determined by either side.
                In this vein, throughout the work of the new materialists introduced at the start
                    of this section, we find a much more sustained recognition of the role of tools,
                    artefacts, and objects more broadly in both human affairs and wider networks
                    (where humans might not even be involved in some collusions, as we shall discuss
                    in the next section). The post-phenomenologist Don Ihde, for example, offers a
                    taxonomy of technological interactions: embodiment relationships (where the
                    artefact melts away, such as using a hammer or tennis racquet); hermeneutic
                    relationships (where the tool both enables and modifies perceptions as it is
                    perceived through, such as using a microscope, telescope, or machine readout);
                    alterity relationships (where the machine is an explicit object of concentration
                    apart from the user, such as using an ATM machine); and background relationships
                    (where the device is set and then modifies the background of experience without
                    further interaction, such as the use of a thermostat and household
                        heating). See  for more on these
                        relationships. Matt Hayler also proposes a fifth category, reflexivity
                        relationships (where tools cause the user to reflect on their bodies and
                        potentials from an external perspective, such as mirrors and videocameras);
                        see . In Ihde’s breakdown of engagements,
                    we start to see the myriad ways in which technologies both explicitly and subtly
                    flavor and condition experience, becoming a part of our perceptions and, in some
                    instances, enabling them to happen at all. Edwin Hutchin’s work on
                        distributed cognition (e.g. ) similarly demonstrates the extent to which tools might enable the conception
                    of action, as well as facilitating it, and even further displaces the human from
                    the centre of action. His description of navigation on board large naval ships,
                    and the tasks undertaken by combinations of personnel and equipment,
                    combinations that elide neat boundaries between human and non-human actors, sees
                    the network of actants as a distributed system that can legitimately be seen as
                    cognizing; it is the system which thinks, and only the system which
                    can have these kinds of thoughts. In the absence of the non-human actors nothing
                    could be done, and certainly not done like this; no one human has control and
                    everyone and everything plays their part toward the goal.
                When it comes to DH research, our interest here is in how systems of humans and
                    non-humans co-produce knowledge. What we take from the work of Ihde and
                    Hutchins, and the science studies of Latour, Pickering, Haraway, and Baird, are
                    that tools are never neutral. They, like technicians and crowds, are more
                    rightly thought of as collaborators, whether they are conceived of as such by
                    their users or not. Latour, Pickering, and Hutchins, in particular, are
                    sensitive to the ways in which tools’ users, especially in technical and
                    scientific contexts, are typically loathe to see the machines with which they
                    work as anything but neutral. As with human-human collaborations, much is
                    invested in the tools not interfering with the results and in the production of
                    knowledge being ascribed to the individual (and excellent
                    researcher), not to anyone/anything she might have depended upon. A profound
                    silence can emerge from hoping to avoid the comment sometimes offered to
                    photographers: That’s such a beautiful picture; you must have a really great
                        camera!
                Non-human agency and the presumed neutrality of digital research tools are
                    explored in Thomas Nygren et al.’s Connecting with the
                        Past: Opportunities and Challenges in Digital History
                    . Here the focus is strongly on the limitations of
                    digital renditions of information, couched in the following terms: 
                        assumptions about the unproblematic application of
                            tools to data can be problematic, not least because there is a risk that
                            “data” will be shaped by and for the logic of digital tools
                        
                    . In this regard, Nygren et al. recognize the ways in which data, as read
                    or received, can be altered by or for the tools used to perform the analysis.
                    The tool introduces its own effects in its parsing of data; in short, as Ihde or
                    Pickering, or Latour also make clear, we make a profound mistake if we see such
                    tools as simply reporting or neutrally working with the
                        data For more on this phenomenon across technological use see Davis
                        Baird on the co-production of knowledge with scientific instruments  and Andy Pickering .; data are produced for and interpreted by non-human actors as
                    much as for and by human collaborators.
                Nygren et al. countered the limitations of their tools, when more adequately
                    recognized, by augmenting the digital with the stories that the flesh and blood
                    researchers could tell, derived from a combination of research methods. By
                    better appreciating what their tools could and could not do, and why and how
                    their specificity might distort seemingly inert or neutral data sets, they were
                    able to see what gaps could be filled in the story with different approaches
                    that didn’t rely on digital computation. As they state: 
                        researchers use a mixture of traditional and digital
                            methods to better understand the life and circumstances facing people in
                            the past. Visits to the archives have been combined with visits to the
                            places of historical events. In the practice of digital history, this
                            connection to historical settings is still important
                        
                    . They acknowledge that 
                        materiality may certainly affect our construction of
                            knowledge
                        
                    , but find this much easier to cope with in relation to conventional
                    historical methods (such as visiting actual sites) than in relation to digital
                    constructions or the unfamiliar whose logic is resisted. The collaborators,
                    human or non-human, that are best known can be mostly easily dealt with –
                    recognizing digital tools’ effects as, without deep investigation, unknowable
                    might be a significant aspect of successful collaboration with them. 
                In much of the analysis of human-material/machine collaboration specifically
                    within DH, insofar as it occurs, debates about how we became posthuman , or our relative posthumanism as researchers or end
                    users, remain very much alive in the sense that the idea of collaboration with
                    non-human actants tends to be evaded, resisted, or not fully engaged with.
                    Actual making processes are frequently glossed over, the process of the
                    materialization of artifacts, and their agency, is elided, and the liberal
                    subject of the sovereign maker, or viewer, tends to remain firmly in place. But
                    what happens when that subject retreats entirely?
            

                Material/machine-material/machine collaboration 
                In purely material interactions between non-human actants we might expect the
                    power hierarchies and politics of human-human and human-material/machine
                    collaborations to be absent as the human retreats from the scene. But for the
                    overwhelming majority of instances in DH research,
                    material/machine-material/machine collaboration requires at least prior
                    human-material/machine interaction (and likely prior humanhuman partnerships) –
                    in this way, material-material collaborations rest upon, or are simultaneous
                    with and shaped by, the other types of interaction that we have discussed.
                    Matter, of course, interacts without human involvement all the time, but in
                    digital research it is only in the rare cases where hardware is programmed to
                    roam free, or algorithms are left to produce emergent effects without
                    intervention, that we might consider humans as removed from digital processes,
                    and even then humans are necessarily the originators of the device or algorithm
                    (or of the hypothetical machine which might create or code them). As Julia
                    Flanders states, technical and professional standards in digital research are 
                        an extraordinarily effective mechanism for
                                representing...an agreement...between collaborating
                            parties
                        
                     Emphasis in original.. Standardization also enables
                    material/machine-material/machine collaboration, i.e. standards allow systems to
                    read, or talk to one another about data or processes, and
                    one question then becomes the extent to which a user or technician ever deals
                    with an open system. Or, put another way, what room is there for the unexpected
                    and unintended, the non-humanly conceived, to emerge? 
                Laszlo Hunyadi points out that 
                        human-human interaction seems to be hard to represent
                            in regular form
                        
                     since our understanding of human communication as a pattern is limited –
                    alternatively, it is in their seemingly obvious regularity that interactions
                    which contain non-human elements are presroumed to be more easily imagined.
                    Hunyadi’s university in Debrecen has created a cognitive robotics lab into which
                    a system of secondary labs without robots is to be networked in order to allow
                    interaction and experimentation between them as a system (www.virca.hu). The project website
                    states: Imagine a completely new form of relationship with your IT devices: a
                        relationship in which the mouse and the keyboard seem like ancient relics
                        used only by geeks and IT professionals; a relationship in which your
                        “desktop” is much more closely linked with your physical reality, and in
                        which social interactions play a central and practical role.
                        Accessed 14 June 2016. The derisive conflating of geeks and
                        IT professionals aside (another example of the power hierarchies
                    described above), this work is concerned with reducing the boundaries between
                    human and machine, and with creating a cybernetic homosocial triangle  between human operators and the virtual
                    spaces in which they remotely collaborate on projects, their object of exchange.
                    The video showcases available online, which depict the virtual lab in Debrecen,
                    are all shot from the perspective of the human in his computer room or lab
                    space, looking at the screen. In one video, a robot in the actual room,
                    child-sized relative to the adult male manipulating it, is walking, imitating
                    the adult’s steps whilst the robot is also simultaneously projected into the
                    virtual space. The overall impression is of the scientist conducting an
                    experiment, ruling over neutral and inert matter, and controlling virtual space,
                    even if remotely. The primacy of the human remains clearly in view here, both
                    actually and conceptually – what seems like a hi-tech entanglement remains the
                    same story of human dominion. 
                Such primacy is hardly inevitable, however, nor does it guarantee the
                    hierarchized relation between human and material/machine. Outside of the DH
                    context, we have already seen quite a few signs of this not being the case, of
                    the unintended consequences of interactions, such as traders bringing down
                    markets in a few misclicks, or the biases that are daily being coded into data
                    sets and search algorithms via normal (though silently discriminatory)
                        use, Overviews of issues in this area can be found in  and . etc. To
                    date, machines still need humans, at least for their design and/or the
                    initiation of the processes that they enter into. However, the idea that this
                    produces control (by humans) is erroneous – there can be
                    unintended consequences, such as collapsing markets and biased data sets, which
                    themselves generate important questions, much discussed in the context of
                    artificial intelligence and science fiction, about the desirable relation
                    between human and digital – are we looking at relations of subordination or of
                        companion species, of symbiotes, parasites, or some
                    other, as yet unrealised entanglement? 
                Deepmind’s AlphaGo Zero AI is one system provoking significant discussion in this
                    area. AlphaGoSee https://boltstatistics.com/alphago/ (formerly at https://deepmind.com/research/alphago/, last accessed 8/10/2017),
                        for details. was originally created and trained to beat human
                    grandmasters of the game Go, a territory-claiming game that, unlike chess and
                    checkers, computers have struggled to compete at, even with only moderately
                    above-average players, due to the human feel required.
                    There are so many possible permutations of the board that the brute
                        force strategies that AIs have tended to draw on in simpler games
                    (trying out as many hypothetical moves as possible before settling upon the best
                    one and playing it in each situation) are simply too time- and
                    computation-hungry to be viable. AlphaGo instead used a combination of human
                    programming, brute force searches, and machine learning – it played a huge
                    number of games against both human and computer opponents in order to train
                    strategies for as many board permutations as possible.
                When the original AlphaGo system did beat Lee Sedol, one of the world’s best
                    players, in 2016, New Scientist reported on the
                    win’s intensifying of an artificial intelligence phobia in
                    South Korea . The presumption of the humanity
                    required to undertake successful Go playing caused a crisis; the computer was
                    assumed to have equalled the leading player in some ineffable category outside
                    of mastery of the game. But AlphaGo was still heavily dependent on human
                    interaction – it was programmed by humans, played against human players in
                    training so as to learn from them, and was explicitly aiming at human-like
                    performance in its first incarnations, having millions of moves from expert
                    players coded into its database of possible solutions as its model of what
                    success should look like.
                AlphaGo, however, has changed. AlphaGo Zero (AGZ) recently beat the original
                    AlphaGo system, and, significantly, had far less human-interaction in its path
                    to becoming the greatest Go player in the world. By again deploying machine
                    learning, AGZ similarly played a vast amount of training games, storing
                    knowledge of the best strategies from each one. But it never played a human
                    opponent, and it was never coded with human strategies or any human’s expert
                    moves. It began with completely random play against an iteration of itself –
                    whichever version won, by chance, would go on to play against a new iteration of
                    itself, with the now ever-increasingly competent versions progressing in an
                    evolutionary fashion. The system is now hugely more efficient, and, in the words
                    of its designers (probably now the wrong term), 
                        it is no longer constrained by the limits of human
                            knowledge
                        
                    . AlphaGo Zero became more competent than the version of AlphaGo that beat
                    Sedol within three days, and better than the best iteration of the original
                    within 40. The team never found out how good AlphaGo Zero could get; with the
                    wider actants in the system affecting things, as always, they 
                        needed the computers for something else
                        
                    .
                When it comes to the production of knowledge about the game Go, AGZ leaves humans
                    in its wake, and it demonstrates the potential for uncoupling humans from
                    computational systems once they have been set up – humans, like their tools, are
                    not neutral: their biases and limitations can flavour a whole system. AGZ’s
                    collaborators in knowledge production, then, straddle the human-machine and
                    machine-machine. It is, and continues to be, its own collaborator, a
                    billion-fold, shaping itself in an entanglement that goes both ways: as each
                    iteration progresses it might lose out to the next incarnation of itself, ceding
                    the ascription of knowledge to the next version that it decides is better. As
                    colleagues and equipment join and leave knowledge-producing systems in more
                    conventional research, so AGZ recruits and rejects itself, over and over. When
                    institutional politics, funding limitations, labour laws, and good graces are
                    replaced by ruthless evolutionary mechanisms, vast progress can be made, and
                    this makes something very clear: we do not want the politics of machine-machine
                    collaborations to transcend their sphere. As the examples of machine-learning
                    algorithms encoding racists and sexist attitudes attest See e.g. ., however, politics does tend to travel –
                    humans may not look like an explicit component in the collaborative system, but
                    their entanglement gets revealed in their shaping effect, as with any other
                    actant. Digital researchers need to function as stewards alive to the effects of
                    all actants, not presume neutrality, as they increasingly pursue machine-machine
                    collaborations which might take on the worst of us or, reversing the flow, to
                    resist the machine’s unsentimental excisions of one another becoming a model of
                    best practice.
                Material/machine-machine/material interactions are also becoming more complex as
                    the ways in, and means by which combinations of hardware and software must speak
                    to one another proliferate. While some materials, such as the fore-edge
                    paintings on the compressed pages of books in the private collections of
                    affluent 19th century readers, may still resist being digitized , as different kinds of materiality encounter each
                    other, those differences generate new and diverse interactional relations that
                    pit algorithmic logics against noise both from within and from without. In an
                    article on instance-based algorithmic learning, Aha et al. poetically describe
                    their extended algorithm's performance as 
                        degrade[ing] gracefully with increasing noise levels
                            and compar[ing] favourably with a noise-tolerant decision tree
                            algorithm
                        
                    . Noise or interference is expressive of difference, and it is such
                    difference that material/machine interactions must increasingly struggle with as
                    we attempt to recruit them in archiving and interpreting the world. Such
                    struggles contribute, we argue, to the reasons to be silent around collaborative
                    efforts in DH: difficulty in comprehension and expression are the reasons that
                    many phenomena go unarticulated, but the various silencings of diverse forms of
                    collaboration in DH research also have other sources to which we now turn.
            

                Reasons To Be Silent
                Discussions of crowd sourcing, or the example of Gabriel Wolfenstein’s depiction
                    of how the gathering of material was facilitated through engagement with
                    enthusiasts in the Living with the Railroads
                    project , can offer useful advice for DH
                    scholars about how to access certain communities who might be described as
                    potentially hard-to-reach, and also how to conduct such
                    research, i.e. what new methods and practices might be required. But, as
                    suggested earlier, such concrete engagement with questions of collaboration is
                    not always forthcoming; we want to suggest four core reasons why this might be
                    the case which relate to the key points outlined in the typology of interactions
                    above. 
                
                    1. Status and Speed
                    The first concerns the status and the role of the expert in research. Richard
                        Sennett has produced an important account of The
                            Craftsman  and the ways in which notions of craft have undergone
                        changes over time . Sennett identifies how, on
                        the one hand, many skills-based activities can now be executed by
                            unskilled persons (or, as above, removing people
                        altogether) because technology significantly facilitates or replaces
                        production processes, and, on the other, craft as an expression of honed
                        skill, socialized and shaped by practice and experience over
                            time, is bulldozed through by the demand for the ever-increasing
                        acceleration of work processes (we can see this clearly when various forms
                        of slowness in production are conceived of as radical
                        as opposed to, say, appropriate). Instantaneity has become the name of the
                        game, from the production of goods to the production of research, and that
                        makes the expert who can provide patient and detailed explanations a
                        seemingly redundant figure (the expert who can be swift and reactive
                        however…). Silence regarding technical ability thus tends to sideline those
                        with specific expertise, particularly where this involves complex skills,
                        reinforcing a power hierarchy that sees academic experts as producers of
                        knowledge and technicians as instrumentalized supporters of this production.
                        This view oversimplifies skills acquisition and maintenance for both
                        academics and technicians, and does not recognise the actual practices of
                        collaboration as they consistently manifest. 
                
                
                    2. The Pace of Change
                    The second reason why concrete engagement with collaborations may not be
                        forthcoming is also related to the issue of technology as such: as the
                        writer of the email quoted at the outset of this article suggests,
                            constant technological development, and by
                        implication the obsolescence that accompanies contemporary digital
                        technology, makes discussions of specific technical processes difficult or
                        seemingly undesirable due to fears that these discussions will rapidly
                        become obsolete as the technology changes. Two issues strike us. The first
                        is simple: there is always something to learn from prior practice, and no
                        shift in the technological apparatus of Digital Humanities research is
                        likely to be so great a rupture that all prior work is rendered irrelevant.
                        Secondly, Susan Hockey makes the point that 
                            Humanities source material lasts for a very long
                                time and digital representations of that material need to be equally
                                long-lived
                            
                        . She discusses the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) which was set up
                        precisely to ensure this for the digital rendering of script sources. As
                        Hockey notes, 
                            [o]ne of the original aims of the TEI was to create
                                an encoding scheme that would be independent of any particular
                                computing system
                            
                        . Withdrawal of public funding, however, curtailed this effort and
                        expertise was thus lost. In this way, the speed of technological development
                        can lead to the silencing of discussions of its practices. Tensions exist,
                        for instance, between the development and commodification of technology on
                        the one hand, and its usability across time and space on the other: the
                        enhancement of a technology’s functionality typically correlates with its
                        accelerated commodification such that consumers clamour to buy the latest
                        machine and/or app, even if they are unable to fully use the ever-increasing
                        opportunities afforded by their current or new technologies . Academics may thus become increasingly
                        distanced from the technical experts that they require in order to undertake
                        DH projects as the gaps between known and unknown potential deepen, and at
                        an increasing rate.
                
                
                    3. The Nature of the Field
                    A third reason relates to the epistemic dimensions of the Digital Humanities:
                        do they constitute a discipline, or a set of methods or practices, or a
                        sub-set of enquiry? At present there is no ready answer to this question,
                        certainly no orthodoxy regarding DH’s domain. Texts such as Kirschenbaum’s
                            What is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in
                            English Departments?, the annual day of DH
                        (which aims to provide a snapshot of the field through the self-report of a
                        day in the life of various academics who identify themselves as Digital
                        Humanities researchers) , and an entire
                        reader on the problems of definition  all engage
                        with the issue of domain in different ways. The continuing need to
                        re-explore the boundaries may also contribute to a dearth of meta-discourses
                        around DH beyond its definition, and that includes
                        meta-discourse on the processes of collaboration undertaken during DH
                        projects. Put simply, unless collaborations of all forms become a part of
                        what DH is, then the field’s focus on definitional concerns
                        will contribute to the current lack of discussion. 
                
                
                    4. Neoliberal Imperatives
                    A fourth reason for the under- and slow exploration of collaboration in DH
                        research concerns the neoliberal imperatives which govern contemporary
                        academe  and which continuously flavour the
                        point above. Such imperatives have led to the simultaneous rise of
                        collective work and individualized accountability in a context
                        of heightened competition – competition to be
                            world-class, excellent, indeed
                            primum without pares. Where collaborative
                        research is submitted to the REF, for example, the collaborators have to
                        specify what exactly their contribution is. But such specification is
                        largely anathema to proper collaborative efforts and goes against our
                        understanding of creative thinking as a collective and intricately entangled
                        process involving a range of human and non-human interactions. It ultimately
                        denies the co of collaboration and, due to its
                        competitive underscoring, reinforces pre-existing inequalities between
                        different kinds of collaborators. As described above, this is partly
                        supported by the hierarchies within academe which construe certain staff as
                        subsidiary and which continue to instrumentalize both tools and people
                        rather than recognising them as co-producers of knowledge. 
                    Resistance to changing such thinking is fed by a Humanities tradition that
                        locates agency, originality, and meaning-making firmly with the
                        author/maker, a tradition put to work in the justification of copyright
                        extensions which are publicly meant to protect the isolated,
                            genius artist and yet predominantly service large
                        corporations’ continued control over profitable cultural icons (see 
                        ). The central texts which rallied the various
                        turns that Humanities disciplines have undergone, including the celebrated
                        (if premature) declaration of the death of the author in favour of the
                        reader , the gleeful reassertion of the author’s
                        cultural function in the renewed foci on intellectual property, paratexts,
                        and the myth of the persona , and the various
                        interpretations of there being nothing outside of the text , these texts each tend to reveal a struggle to
                        retain the pre-eminence of the human in the construction of meaning and
                        worth. These same texts also come to underpin a manner of thinking which
                        supports contemporary new materialist and posthumanist stances – the
                        author’s death reveals other factors that might play a role in
                        meaning-making; the lack of access to things outside of the text (or
                        context) does not mitigate their role in producing what we can perceive, and
                        how troubled and slippery text must always be demonstrates how we can be
                        fooled in our pursuit of truth; and the vagaries of economic and cultural
                        forces and the inscriptions and material properties of the authored and
                        edited book can show how non-human agency becomes entangled with human
                        activity. Neoliberalism’s focus on individual achievement leaves little time
                        for understanding subtle posthuman entanglements with people and things both
                        inside and outside of our full comprehension. In DH research, the non-human
                        actants of hardware and software are, in part, the secret ingredient – not
                        revealed by the master chef so that we might be delighted or surprised by
                        what we are served, but, rather, as in the story of The
                            Sorcerer’s Apprentice, an understanding that we may also find
                        ourselves unable to govern that which we call into being.
                
            

                The Effects of Silence
                The effects of not speaking about the collaborative processes that inform DH are
                    manifold. For one thing, such silences undermine a certain deliberative approach
                    to education and research which acknowledges the processes that inform that
                    education. This lack of acknowledgment means that processes are constructed as
                    inadvertent and hence beyond our agency. It fosters a 
                        learned helplessness
                        
                     and leads to situations where academics in their 40s talk of themselves
                    as dinosaurs because they do not engage with, are alienated
                    from, and think they cannot understand contemporary technologies. Griffin
                        has found this in a project she is currently undertaking on women working in
                        DH, where she is interviewing women and men in DH. These interviews are part
                        of a large Nordforsk-funded project on women in technology-driven
                        professions (2017-2022, Project No. 81520). See http://www.gender.uu.se/nordwitfor details of the project.
                    We see this effect most clearly at every academic gathering that involves
                    technology where, almost unfailingly, something (a PowerPoint presentation, a
                    video clip, the interface between laptop and data projector) does not work, the
                    presenter (usually a researcher or academic) does not know how to make it work,
                    and no technician to facilitate the process can be found. Such disjunctures and
                    competence issues are a norm rather than an exception in academe, and point to
                    divisions (human-human, human-machine, machine-machine) that the silence around
                    collaboration only serves to reinforce and exacerbate. It also has the effect of
                    individualizing this experience, suggesting individualized rather than systemic
                    failures to address and deal with such disjunctures. 
                At the same time, contemporary western culture is saturated with online tools
                    that both academics and students use, whether they do DH in a deliberative
                    fashion or not. In her interviews with staff in Sweden working in DH
                    environments, Griffin found that such staff often disavow DH as an academic
                    field precisely because of the ubiquity of digitality. Such ubiquity can lull
                    institutions into a sense of non-responsibility, where the mere existence of
                    Google-based online tools, for instance, can suggest that universities or
                    research centres need only participate in this cornucopia rather than consider
                    how this plenitude might require changes to their curricula, delivery, and
                    attitudes towards digitality. But purposive participation, such as we would
                    advocate, and which has to include discussions of collaboration at its core (for
                    instance of distance-collaborations with unknown others who produce tools, farm
                    data created through the use of those tools by scholars, and incite further
                    uses), is critical to becoming and being an effective researcher and scholar,
                    indeed a participant, in contemporary (digital) cultures. We would suggest that
                    the pervasive fake news and fake media
                    rhetoric of the current moment in part arises from the lack of a critical
                    digital humanities engagement we encounter in education and research scenarios
                    (see http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/mediapolicyproject/2017/05/22/tackling-fake-news-towards-a-new-approach-to-digital-literacy/,
                    last accessed 7/10/2017). 
                Increasingly, digitality is recognized as a collaborative effort and effect,
                    where engagement always involves encounter with collaborators, known and
                    unknown. This means that digital literacy needs, inter alia, to analyse digital
                    collaboration that already occurs automatically, and its effects must be
                    addressed. We have hardly begun with this in the Digital Humanities. Failure to
                    address this increases digital divides between those seemingly in the know,
                    those who under-value the skills and knowledges they actually do have, and
                    others who become more and more technology-resistant as they feel increasingly
                    alienated. In contemporary knowledge economies, as well as in the technologizing
                    environments we inhabit, this is not a sustainable option. 
                A further institutional issue here is, as one of Griffin’s respondents put it,
                    that institutions have become used to the idea that Humanities ‘cost nothing’.
                    This respondent (the director of a DH laboratory that had eye-tracking
                    equipment, scanners, and a whole range of other electronic devices used to
                    conduct various kinds of DH research) had a strong sense that institutions
                    needed to be educated about the fact that the Humanities, and in particular DH,
                    also require capital resources to both establish and maintain themselves. And,
                    whilst there have been related critiques of the needs for certain kinds of DH
                    resources (e.g. ), the basic point that DH
                    requires resources is well taken and becomes more apparent in the context of
                    discussing collaboration since it refuses the rhetoric of the lone scholar,
                    needing only to be equipped with pen and paper, that continues to haunt the
                    Humanities. A related issue here is that institutions need plans for their
                    technology development which includes the re- and up-skilling of staff as well
                    as material resources. Such planning continues to be somewhat haphazard.
                    Rosenblum and Dwyer, for example, note that the fact that as co-directors of a
                    DH Centre they were given 25% and 50% time respectively – clearly not enough to
                    fulfil all their tasks.
                Silence around collaboration contributes to maintaining a stagnant culture in
                    academe, in particular in relation to the fact that collaboration structures
                    learning. Machine-human collaboration occurs in learning all the time in that
                    knowledge producers at all levels constantly mobilize computer-based and
                    –produced knowledge to co-produce their own materials. At the same time the myth
                    of the singular individual who discovers continues to be
                    perpetuated in arenas such as prizes (Nobel as well as others), providing a
                    largely false image of how knowledge production occurs. This needs to change if
                    we want to normalize collaboration, the de facto reality of
                    knowledge production, for the coming generations of scholars.
                Silence around collaboration also creates issues regarding our perception of the
                    object world, rendering it other and inaccessible. Whilst that world must always
                    be translated into human terms, and something is inevitably lost in such
                    translation, we miss too much in skipping it entirely. Matt Hayler has
                        written extensively about the human accessibility of technological objects
                        in his Challenging the Phenomena of Technology
                         inspired by object-oriented philosophers such
                        as Graham Harman . Our tools reinforce,
                    resist, shape, and encode material realities which both pre-exist, and are
                    co-produced by, them, and the better we are able to read these tools’
                    contributions to DH research, the better that we can understand that research’s
                    distortions and/or reasons for success. 
                If we think of DH as, at least in part, a collection of methods (which certainly
                    not every DH scholar does), then explaining how collaborations might come about
                    and be successful (or not) can be important ways of enabling others to learn
                    from the processes of DH projects. The development of a large body of
                    methodological literature around interviewing, for example, has produced
                    important insights into the dynamics between interviewers and interviewees,
                    leading to a foundational example of the contemporary notion of knowledge as
                    co-produced and situated 
                    . This understanding, in many ways, goes against DH
                    traits such as the standardization of knowledge into readable data, as an effect
                    or requirement of digitization, and the deterritorialization of knowledge that
                    this implies, leaving DH, at times, troubled by the tension between variability
                    and standardization , between the unpredictable and
                    the prepared for, the unintended and the deliberate. Unstructured data are near
                    impossible to digest digitally, but this does not mean that digital research can
                    be blind to their effects. 
                 Not discussing human-human collaborations is also a way of implying a
                        them and us structure of academe
                    where different categories of contributors occupy different and hierarchized
                    spaces. This results in a reinforcement of the failure to transform the social
                    and political structures of the academy, something that is necessary both in
                    order to better realise the collaborative and interdisciplinary work to which
                    universities aspire and to the realities of such work. 
                At the same time, most scholars inadvertently collaborate with technology
                    already, at least minimally through Google searches, online reading, emailing,
                    Skypeconferences etc. Mystifying the collaboration process in DH means
                    constructing resistance to technology by making it into the unknown. This is
                    also reinforced by a lack of recognition in higher education institutions that
                    digital competence is a skill that needs to be acquired and maintained in a
                    manner akin to Sennett’s craftsman’s training. Such training is often
                    unavailable in academe, not recognized in terms of time and work requirements,
                    and left to the perspicacity and perseverance of individual staff. This results
                    in a DH skills shortage that currently manifests itself in the limited numbers
                    of staff knowing limited numbers of DH tools. In turn, this means that the
                    development of new research ideas and related critiques of DH cannot flourish
                    nor can the collaborations that makes the best DH research so stimulating. It’s
                    time we talked more about these things. 
            

                Moving Forward
                How, then, could the discussion around collaboration in DH change? As we pursue
                    our own collaborations, that will eventually be written up and published, we’re
                    starting to ask how we can best be true to the issues raised in this article.
                    Matt is involved in two projects that have technical, creative, and other
                    non-academic partners and which might function as examples.
                The first, Ambient Literature See https://ambientlit.com/, accessed
                        8/11/2017 for details. sees professional writers commissioned to
                    create works of electronic fiction that investigate our relationship with both
                    places and digital technologies. See https://ambientlit.com/index.php/2017/04/19/it-must-have-been-dark-by-then/
                        and https://ambientlit.com/index.php/2006/07/21/the-cartographers-confessionby-james-attlee/,
                        accessed 8/11/17, for examples of the first two pieces for the
                        project. The project will also result in a co-authored academic book,
                    with no lead author, that includes contributions from, and interviews with the
                    writers and technicians working on the pieces. There will, further, be a
                        cookbook aimed at demonstrating, for those interested
                    in the production of these kinds of works, the options and opportunities
                    currently available, i.e. what tools, technicians, budgets, and readers will
                    permit. An edited collection will further gather voices from across writing,
                    publishing, technical production, and academia. Maybe the project is cheating –
                    it was devised to investigate the ways in which collaborations between humans,
                    technologies, and environments manifest and alter in a landscape of ubiquitous
                    mobile computing. But it demonstrates what voices should be included and the
                    balance of power that might be achieved; no one academic gets to be the
                        primus deploying everyone else as instruments of knowledge
                    production.
                The second project is an augmented reality performance of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, a medieval text set in the West
                    Midlands. The project is at the earliest stages of development, but as heritage
                    and technical partners are sought (the first to provide an appropriate location
                    for the production, the second to enable the movement of characters, sounds, and
                    settings between real and virtual environments), it is clear that, again, the
                    roles of academic, non-academic, technical, and non-human collaborators will
                    need to be carefully considered. It would now seem impossible to think of the
                    work simply accruing to the two academics on the project team, with all other
                    actants simply being instruments for them to deploy – the team will
                    have their say, and when it comes to the silenced roles of the non-humans, be
                    they mobile phones, buildings, or environmental features, there will be at least
                    some attempt to speak up on their behalf.
                Maybe creative productions set the easier precedent; the industrial arts of
                    cinema and videogames, despite the impositions of the auteur, are well
                    recognized as mass collaborative efforts, with cameras, lenses, and sound,
                    graphics, and physics engines all frequently brought to the fore – you could not
                    have seen or played this without all of these people, and all of these
                        things. But in any project, we think that it is relatively
                    easy, and undoubtedly important, to resist the silencing outlined above. It
                    boils down to two calls: the first is to recognize that no collaborator can ever
                    be neutral, and the second that, therefore, their roles must be understood as
                    well as possible, before, during, and after the event. Credit and blame need to
                    be attributed, expressed, and shared. That’s how we get better.
            

                Acknowledgments
                The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their extremely
                    helpful comments.
            
