Title:  Historical GIS and
               Guidebooks: A Scalable Reading of Czechoslovak Tourist Attractions
Volume:  017
Issue:  2
Date:  26 May 2023
Abstract:  
            
            This article demonstrates the value of scalable reading of historical travel
               guides, combining traditional close reading with computer-assisted distant reading.
               Aiming to scrutinize the persistence of older tourist attractions under communism, we
               analyse guidebooks intended for similar audiences but produced under different
               political regimes. More specifically, we compare three travel guides to the same
               geographical area produced between 1905 and 1959: one to communist cold war
               Czechoslovakia, one to democratic interwar Czechoslovakia, and one to the
               Habsburg-era Czech lands and Slovakia. We analyse the geographic distribution of
               attractions by geolocating the guidebook toponyms and visualizing them with
               Geographic Information Systems (GIS). This distant reading is complemented with a
               hermeneutic analysis grounded in a close reading of the guidebook text. The
               combination of these approaches documents the similarities in the symbolic
               representation of the country’s attractions across political caesuras and provides a
               methodological template for future explorations of travel guides with historical
               GIS.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Scholars interested in the history of travel and tourism have long relied on
               historical guidebooks as a primary source to past patterns of mobility and cultural
               ideals. The guidebook’s descriptive and prescriptive nature — describing places,
               peoples, and cultures, and ordering them in a normative hierarchy of attractiveness —
               is a treasure trove of information about the practices and ideas constituting past
               travel cultures . Historians have been keen to query
               guidebooks for insights about aesthetic sensibilities, communications and
               infrastructures, and representations of the other. The preferred method for studying
               such themes has been qualitative, close readings of travel guides (classical examples
               of this include ; ). Only
               recently have tourism historians begun to employ digitally enabled methods, for
               instance Historical Geographic Information Systems (HGIS) exploring the origins of
               nineteenth-century Baltic spa guests  and the family
               networks of Grand Tour travellers to Italy , or
               semantic modelling of Baedeker travel guides . Scholars of the ancient world have also
               demonstrated the value of HGIS for studying travel times in the Roman Mediterranean
                   and for understanding Pausanias’s Periegesis Hellados — a complex cultural geography of Greece
               often referred to as the first guidebook . What we
               propose in this article, though, is for historians of modern tourism to take
               advantage of the comparatively homogenous nature of modern guidebooks and harness
               HGIS for new, computer-assisted tourism histories.
            The primary aim of this article is to scrutinize the persistence of older tourist
               attractions under communism in Czechoslovakia. In doing so, we also demonstrate the
               promising methodological avenues for scalable reading of the tourist guidebook
               as a historical source, combining traditional close reading with computer-assisted
               distant reading . More specifically, the article
               illustrates the potential of systematically mapping the spatial information contained
               in guidebooks diachronically and in combination with qualitative, contextualizing
               sources. Approaching modern guidebooks to the same destination as time series enables
               the researcher to chart the rise and fall of touristic sites. The possibility to
               pinpoint the omission and disappearance of tourist attractions over time and across
               large geographical areas is particularly promising as such absences easily pass
               unnoticed during traditional close readings. The method also allows for visualizing
               attraction hierarchies by comparing the touristic sites contained in comprehensive
               guidebooks with those in compact guidebooks from the same period. Such observations
               can then inspire further research into changes and continuities in touristic
               infrastructure and forms of attraction. In these efforts, the current work thus seeks
               to bridge the gap between quantitative and qualitative uses of GIS (; ; ).
            This article illustrates some of the methodological opportunities outlined above
               through a scalable reading of the first guidebook to communist Czechoslovakia for
               western travellers after the Second World War. The guidebook Czechoslovakia 
                was published eleven years after the communist coup in
               1948, and produced by Čedok, the Czechoslovak National Tourist Organization. To
               provide diachronic contextualization we compare this guidebook with two predecessors
               similar in terms of audience and scope, but markedly different in terms of production
               context. Closest in time is the Guide to the Czechoslovak
                  Republic
               , Čedok’s first travel guide for foreign readers published
               under the democratic interwar government a decade after the republic’s foundation in
               1918. Čedok published no similar volumes between 1928 and 1959, which makes the two
               publications ideal for a study of how the communist tourist authorities sought to
               present the country. The continuity in intended audience (foreign, primarily western
               tourists) combined with the radically differing political circumstances allows for
               novel insights into the persistence of old travel ideals under communism. The two
               volumes are further contextualized by comparison with the reputable German guidebook
               publisher Baedeker’s comprehensive Austria–Hungary including
                  Dalmatia and Bosnia from 1905, which covered the geographical area that
               became Czechoslovakia after 1918. Taken together, the travel guides allow us to trace
               the (dis)continuities of tourist attraction distribution in communist
               Czechoslovakia.
         

            Opening communist Czechoslovakia to western tourists
            In 1957, more than one hundred diplomats and travel industry representatives from
               twenty-nine countries converged on Prague in Czechoslovakia for a five-day conference
               on international tourism. The event took place four years after the death of Stalin
               in 1953 at a time when the Communist government, in power since the coup in February
               1948, was gradually improving its diplomatic relations with the West. Organised by
               Čedok, the primary aim of the conference was to promote Czechoslovakia as an
               international tourist destination and ease the mobility of Western tourists across
               the Cold War divide. The organizers hoped that the global meeting would facilitate
               contacts and sow the seeds of future collaboration between airlines, railways, and
               tourist associations of all continents. Shortly before the Prague conference, the
               travel bureaus of the socialist states had held a separate meeting in Carlsbad where
               they concluded that the most effective path to mutual
                  understanding and comprehension is for nations to speak to nations in the most
                  direct manner, by tourism.Czech National Archives, Prague, Státní
                  úřad plánovací II, f. 1177, vol. 471. Bulletin no. 2 (23 October 1957). The
               declaration echoed a stance taken by the Czechoslovak Politburo two years earlier as
               it revised its policy towards Western tourism in the autumn of 1955 . Back then, the leading political
               organ recognized that at present, the development of tourism is
                  of particular political importance. Foreign trade is becoming one of the
                  instruments of mitigating international tensions.Czech National
                  Archives, Prague, Státní úřad plánovací II, f. 1177, vol. 468. Zpráva o rozvoji cestovního ruchu, appendix III (no date
                  [1955]), p. 1.
            In terms of formal tourism policy, the years 1955–56 marked the country’s turning
               point away from Stalinist isolation and towards the search for a common ground between East and West in the postwar world order later
               epitomised by the award-winning Czechoslovak pavilion at the 1958 Brussels World’s
               Fair . In 1955, Čedok made its first
               arrangements with western travel companies and the following year it invited forty
               western travel industry representatives to the country. Starting in March 1956,
               Czechoslovakia also began to issue regular tourist visas and Čedok prepared thirteen
               hotels of higher standard specifically for western guests . Instead of seeing Western tourists
               solely as a threat to national security, the Communist regime prepared to capitalise
               on international tourism as a tool for cultural diplomacy and an invisible
               export.
            To some extent the efforts of the Communist regime to attract foreign visitors and
               win international recognition through tourism mirrored initiatives of the newly
               founded Czechoslovak state in the interwar period. After the breakaway from the
               Austro-Hungarian empire at the end the First World War, the new state utilised
               international tourism to gain recognition abroad as an independent nation worthy of
               its sovereignty . Čedok was quickly
               established as the country’s national travel agency and a semi-official tool of
               nation branding with several foreign offices (; ). The country also
               participated in transnational collaboration on tourism, hosting the second
               international congress of national tourist organizations in 1926 . These congresses were continued immediately
               after the Second World War when the International Union of Official Tourist
               Organizations (IUOTO) was established with Czechoslovakia as a member. Following the
               February coup in 1948, though, the Stalinist regime in Prague left the organization
               at the onset of the Cold War.
            Nine years later, in 1957, the country returned to the international tourist
               organization it had once helped found. The same year the international tourist
               conference in Prague crowned the reorientation of Czechoslovakia’s international
               tourism policy. Čedok representatives were sent on at least 14 different trips to
               Western Europe, North America, and Africa where they attended travel fairs and
               surveyed the local travel industry for potential partners.UNWTO archive,
                  Madrid, International Union of Official Tourist Organizations, UIOOT 645. Letter
                  by CEDOK president Grégr to IUOTO Secretary Morin (27 December 1956); Czech
                  National Archives, Prague, Státní úřad plánovací II, f. 1177, vol. 472, CEDOK
                  travel reports (1957–59). These efforts to attract foreign tourists raised
               fundamental questions with significant ideological ramifications. What, in fact, were
               communist Czechoslovakia’s tourist attractions, and how could they be ordered in a
               hierarchy of attractiveness? Where should Western visitors be invited to travel and
               why? Security interests would have to be balanced against economic interests as the
               spatial distribution of tourist sites for foreigners risked interfering with military
               zones and state security efforts to thwart western cultural influences and spying.
               One aspect of the political dilemmas of international tourism to Cold War
               Czechoslovakia is captured in a US embassy cable sent from Prague to Washington DC in
               1957. Visitors and permanent foreign residents in Prague often
                  bemoan the fact that there is no up-to-date guidebook to the Czechoslovak capital
                  city. Recently an embassy officer asked an employee of ARTIA, the responsible
                  state publishing house, why this was so. Oh, the
                  Czech replied, you have no idea what a difficult task it is,
                     how great is the responsibility involved in determining which buildings and
                     other landmarks should be included in such a guidebook and what reasons should
                     be given for visiting them. So many offices and ministries would have to be
                     consulted by an author, so many decisions would have to be made…
                     Archives Unbound, Czechoslovakia from Liberation to
                        Communist State, 1945–63: Records of the U.S. State Department
                     Classified Files. 749.00. Embassy cable, American Embassy, Prague, to
                     Department of State (27 August 1957). Disregarding its somewhat
               satirical tone, the dialogue recounted in the cable illustrates Mary Heiman’s point
               how, in Czechoslovakia’s political system that routinely
                  disgraced and punished anyone who stepped out of line with the current policy
                  directives, there was not a lot of scope for independent initiative.
                Four years earlier, however, amidst
               Stalinist show trials and campaigns to root out bourgeois
                  elements, Čedok had in fact compiled an 80-page guide in Czech to Prague
               and its environs . Yet its lengthy sections on The recreation of Prague workers,
               Prague on the road to socialism, and In the footsteps of the workers’ movement and the history of the
                  Communist Party in Prague did not provide an ideal template for a
               guidebook geared to a western audience. Complicating matters further and exemplifying
               the dynamic and sometimes contradictory process of de-Stalinisation in
               Czechoslovakia, the editor of the 1953 guidebook was the prominent geographer Jiří
               Král — author of Čedok’s 1928 Guide to the Czechoslovak
                  Republic — who had been forced into retirement after the Communists came
               to power and now worked as a tourist guide in Prague to make ends meet. The estranged
               and somewhat eccentric Král was only rehabilitated in 1966, so he and his manuscript
               would have been unlikely candidates for the symbolically important job of introducing
               the country to western readers .
                  We are grateful to René Matlovič and Jiří Martínek for bringing the details about
                  Král’s life to our attention.
            
            The task of producing the first postwar guidebook for western tourists to
               Czechoslovakia instead fell on Jiří Chyský. The son of Čeněk Chyský, an important
               figure in the Czech tourist movement and author of guidebooks to Prague (; ), Chyský junior had himself
               edited a Czech tourist guide to Prague in 1955 and written a booklet on the
               organization of domestic tourism the same year. Jiří Chyský was also an ardent
               communist and an employee of the Ministry of Justice who had helped the Party seize
               control of the scout movement in 1948, so he was undoubtedly attuned to the politics
               of tourism. Among his collaborators on the international guidebook project were Milan
               Skalník, an accomplice in the purge of the scout movement, and Vladimír Adamec,
               author of several guidebooks for domestic readers in the 1950s . Unfortunately the Čedok archive has been
               lost, which makes further investigations into the production of the two guidebooks
               difficult . From other government sources we
               nevertheless know that in 1958, the Czechoslovak authorities reached an agreement
               with the Geneva-based guidebook publisher Louis Nagel, who was seeking to establish
               his publishing house as the leading provider of guides to Eastern Europe. Nagel’s had
               already published guides to Moscow and Leningrad 
               and Hungary , and according to Čedok’s investigations,
               Nagel’s guides enjoyed a fine reputation in Switzerland and France as reliable and
               objective. The manuscript was eventually provided by Čedok in collaboration with
               Chyský, and seven other authors. Nagel’s published the result in 1959 simultaneously
               in English, French, and German editions. The print-run amounted to 3,000 copies to be
               sold through Western channels aiming to earn hard currency profits.Czech
                  National Archives, Prague, Státní úřad plánovací II, f. 1177, vol. 472. Travel
                  report, Switzerland (25 September–2 October 1958).
            
            Nagel’s 1959 guidebook to Czechoslovakia is a typical artefact of the cultural Cold
               War in which the superpowers vied for popular support at home and abroad. It lends
               itself well to the kind of close readings of descriptions and prescriptions that
               historians have honed since the cultural turn of the 1980s. However, with its 290
               pages and an index of more than 600 entries, this list of toponyms meets the big
                  data criteria set forth by Graham et al. to be big
                  enough for computational intervention to make new
                  sense of them
               . HGIS provides another way of exploring
               the guidebook’s officially approved image of Czechoslovakia as a destination of
               Western tourism. It also allows for comparisons with the attractions represented by
               guidebooks from other periods or produced by other publishers. In this way,
               historical comparisons of guidebooks allow for diachronic studies of a destination’s
               tourist attractions across political caesuras, thereby querying the relation between
               politics and tourism from a new perspective.
         

            HGIS and travel guides
            Building a suitable corpus of guidebooks for exploration with HGIS involves several
               methodological challenges. First, attempts to build long time series face the problem
               of genre fluidity as the modern tourist guidebook is barely 200 years old. Before the
               publication of the first travel guides by Baedeker and Murray in the 1830s, travel
               writers liberally mixed advice with art history, geology, folklore, and political
               commentary. It was only with the introduction of authoritative, standardized, and
               regularly updated texts for travellers in the middle of the nineteenth century that
               travel writing and travel guide parted ways . To ensure
               relative conformity of the compared texts, we recommend limiting a travel guide
               corpus to modern, post-1830s guidebooks.
            The second challenge concerns the creation of a meaningful sample from the heaps of
               modern guidebooks churned out by a vast number of publishing houses around the world
               as leisure travel developed from an elite privilege to a mass phenomenon. In this
               study, the focus is on the officially approved image of Czechoslovakia as represented
               by travel guides produced by the state tourist agency targeted at foreigners. We
               therefore chose to focus on two travel guides produced by the same organization
               (Čedok), geared towards the same audience of relatively affluent foreigners with time
               to spare for a longer journey abroad; Guide to the Czechoslovak
                  Republic
               , and Czechoslovakia
               . Čedok did not publish any similar travel guides for
               foreign tourists between 1928 and 1959, only some small brochures. To provide further
               historical contextualization we also compare with the 1905 Baedeker guide to
               Austria–Hungary. While the German version of this Baedeker guidebook was regularly
               updated until the outbreak of the First World War, the edition from 1905 was the
               final one published in English before the eventual dissolution of the Habsburg
               Empire. Čedok’s 1928 guidebook was published simultaneously in German and English,
               while the Čedok/Nagel guidebook from 1959 was published simultaneously in German,
               English, and French. We chose to compare the English editions of the three guidebooks
               since minimizing the number of German toponyms in the corpus reduced the need for
               disambiguating place names.
            Working with twentieth century guidebooks entails a third methodological challenge.
               As the personal idiosyncrasies of travel writing gave way to the formulaic
               descriptions of frequently updated guidebooks the literary status of the genre
               diminished. Twentieth century guidebooks attained an ephemeral quality similar to
               grey literature with lasting consequences for preservation and access. Given the
               short half-life and low literary standing of these books, library and archive
               collections are often patchy. And even if one successfully locates a complete series
               of a guidebook title, a fourth challenge emerges: twentieth century guidebooks rank
               just about rock bottom of current digitization priorities. This is unsurprising, as
               the preserved books are often in good conditions, oftentimes under copyright, and
               perceived to be of marginal relevance to the national community’s cultural heritage.
               Since we did not possess the means required for producing digitized editions with
               high quality machine-readable text we opted for a simpler and more efficient method
               to prepare the data for computer-assisted analysis. Instead of working with complete
               guidebook texts we digitized, cleaned, and mapped only the toponyms included in the
               guidebook indexes. This cost-saving method builds on the reasonable assumption that
               the guidebook editors included all the places they deemed most relevant to foreign
               tourists in the three indexes. Our assumption is supported by the fact that the
               guidebooks contained comprehensive indexes (see Table 1) referring to an average of
               2–3 unique toponym per content page. However, some of the toponyms are duplicates as
               the English-language indexes also included alternate names in Czech, Slovak, German,
               and Hungarian. The precise number of toponyms and unique positions for each guidebook
               is listed in table 1. Note that these numbers do not include indexed toponyms outside
               the 1959 borders of Czechoslovakia, nor do they include geographic entities that are
               not meaningfully represented by a single coordinate (e.g. rivers, mountain ranges,
               large forests). Such toponyms are also excluded from the maps.
            
               Table 1: Indexed toponyms and unique positions in the three guidebooks
               
                  Guidebook 
                  Indexed toponyms
                  Unique positions
               
               
                  Baedeker (1905)
                  1007
                  754
               
               
                  Čedok (1928)
                  1523
                  1281
               
               
                  Čedok/Nagel (1959)
                  617
                  586
               
            
            The method excludes all toponyms considered too marginal by the editors to feature in
               the index. However, this apparent weakness works to our advantage, as the point of
               the analysis is to identify continuity and change in tourist attractions — not to map
               every town or village mentioned in the travel guide merely to help readers navigate
               from one attraction to another. In the process we excluded toponyms listed as
               subentries under the bigger cities in the 1905 and 1959 guidebooks (such as palaces,
               churches, and museums) since our focus is on the countrywide range of attractions.
               Mapping the changing tourist geography of a city like Prague would undoubtedly yield
               interesting results. However, precise geocoding at street level during a period of
               rapid urban development would require manual labour beyond the scope of this project.
               For the heatmap visualizations (Figure 2) we still assigned approximate weight to the
               cities based on the subentries (or the page span in the case of the 1928 guidebook,
               which did not have subentries). More precisely, we multiplied the page count by
                  4 of Prague, Brno, Olomouc, Ostrava, Bratislava, and Trnava (the cities with
                  subentries in the 1959 guidebook). This produced approximate weights ranging from
                  2 (Trnava) to 100 (Prague), which is in line with the number of toponym subentries
                  of the 1905 and 1959 guidebooks.
            
         

            Disambiguation and geolocation of historical toponyms
            To geolocate the lists of toponyms included in each index we matched them against a
               gazetteer with toponyms and coordinates compiled from the open-source geographical
               database GeoNames, supplemented with toponyms from WikiData. GeoNames boasts of
               having 27 million geographical names compiled from 402
               different sources, including official sources such as the Czech Office for Surveying,
               Mapping and Cadastre, and the Geodetic and Cartographic Institute Bratislava.
                  https://www.geonames.org/. Last
                  accessed 24 January 2022. A persistent challenge for HGIS is disambiguation
                  (; ). To capture all the
               possible places and toponyms inside the borders of communist Czechoslovakia we
               combined the gazetteers for Czechia, Slovakia, and Hungary and linked them with
               GeoNames’ own list of alternate names. To ease the disambiguation of historical
               toponyms featured in the travel guide indexes we supplemented the gazetteer with
               English and German spelling variations from WikiData, bringing the total number of
               languages to five. From the onset, our gazetteer thus contained 156,932 toponyms
               across 68,947 coordinates stored in a relational database.
            The automated toponym disambiguation is a particular variant of Approximate String
               Matching (ASM): the problem of declaring whether two non-identical strings of
               characters match. It is a classical computer science problem that has inspired
               numerous solutions in the form of metrics declaring a pair a match or not based on a
               predetermined threshold (; ; ; ). Machine Learning models offer another solution,
               but while they tend to perform better, they also require training on large amounts of
               annotated data and typically lead to static models, needing retrained whenever new
               pairings are discovered (; ). In many toponym disambiguation cases, a
               simple metric approach thus suffices to yield reliable results efficiently (; ; ). With more than 3,000 toponyms to
               geolocate and a need to minimize false positives, we opted for a very restrictive
               threshold to ensure that only highly similar toponyms were auto-matched
               (Jaro-similarity of 0.9).
            For easy data entry, we constructed a place name disambiguation and geocoding
               application (CITADEL) composed of two parts: a web application with a graphical user
               interface (built with Anvil), linked with a server-side application (written in
               Python) to run the automated disambiguation and matching against the toponym
                  database. For more details on CITADEL and its source code: https://github.com/MatJohaDH/citadel
                When users enter index toponyms in the GUI they are matched against the
               gazetteer in a series of successively looser matching conditions, from requiring a
               perfect match to Jaro 0.9, to generate a list of probable positions. CITADEL
               geolocated the majority of the index toponyms and provided a short list of
               suggestions for most of the remaining toponyms to aid in their manual disambiguation.
               To assign a coordinate to the remaining toponyms we cross-referenced the indexes, the
               guidebook descriptions, modern and historical maps to approximate the coordinates.
               The toponyms we geolocated manually were added to the gazetteer to improve
               disambiguation and geolocation of other historical sources in the future. Finally, we
               mapped the toponyms The dataset is published on Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7418864
                using the open-source GIS tool QGIS and importing historical borders from the
               CShapes 2.0 Dataset . Background layers were
                  imported from https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/digital-elevation-model-of-europe
                  and https://gisco-services.ec.europa.eu/distribution/v2/lau/download/#lau19
                  (accessed 12 September 2022).
            
         

            Analysis
            To provide a baseline for our interpretation of the 1959 travel guide we began by
               mapping its indexed toponyms along with the indexes of the 1905 and 1928 guidebooks.
               Figure 1 shows the results, with each dot representing the coordinate of a toponym
               within the borders of Cold War Czechoslovakia. Given our analytical focus on the
               tourist attractions in 1959 we chose to map all guidebooks on the same projection of
               communist Czechoslovakia’s political borders. Our emphasis on the country’s cold war
               borders admittedly yields a somewhat misleading impression of the earlier guidebooks
               since the area’s political geography appeared entirely different during the
               Austro-Hungarian Empire and the interwar period. Most importantly, in the Dual
               Monarchy before the Great War the Czech lands belonged to Austria whereas Slovakia
               constituted a part of Upper Hungary. Moreover, interwar Czechoslovakia also included
               the area east of Slovakia known as Carpathian Ruthenia (part of present-day Ukraine).
               We nevertheless decided to exclude Ruthenian toponyms from our analysis since this
               poor and remote region cursorily mentioned in the 1928 guidebook was transferred to
               the Soviet Union after the Second World War and thus did not feature in the 1959
               guidebook.
            
               Geolocated toponyms by travel guide
               
               A set of three maps of Czechoslovakia labeled 1905, 1928, and 1959 where
                  toponyms are shown as dots
            
            At first sight, the three maps in Figure 1 show a similar, fairly even distribution
               of attractions throughout the elongated country. Upon closer inspection, however, the
               1905 and 1928 maps include more toponyms in the western part of the country compared
               to the 1959 map. To make the differences clearer, we generated heatmaps based on the
               same toponym data and standardized across the three datasets to allow for comparison
               (Figure 2).The three maps have 20 as their shared maximum kernel density
                  estimation and a radius of 20km. The colour scale has five gradients, each
                  representing one fifth of the range, while the extremes are transparent (0) and
                  black (>20).
            
            
               Heatmaps of weighted geolocated toponyms by travel guide
               
               A set of three maps of Czechoslovakia labeled 1905, 1928, and 1959 where
                  toponym density is indicated by color
            
            The heatmaps show a continuity of toponym density in four areas: The cities of Prague
               and Brno, which had long been the urban centres of Bohemia and Moravia; the Bohemian
               Paradise (Český ráj) northeast of Prague, famous for its medieval castles and
               distinctive sandstone rock formations; and the High Tatra Mountains on Slovakia’s
               northern periphery, a popular area for hiking, hunting, mountaineering, and medical
               retreats since the late nineteenth century. The heatmaps also show a clear shift in
               emphasis from the older guidebooks’ denser distribution of toponyms in Bohemia (the
               western half of present-day Czechia) and thinner distribution in the mountainous
               Slovakia compared to the 1959 guidebook’s more balanced representation of Czech and
               Slovak attractions. (Note here that the overall lower temperature of the 1959
               map owes to its relatively smaller number of indexed toponyms compared to the older
               guidebooks.)
            The high density of attractions in Bohemia on the 1905 and 1928 maps is an expected
               finding. Bohemia had traditionally been the richest and most populous part of the
               country and the West Bohemian spa triangle outlined by Carlsbad (Karlovy Vary),
               Marienbad (Mariánské Lázně), and Franzensbad (Františkovy Lázně) had a long history
               of attracting visitors from far-away lands . The
               borderland’s spa towns continued to cater to an international clientele after the
               First World War while numerous historical castles perched on hilltops and charming
               chateaux surrounded by romantic gardens provided spectacular tourist sights. The
               pre-WWII density of attractions along the borders with present-day Austria, Germany,
               and Poland illustrates the transformation of areas characterized by high hills and
               deep forests into recreational sites for hiking, camping, and skiing in the early
               twentieth century. These parts of the country, Bohemian Switzerland, the Bohemian
               Forest (Šumava), and the Giant Mountains, were deemed such important tourist
               attractions that they merited special fold-out maps in the 1928 guidebook,
               underlining their touristic value and accessibility. Both the 1905 Baedeker and the
               1928 Čedok guide also included detailed maps of the High Tatra Mountains, and the
               area’s many summits, saddles, valleys, lakes, hiking routes, and huts were
               meticulously described and indexed in all three guidebooks, which explains the
                  high temperature there.
            More surprising, though, is the relatively thin representation of western Bohemia in
               the 1959 guidebook and the more balanced representation of Czech and Slovak
               attractions. The first difference is a likely effect of the cold war militarization
               of this region where the Warsaw Pact bordered directly with NATO. For security
               reasons, the Czechoslovak authorities did not want western tourists roaming too close
               to the state border, which at this point was not yet fully demarcated and fortified
                  . The second difference
               indicates an attempt to present the two parts of the country, the Czech lands and
               Slovakia, as equally attractive, despite the latter’s more remote location from the
               western tourist’s point of the view (which the guidebooks all adopted). Writing on
               behalf of the new state’s official tourist organisation, Král seems to have
               recognized the political obligation to give Slovakia a more detailed treatment
               already in 1928; a concern that did not burden a commercial guidebook publisher like
               Baedeker at the turn of the century. In his introduction, Král explained that
                     The greatest attention is of course devoted to the
                     world famous Spas. But also those regions, which nature has endowed with such
                     uncommon attractions — notably in Slovakia and Subcarpathian Russia — and where
                     so far, the foreigner has only rarely found his way, are dealt with here,
                     allowing at least a rough idea to be formed by him, who would penetrate into
                     districts where both people and nature have a character of their own, even if
                     conditions are sometimes below the standard of comfortable tourism.
                   Král’s guidebook devoted just 48 of its
               272 pages (18%) to Slovakia but it was nevertheless considered exemplary compared to
               contemporary handbooks on Czechoslovakia. Writing a few years later, a reviewer of
               two English-language travel guides to Czechoslovakia (published outside the country)
               held up the reviewed books against Kral’s and found Slovakia treated in a very perfunctory way and rushed
                  through in a very cursory manner
               . Three decades later, the authors of the 1959
               guidebook were careful to steer clear of the exoticizing language enveloping Slovakia
               and the historical bias towards attractions in Bohemia and Moravia. Numerically, 85
               of its 290 pages (29%) covered Slovakia. 
            To further probe the (dis)continuities between the three guidebooks we analysed the
               indexed toponyms with the help of a clustering algorithm. This method allowed us to
               merge coordinates referring to the same tourist site. For instance, the 1959 index
               contained an entry for Bouzov, castle while the 1928
               index had an entry for Bouzov, the Moravian village next
               to the castle. The geocoding process assigned different coordinates for the two
               entries, but since the attraction is the same, the clustering algorithm is useful to
               group such entries under a single coordinate. The clustering process also eliminates
               the problem that our multilingual gazetteer would sometimes contain near-identical
               coordinates for identical toponyms. The clustering algorithm merged any points within
               a radius of roughly 4 km calculated as the great-circle distance of the coordinates
               into the same cluster. The low radius was chosen to avoid an avalanche of clustering
               creating meaningless superclusters. When all positions within the radius had been
               placed in the same cluster, the cluster’s coordinates were calculated as the
               arithmetic mean of the member coordinates. The method allows for the subtraction of
               clusters between maps, which renders the (dis)continuities more visible.
            
               Geolocated toponym clusters (4 km) included in the Baedeker 1905, Čedok 1928
                  and Nagel 1959 guidebook indexes
               Map of Czechoslovakia with black dots
               
            
            Figure 3 shows the 174 clusters comprised of 573 unique, close-neighbouring positions
               included in all three guidebooks. A quick glance at the map suffices to note that the
               country’s main border posts and all the bigger cities are represented. A closer
               reading of the clusters’ locations shows that the shared content includes a number of
               spas, many of which had been popular with foreign guests since the nineteenth
               century, e.g. Carlsbad, Marienbad, Franzensbad, Bad Königswart (Lázně Kynžvart), Bad
               Gräfenberg (Lázně Jeseník), Pistyan (Kúpele Piešťany), and Kúpele Korytnica. The
               clusters also contain some of the country’s picturesque old towns and famous castles
               including Český Krumlov, Karlštejn, Kroměříž, Křivoklát, and Loket. Natural landmarks
               such as peculiar rock formations, scenic cliffs, caves, forests, valleys, hills, and
               mountains also feature in all three guidebooks. Among the historical landmarks with
               an established pedigree as tourist attractions included in the books is the
               Austerlitz battlefield near Brno where Napoleon defeated the Austrian and Russian
               armies in 1806.
            
               Geolocated toponyms clusters (4 km) with toponyms from both Čedok 1928 and
                  Nagel 1959 guidebook indexes
               Map of Czechoslovakia with gray dots
               
            
            To check for the continuities between the Czechoslovak guidebooks produced by the
               country’s national tourist organisation, we also mapped the toponyms clusters shared
               by these two guidebooks (Figure 4) using the same clustering method and radius as
               outline above. The map includes 290 clusters comprised of 680 unique,
               close-neighbouring positions. The map is largely identical to Figure 3, though it
               includes even more famous castles and chateux (e.g. Pernštejn, Kost, and Zvíkov),
               some of which had possibly been closed to the public or in poor condition around
               1905. The shared clusters between 1928 and 1959 also contain some remotely located
               dwellings such as the small Moravian town of Kralice where the humanistic scholar
               Comenius worked on a famous bible translation in the seventeenth century. By 1959 a
               Kralice Bible Museum had opened, which the communist-era guidebook hastened to stress
                  is also of great interest to laymen because many very
                  beautiful impressions have been produced by the Kralice press
               .
            
               Geolocated toponyms clusters (4 km) unique to the 1928 guidebook index
               Map of Czechoslovakia with blue dots
               
            
            We then mapped the clusters unique to 1928 and 1959 individually, thus identifying
               the attractions unique to each guidebook (Figures 5 and 6). Using the same clustering
               algorithm we eliminated clusters containing toponyms from both indexes so that the
               remaining points were attractions at least 4 km away from any attraction listed in
               the other guide. Figure 5 thus shows the 480 toponym clusters (636 positions)
               included in the 1928 guidebook but not present in the 1959 guidebooks. The figure
               confirms the observation that the 1928 guidebook contained many more references to
               attractions along the western borders and a heavier emphasis on Bohemia. In
               comparison, the attractions unique to the 1959 guidebook (Figure 6) are
               overwhelmingly located in Slovakia, especially around Komárno on the border to
               Hungary and in the mountains of Central Slovakia. The Moravian Karst north of Brno
               and the Haná region around Olomouc where the Javoříčské caves were discovered in 1938
               also contains toponym clusters unique to the 1959 guidebook. Other unique toponyms
               represent recently constructed dams and the new recreational areas that had sprung up
               in their vicinity (e.g. Brno and Slapy).
            
               Geolocated toponyms clusters (4 km) unique to the 1959 guidebook index
               Map of Czechoslovakia with red dots
               
            
            Returning to the question of the relation between politics and tourism, we can thus
               conclude based on the toponym distribution maps that the 1959 Čedok editors departed
               from their predecessors’ emphasis on Bohemia to present a more balanced picture of
               Czechoslovakia. Otherwise, the result of this distant reading of guidebooks points to
               the continuity. With a 4 km clustering radius, the communist-era guidebook contains
               290 clusters shared with the interwar guidebook and 173 unique clusters (193
               positions). A closer look at the unique clusters show that many of them contain
               attractions unconnected with the Czechoslovak railroad network. The editor of the
               1928 guidebook had deliberately organized the text in accordance with the railways,
               which explains why these harder-to-reach attractions feature exclusively in the 1959
               guidebook. As Felix Jeschke writes about editor Jiří Král’s selection criteria,
                  the railways were the network that made the country
                  accessible, offering a pre-ordered system of routes. Places not served by the
                  railway were not presented as destinations and had to be sought out by intrepid
                  travellers themselves.
                Examples of such attractions added to the
               1959 edition include the medieval castle of Smolenice, the baroque castle at
               Milotice, the excavation of fossilised trilobites at Skryje, the remote Slovak
               hunting grounds at Remetské Hámre, and the small wooden churches built in Byzantine
               style near Svidník. The addition of sights like these support our argument that the
               1959 guidebook presented a country rich in romantic attractions dating back
               centuries.
            Further scrutiny of the guidebook text substantiates our claim that the 1959
               guidebook emphasized the country’s inherent appeal to tourists attracted by nature
               and historical architecture: The very many natural beauties of
                  Czechoslovakia make the country a tourist’s paradise
               . The Czechoslovak landscape has a fresh and green appearance
               , Slovakia is a paradise
                  for all mountain lovers
               , and the numerous mineral springs are of world-wide reputation
               . As we have already shown, the country’s
               numerous castles and chateaux featured prominently. Pernštejn is one of the most valuable architectural monuments
               . Karlštejn is out of a
                  fairy story
                and Konopiště was sumptuously rebuilt
               . Readers had to look carefully to find
               tourist sites more explicitly related to contemporary politics or the history of
               communism. For instance, the Slovak National Uprising against the German occupants
               and their fascist collaborationists in August 1944 is relegated to a historical
               sidenote in small print in the section on Banská Bystrica, the city where the
               uprising took place. The museum dedicated to this event of considerable importance to
               the party’s self-understanding  is only
               mentioned after two sizeable paragraphs about renaissance burgher houses and the old castle buildings
               . The scalable reading of the 1959 guidebook
               produced by communist Czechoslovakia’s National Tourist Organization thus
               demonstrates the continuity with the interwar branding of the country’s many tourist
               sights.
         

            Conclusions
            In her work on heritage management in communist Czechoslovakia, Cathleen Giustino
                   has shown how an ideological ambiguity
               was at play in the country’s castles and chateaux. After the Second World War, dozens
               of former aristocratic residences were confiscated and turned into state-owned
               museums, which became popular sites of domestic tourism. And as party loyalists often
               noted, the sites lacked clearly encoded ideological messages. The translation of
               communist cultural policy into heritage management and tourist site administration
               did not result in a simple eradication of the aristocratic material culture.
               Communist leaders had more pressing concerns than exhibition design at backwater
               tourist sites, leaving art historians and tour guides some discretion to promote
               their site’s high-cultural attractions. Our scalable reading of the 1959 guidebook
               suggests that its editors also had the liberty to steer clear of awkward ideological
               messages that could rub western readers the wrong way. Instead, the book appears
               tailored to the educated and historically interested international audience.
               Returning to the guidebook author’s dilemma recounted in the US embassy cable, our
               analysis shows that the editors eventually opted for continuity, including many of
               the attractions already mentioned in the 1905 and 1928 guidebooks. This tendency can
               be traced back to stylish photo books published by Artia, the state publishing house,
               since 1953, showcasing the beauties of Prague, as well as castles and chateaux,
               interspersed with images of socialist society . Books
               like these were sold at the Brussels Expo in 1958 where the Czechoslovak pavilion
               also introduced visitors to historic monuments with photos of castles and chateaux,
               hoping that it would attract foreign tourists to Czechoslovakia . For additional details on the
                  ambition to attract foreign tourists through the Brussels pavillion, see NA, SUP
                  II, f. 1177, vol. 472, 1958. Zpráva o činnosti
                  informačního střediska Čedoku v Bruselu v době Světové výstavy 1958. This
               hope, however, remained frustrated for a few more years. It was only by the mid-1960s
               that Western tourists started to arrive in Czechoslovakia in significant numbers and
               not until 1978 did the total number of visitors from non-socialist countries exceed
               one million . Still, the attempts to
                  normalize the image of communist Czechoslovakia in the West and reassert
               its status as a worthy destination of international tourism began already in the
               1950s. By building on the legacy of romantic attractions established in the
               nineteenth century, Čedok tailored the guidebook to western audiences and showcased
               the entire country as ready for consumption by foreign visitors.
            There is an important distinction to be made between cold war tourism and tourism in
               the Cold War as Christian Noack and Sune Bechmann Pedersen have argued. While the
               Cold War was at the centre of the first form of tourism, it was a contextual
               chronological marker in the second . The visualization of toponyms presented in this article allows for
               a distant reading of tourist attractions in Czechoslovakia and illustrates the
               symbolic continuity with the pre-war era, undisturbed by the Cold War, which our
               close reading also supported. Naturally, this was only symbolic. It goes without
               mentioning that the experiences of western tourists on the ground differed greatly
               from those of the interwar period, and that other sources than guidebooks are needed
               for research into this matter. Still, our scalable reading reveals the symbolic
               attempt by Czechoslovak authorities to normalize tourist relations across the Iron
               Curtain and re-integrate communist Czechoslovakia in the international tourist
               industry by perpetuating a pre-socialist tourist legacy. Our study has thus shown the
               efficacy of analysing travel guides with HGIS and pointed out a promising new
               methodological avenue for the field of tourism history. To enable similar research
               for other areas or travel guides, we have made CITADEL publicly available and
               prepared to be set-up for any combination of countries and languages.
         

            Acknowledgements
            This work was supported by Erik Philip Sörensens stiftelse (grant no. H2019-039) and
               conducted at the DigitalHistory@Lund research platform, Media History, Department of
               Communication and Media, Lund University
         
