Title:  Foreword
Volume:  003
Issue:  1
Date:  26 February 2009
Abstract:  
            A brief remembrance of Ross Scaife.
         
Full Body Text: 
Foreword
This is a book about the future, not about Ross Scaife. That's
                the way it should be, and that's the way he would have wanted
                it.
 For Ross was a scholar and teacher who knew in his bones that
                the steady, thoughtful consideration of the human past is a tool
                of unmatched power for informing humankind's ability to imagine
                and enact futures worthy of the intelligence and dignity of its
                every member. To honor him best, we should share in that
                conviction and learn from the resourcefulness and persistence of
                his practice. 
 Ross's career flourished in the twin decades of the information
                revolution. Whatever the globalized society we share may now
                experience, we live ineluctably in an information society. What
                we invent now, what we do now will entail living out the
                implications of a transformation that has already happened.
                Through the too few years that Ross was given to shape his
                vision and share it with others, he kept his eye clearly on ways
                to make sure that the revolution in knowing will serve his
                profession and through it his society. 
 His convictions were clear and luminous. The best that we can
                know about the past needs to be preserved and disseminated by
                the most powerful media available to the widest audience
                possible. The Stoa consortium that he led gave example
                repeatedly to the force of those convictions and their power to
                change for the better the ways we learn and think and teach.
 We both learned from, were inspired by, and benefited from
                Ross's friendship. We feel the ache of his loss deeply, but we
                are delighted to see in this volume an exactly appropriate
                response to loss: innovation, optimism, and the commitment of
                teachers and scholars to receiving, interpreting, and
                transmitting the heritage of humankind's pasts to its present
                and future. Ross, we think, would be glad to read this book, and
                then soon enough impatient to get beyond its insights to the
                next stage. He reminds us of another Kentuckyan of yore, Daniel
                Boone, who made it to the frontier ahead of the rest, and then
                kept uprooting and moving further west, always seeing and
                seizing opportunity, always staying at the leading edge. We owe
                him the tribute of emulation. 
