Title:  Pedagogical Entryways into Digital Humanities: A Review of
                    Linda K. Hughes and Sarah R. Robbins’ 
Volume:  011
Issue:  1
Date:  29 November 2016
Abstract:  
                
                This review of Linda K. Hughes and Sarah R. Robbins’ Teaching Transatlanticism considers the representation of digital
                    humanities in a literary studies pedagogical anthology. Hughes and Robbins
                    position digital humanities methodology as the future of pedagogical research in
                    the field of transatlanticism, compiling digital humanities scholarship into a
                    section titled Envisioning Digital
                        Transatlanticism.
                    Teaching Transatlanticism thus illustrates the ways
                    literary scholars are crossing over into digital humanities research, and how
                    literary scholars more versed in the digital humanities are welcoming new
                    participants.
            
Full Body Text: 
Scholars of transatlantic literature are not fans of disciplinary and national
                boundaries. We are more comfortable aligning ourselves with discussions that take up
                literary exchanges from all sides of the Atlantic rather than adhering to the
                nationalist – either British or American – coherent, tightly sealed literary canons.
                Boundary-crossing and open geographic exchange can become a challenge, however, when
                setting out to plan a course on early transatlantic literature, or even to fulfill
                institutional and departmental requirements for what counts as literary studies.
                Linda K. Hughes and Sarah R. Robbins take up this challenge in their edited
                collection, Teaching Transatlanticism: Resources for Teaching
                    Nineteenth-Century Anglo-American Print Culture, published by Edinburgh
                University Press. Teaching Transatlanticism aims to
                reposition the way literary scholars teach nineteenth century transatlantic
                literature. The anthology offers a selection of essays from literary scholars who
                cross genre, discipline, and national boundaries in their pedagogical methods.
                Though Teaching Transatlanticism is not a text
                primarily devoted to digital humanities (DH) scholarship, Hughes and Robbins
                encourage readers to look towards DH for pedagogical methodologies. Of the
                anthology’s six sections and nineteen chapters, only three short chapters – grouped
                together at the end of the text in a section entitled Envisioning Digital Transatlanticism – take up digital humanities
                pedagogy. This may initially seem to demote the text’s applicability for scholars
                more versed in digital humanities discourse. However, what Teaching Transatlanticism offers DH scholarship is insight into the
                ways literary scholars are crossing the bridge into DH work, and withal how literary
                scholars more versed in DH are welcoming new participants. Because, as Karen Kilcup
                argues, composing an anthology creates a miniature
                    canon, we can better understand the ways that DH scholarship is woven
                into more traditional literary studies methods by reading Teaching Transatlanticism as a case study of the literary canon . From this perspective, pedagogy is an
                accessible passageway into DH methodology for literary scholars. 
Hughes and Robbins explain in their introduction that by compiling Teaching Transatlanticism with the digital pedagogy section towards the
                end of the text, they are able to end by looking ahead to the possibilities opened
                by digital humanities. While DH pedagogy is certainly
                not a new field, Hughes and Robbins recognize that many of their readers may be new
                to DH scholarship, and may also be unsure of how to become acquainted with the
                field. The editors promote a kind of DH-curiosity in their audience by adopting an
                inviting, optimistic rhetoric, and by invoking terms like envisioning,
                possibilities, and looking ahead. DH scholars are not unfamiliar with this type
                of discourse nor would they dispute placing digital humanities at the forefront of
                innovative scholarly practices in the humanities. Such inviting rhetoric celebrating
                DH as the future reinforces what Bethany Nowviskie referred to as the eternal
                September of the Digital Humanities. For Nowviskie, the eternal September tension
                within the DH community describes a field that is growing in popularity and quickly
                gaining newly interested scholars, but that also has a long history of scholarship
                often going unrecognized . As a relative newcomer to the field
                myself, I am interested in pedagogical methods that aid new scholars in joining the
                conversation, and in the tension that arises when transitioning from DH novice to DH
                expert. 
Turning to the Envisioning Digital Transatlanticism section of the anthology, I
                want to draw attention to the ways both the editors and authors of these short
                chapters situate digital pedagogy as necessary to literary studies. This
                Envisioning section promotes DH scholarship, targeting an audience who may be less
                convinced by the direct link between transatlanticism and DH. Even the editors’ use
                of the word envisioning in the title suggests a persuasive, advocating tone.
The first essay in the Envisioning section of the anthology, Alison Chapman’s
                Transatlantic Mediations: Teaching Victorian Poetry in the New Print Media,
                convincingly argues that DH pedagogy is valuable in a literature classroom. For
                Chapman, digital pedagogy is especially useful when teaching a transatlantic
                literature course because transatlanticism is so invested in mediation Chapman explains teachers’ investment in mediation by pointing
                to the ways that transatlantic texts work within different categories (of the
                nation), unsettling unitary definitions and emphasising dynamism and context. Transatlantic print culture is heavily mediated, and
                digital pedagogy offers the tools to examine the telesthesia of transatlantic print
                as a circulation of texts, seen artificially and yet illuminatingly up close through
                the constructed lens of the digital object and the digital tool. Beyond the editors’ motioning towards DH as the future, Chapman
                explicitly argues that the digital should be a universal component in literary
                studies courses: it is my contention that critiques of digital platforms, tools,
                and methods belong in every higher education literary course to nurture students’
                digital literacy. Chapman thus theorizes the
                benefits of digital pedagogy in a transatlantic literature course as twofold:
                digital mediation helps students understand the circulation and dissemination of
                transatlantic print culture, and students’ digital literacy skills are further
                developed by engaging critically with digital methods.
Following Chapman’s chapter is Erik Simpson’s Digital Transatlanticism: An
                Experience of and Reflections on Undergraduate Research in the Humanities. Like
                Chapman, Simpson argues that DH methodology is particularly applicable to
                transatlanticism, citing several of his undergraduate students’ research projects in
                creating a bibliographic database, The Transatlantic 1790s.
                Simpson argues, In humanities computing...we can construct tools that achieve a
                kind of transatlantic perspective unavailable to scholars whose academic world is
                shaped by the conventional boundary marker of the Atlantic...we can also create
                online environments that place these new insights in the context of transatlantic
                theory. Simpson’s essay is especially enlightening
                because he provides details into the specifics of his undergraduate students’
                projects, such as one student who investigated debates about marriage in the 1790s
                and another who researched discourse on physiognomy, figurations of the eye, and
                diagnoses such as hysteria. Simpson credits his
                students both in his chapter as well as within each entry in
                The Transatlantic 1790s database.
                Simpson’s research can thus serve as a model for both incorporating DH methods into
                transatlantic literature classrooms, as well as for best practices in crediting and
                showcasing student research. 
Hughes and Robbins present Teaching Transatlanticism alongside
                a website of the same name – teachingtransatlanticism.tcu.edu which is the subject
                of the final chapter in the Envisioning Digital Transatlanticism – section of the
                anthology. Hughes and Robbins introduce the site as an online extension of the
                conversation started by the anthology’s contributors: We anticipate...that an array
                of voices will join our curricular conversations via the website associated with
                this volume. The WordPress site includes two
                components that solicit user participation: teaching materials listed under a page
                titled Teaching Resources, and a discussion forum listed under a page titled
                Conversations open to new users to comment and create new threads. The Teaching
                Resources page, which lists syllabi, lesson plans, and graduate student exam lists,
                suggests users submit additional resources to the website editor for possible
                inclusion in this section and provides a link to the discussion forum on the
                Conversations page. Currently, the teaching resource contributors and forum
                participants are mostly individuals associated with the Teaching
                    Transatlanticism anthology. While it is useful to be able to access syllabi
                and lesson plans from the anthology’s authors, the small circle of users on the
                Teaching Transatlanticism website points to the challenge of soliciting and
                maintaining an active user community online, based around such a specific field. In
                her research on participatory interface design and digital editions, Amanda Visconti
                explains that her work requires her to conceptualize the range of definitions of
                inclusivity online: as web design that is universally accessible to users; as
                invitation to participation; as scaffolding to make a site not only welcoming, but
                usable by new community members. For Visconti, soliciting and
                including new users on her site (a digital edition of Joyce’s Ulysses, InfiniteUlysses.com) requires not just building the necessary
                collaborative components, but also seeking out user feedback in the building and
                design process. 
 In his essay, Twenty-First-Century Digital Publics and Nineteenth-Century
                Transatlantic Public Spheres, Tyler Branson, the site’s creator, employs public
                sphere theory, citing Michael Warner and Nancy Fraser, to think through digital
                collaborative spaces and the types of publics summoned by such a digital commons.
                For Branson and his collaborators, the Teaching Transatlanticism site is the
                culmination not just of a book and digital humanities project on transatlantic
                teaching, but also a reflective process on how publics form and operate. His essay relies on public sphere theory as it enables him to
                challenge...the concept of a universal public in favour of multiple
                publics or counterpublics as he speculates that the types of users participating on
                the site will be a collection of overlapping yet distinctive human teaching voices
                from all over the world. Like Visconti, Branson
                is thinking carefully about how users are included within the site, and about the
                site’s accessibility as a digital commons for a wide range of academic users . However, in its current iteration, the Teaching
                Transatlanticism website does not quite attain the aspirations Branson articulates
                in his essay, as the site still lacks outside user participation and collaboration.
                The disjuncture between Branson and his collaborators’ ambitions for Teaching
                Transatlanticism and the present manifestation of the site highlights the necessity
                of scholarly organizations like NINES (Networked Infrastructure
                for Nineteenth-Century Electronic Scholarship) which peer-review digital projects
                and provide support for scholars conducting digital research. 
Teaching Transatlanticism reveals that pedagogy is an
                encouraging realm in which literary scholars can be introduced to digital humanities
                methodology. The authors in this volume help us understand the connections between
                transatlanticism, mediation, and the digital, and their work demonstrates an opening
                for further conversation. If digital humanities is indeed the future of
                transatlantic studies that the editors of this anthology envision, we can perhaps
                imagine a digital companion edition to this text focused on digital transatlantic
                pedagogy – one that calls forth a vibrant online community of transatlantic
                scholars. It seems that users are more drawn to online communities where they can
                annotate texts and collaborate on projects, rather than the model of the often
                neglected static forum or comment box. 
