Title:  Decolonial by Design: Building 
Volume:  018
Issue:  4
Date:  6 December 2024
Abstract:  
            This case study illustrates how carefully designed digital publications can make significant contributions to decolonial 
               scholarship, with a focus on the humanities. Drawing upon my recent experience creating Sekuru's 
               Stories, a co-authored digital humanities project featuring music from Southern Africa, I suggest 
               several ways to engage this decolonizing potential. Among other issues, I discuss which digital platforms may prove most 
               readily accessible to users with limited internet access, outline options for making content available in indigenous 
               languages, and highlight special interactive features such as comparative map viewers and 3D imaging. I also discuss 
               considerations in building digital projects that will prove accessible, robust, and sustainable over time, as well as 
               specific strategies for cultivating a wide audience. One highlight of digital publication is its ability to support 
               multiple navigation options, including both linear and non-linear ways of moving through content. Similarly, digital 
               projects can integrate both narrative and non-narrative formats, blending aspects of monograph and website. When these 
               considerations are taken into account, well-designed digital projects are uniquely capable of reaching a wide audience of 
               scholars, students, and laypeople. As evidence, I analyze data from Google Analytics showing that the primary readership 
               for our project is located in Southern Africa. I argue that digital humanities projects can prove accessible 
               and engaging for non-specialists without sacrificing scholarly rigor, and I call upon scholars to embrace the decolonial 
               potential of digital work. I conclude by outlining concrete steps to place the digital humanities more firmly at the heart 
               of the humanities writ large. 
            
         
Full Body Text: 

          Introduction
            Shortly after arriving in Zimbabwean territory in the mid-1890s, the British South Africa Police established a 
               small camp in the town of Chinhoyi. Soon, however, British authority was threatened by a spirit medium 
               named Sasa, who had settled at the nearby sacred site of Chirorodziva. Sasa was 
               captured and taken to the police camp with his brothers, precipitating a dramatic series of events still recounted by 
               his descendants. Among them is Sekuru Tute Chigamba, a renowned performer of the Zimbabwean 
               mbira dzavadzimu, or mbira of the ancestral spirits. In 
               Chigamba's telling, the British forces demanded that Sasa prove his legitimacy by making 
               rain fall within the hour. Positioned beneath the hot sun, the brothers began to sing, 
               Kakore tenderera, kemvura tenderera, or, Little cloud, 
               circle around, full of rain, circle around. Soon, a small cloud appeared in the sky. The ensuing downpour 
               lasted more than a day, and after begging Sasa to halt the deluge, the British ordered him to resettle 
               near the British encampment. As Chigamba recounts, The British said to 
               Sasa, Whenever we need rain, we will come to you. You are the… [best] rainmaker in 
               Rhodesia. … And people were coming to them to ask for rain.
            
            Chigamba's fascinating account of this colonial encounter belongs to the Shona narrative genre of 
               nhoroondo, or stories about the past. Drawing on decades of ethnographic work, I present 
               a series of Chigamba's oral narratives through a born-digital project titled Sekuru's 
               Stories (sekuru.org). Sekuru's Stories 
               brings together a multimedia ethnographic archive of photographs, musical transcriptions, maps, audio and visual 
               recordings, and narrative text, making it a project ideally suited for digital as opposed to manuscript publication 
               (see Figure 1). This digital project was co-authored with Chigamba, who is often referred to by the 
               honorific title Sekuru, or Grandfather. Born in 1939, Sekuru Chigamba 
               grew up immersed in the ritual life of northeastern Zimbabwe, where his father served as an interpreter 
               for a senior clan spirit, or mhondoro. Yet his father also worked as a cook on a succession 
               of commercial farms owned by white Rhodesian settlers, giving the young Chigamba an intimate view of 
               everyday colonial entanglements. Echoing one of the world's most recurring twentieth-century narratives, 
               Sekuru Chigamba migrated to the colonial capital in 1962. Here, he gained employment in a shop owned by 
               Albert Amato, a Jewish refugee who fled Rhodes Island during the Holocaust. During this time, 
               Sekuru Chigamba also began teaching himself to play the mbira dzavadzimu. 
               Now considered one of the world's foremost mbira musicians, Sekuru 
               Chigamba has toured widely in Europe, North America, and beyond.
            
            
              Screenshot of the homepage for Sekuru's Stories 
                 (https://sekuru.org/home).
              Screenshot of the homepage for Sekuru's Stories, featuring rows of three 
                 clickable buttons with thumbnail sized photos at the top and bottom and brief text with the project description at 
                 the center.
              
              
            
            Around the time of Zimbabwe's political independence, a rising tide of decolonial scholarship analyzed 
               several of the nation's oral poetic genres, with emphasis on the resilience and contemporary import of African 
               languages and cultures. Among these genres were tsumo proverbs 
               , nhetembo praise poetry 
               , ngano folktales , song 
               lyrics , and the didactic and narrative poetic forms of 
               nhango and ndyaringo . 
               By comparison, nhoroondo have received scant scholarly attention. This may be partly 
               because the term nhoroondo can refer to various ways of narrating the past, including 
               legends and myths, specific historical accounts, individual life histories, and academic narratives. A variety of 
               other expressive forms, including songs, folktales, proverbs, and even dream narratives, are also frequently caught 
               up within nhoroondo. As exemplified in Sekuru Chigamba's account of 
               Sasa's encounter with British authorities, the narrative genre of 
               nhoroondo brings together multiple strands of scholarly interest, including 
               relationships between mediumship and musical performance , ritual and place 
               , and the problems of navigating different forms of power .
            
            Through digital engagement with Sekuru Chigamba's narratives, Sekuru's 
               Stories takes up nhoroondo as a multivalent and polyphonic form, offering 
               a new way of approaching Zimbabwean history, biography, and memoir. Following Sabelo J. Ndlovu-Gatsheni, 
               I consider Sekuru Chigamba's oral narratives through the larger framework of decoloniality, marked by an 
               epistemological movement gesturing towards…  the different ways of knowing by which people across 
               the human globe provide meaning to their existence . This is 
               especially significant in light of published accounts of Zimbabwe's colonial and postcolonial history, 
               which includes a recent spate of both scholarly and popular memoirs  
                  . With 
               the exception of the account of a few black nationalists   
               , however, these memoirs overwhelmingly portray the experiences of expatriates and white 
               Zimbabweans.One notable exception is a memoir published by third-generation Chinese Zimbabwean 
               Fay Chung, who played an important role in the nationalist movement . 
               In this context, the digital presentation of Sekuru Chigamba's oral histories offers precisely the type 
               of counterstories that narrate away from the center of the digital 
               humanities which has been consistently and frequently imagined as a white, male, able-bodied, cisgendered, 
               heternormative space .
            
            Based on my experience creating Sekuru's Stories, I discuss some of the many ways in 
               which carefully designed digital publications can contribute to the decoloniality of knowledge by presenting new 
               ways of thinking, knowing, and doing .I take the 
               idea of decoloniality of knowledge specifically from the work of Sabelo J. Ndlovu-Gatsheni. Echoing 
               Kim's formulation, Ndlovu-Gatsheni likewise emphasizes the importance of 
               the emergence of another-thinking, another-logic, and another-world view 
               . My account highlights specific strategies and approaches in 
               building Sekuru's Stories. Among them, I advocate for building accessible, robust, and 
               sustainable digital projects, making content available in indigenous languages, cultivating readerships outside 
               North America and Europe, and integrating non-linear as well as linear paths through 
               digital humanities projects. I also discuss how specific design elements in Sekuru's 
               Stories, notably its logo and color scheme, both reflect and contribute to the project's decolonial goals. 
               Before turning to the project itself, however, I offer a brief description of Sekuru Chigamba's primary 
               instrument, the mbira dzavadzimu (or mbira of the 
               ancestral spirits), which has come to be one of Zimbabwe's most iconic musical traditions.
            
        

          The Mbira Dzavadzimu
            One of many types of mbira played throughout Southern Africa, the 
               mbira dzavadzimu features between 22 and 28 keys mounted on a wooden soundboard, or 
               gwariva (see Figure 2). These keys are organized into three separate registers, 
               with the highest register on the instrument's right-hand side, a middle register on the instrument's upper left-hand 
               side, and the lowest register on the instrument's lower left-hand side. Played during all-night ceremonies called 
               mapira, the mbira is instrumental in summoning the 
               ancestral spirits to possess living mediums, known as masvikiro. The 
               mbira's unique timbre is produced by shells, bottle tops, or wire beads affixed to 
               the instrument's soundboard, which produce a gentle buzzing sound integral to generating states of trance. During 
               performance, the mbira is often placed inside a calabash resonator, or 
               deze, which amplifies its sound. Within a typical ensemble, 
               mbira players are joined by at least one musician playing the 
               hosho shakers, which are responsible for maintaining a steady triplet pulse. The 
               hosho also contribute a dense, distinctive timbral quality that complements 
               the buzzing tone of the mbira.
            
            
              The mbira dzavadzimu (photograph by Jennifer Kyker).
              Photograph of a mbira dzavadzimu made out of wood, metal, and bottle caps 
                 propped against a piece of tree trunk supporting a piece of railway tie used as an anvil to make mbira.
              
              
            
            The repertory of the mbira dzavadzimu includes well over a hundred songs. While 
               some are specific to particular regions, families, or individuals, others are widely shared, immediately enabling 
               musicians from different areas to play together. Mbira songs generally feature two 
               interlocking parts, known as kushaura and kutsinhira, 
               which are played simultaneously by two or more musicians. The interplay between these parts produces the complex 
               polyphonic and polyrhythmic musical relationships characteristic of mbira music. 
               Because Sekuru Chigamba actively composes new songs for the mbira, his 
               stories offer examples of innovation within a musical tradition often described as inherently conservative in its 
               orientation toward the past  . In addition, 
               Sekuru's Stories presents a range of other musical practices, from twentieth-century 
               acoustic guitar playing to endangered Zimbabwean musical bows such as the mukube, 
               chipendani, and the groundbow.
            
        

          Building Sekuru's Stories
            I developed Sekuru's Stories between April 2018 and September 2019 with funding from an 
               ACLS Fellowship and institutional support from the University of Rochester's Digital 
               Scholarship department, led by director Emily Sherwood. With the backing of the Andrew W. Mellon 
               Foundation, as well as dedicated institutional investment, the University of Rochester is a leader 
               in the field of digital humanities. Many born-digital research projects supported by the Digital Scholarship 
               department, such as the Blake Archive, the Seward Family Archive, and the Bragdon Train Station, have come to 
               successful fruition. Through the Digital Scholarship department, I had access to a team of tech professionals that 
               included programmers, archivists, geographic information system (GIS) research specialists, visual technologists, 
               and specialists in metadata, information discovery, and digitization. After evaluating three different platforms — 
               Omeka, Scalar, and Wordpress — we selected Wordpress as best suited for broad, international accessibility. The 
               team then helped me select and customize a Wordpress theme that suited the project's requirements. Along the way, we 
               took care to minimize our use of plug-ins and external links to ensure long-term sustainability. The team's initial 
               contributions enabled me to work independently throughout the rest of the year as I built the project's internal 
               structure and added content.
            
        

          Structuring a Digital Monograph	
            Designed as a digital monograph, Sekuru's Stories is organized into five sections 
               roughly akin to chapters, allowing readers to page sequentially through its content. Reflecting the project's 
               structure as a digital monograph, its initial landing page is designed to look like the digital analogue of a physical 
               book cover (see Figure 3). Despite growing interest in the digital humanities, relatively few digital humanities 
               projects present monograph-length scholarly work in the form of an interactive website. While many university presses 
               now work digitally, for example, they tend to employ the conventional format of e-books, which seldom accommodate 
               extensive multi-media features. Projects such as digital archives, on the other hand, often focus primarily on 
               curating primary source materials rather than presenting detailed interpretation and analysis. With its distinctive 
               format as a born-digital monograph, Sekuru's Stories has proven exceptionally successful 
               in garnering readers in Southern Africa and in the Global North.
            
            
              Screenshot of the landing page for Sekuru's Stories 
                 (https://sekuru.org).
              Screenshot of the landing page for Sekuru's Stories, with a photograph of 
                 Sekuru Chigamba and a button labeled Enter.
              
              
            
            Reflecting the multivalent nature of Sekuru Chigamba's oral narratives, Sekuru's 
               Stories is designed to encourage various modes of engagement, making it accessible and engaging for general 
               audiences and specialists alike. Organized in chronological order, the first three sections of the project — Early Years, 
               Musical Life, and Independence — chart the trajectory of Sekuru Chigamba's life. Two other sections — 
               Mbira and Ancestors — present Sekuru Chigamba's 
               specialized knowledge of Zimbabwean music and history. Each section of the project is accessible through the top 
               navigation bar, which serves as an analogue to the table of contents in a physical book. Within each section are the actual 
               stories, which may be read individually or sequentially and are accessible through drop-down menus. In addition, each section 
               of the site features introductory and concluding essays framing the stories within that section for readers.
            
            In the first section of Sekuru's Stories, titled Early Years, 
               Sekuru Chigamba relates stories from his early years in Guruve, beginning with his birth in 
               1939 and ending with his departure as a migrant laborer in 1957. The stories in this section offer vivid oral testimony 
               about the detrimental effects of colonialization as experienced by an ordinary Zimbabwean family. At the same time, the 
               vibrant world of Zimbabwean musical practice within these stories illustrates the vitality and resilience of indigenous 
               lifeways even under trying circumstances. In the second section, titled Musical Life, he 
               recounts stories about his life in the urban capital, from his attendance at ceremonies in the early 1960s to his family's 
               experiences of extreme hardship in the late 1970s. Here, Sekuru's oral narratives challenge conventional 
               portrayals of the mbira dzavadzimu as an inherently conservative musical tradition. 
               Rather, his stories depict the mbira dzavadzimu as a vibrant musical practice 
               characterized by relentless innovation, creativity, and change.
            
            The third section of Sekuru's Stories, titled Independence, 
               begins at the pivotal moment of political decolonization, which in turn paved the way for Sekuru Chigamba's 
               emergence as an international touring artist. The stories in this section illustrate how seemingly opposed spiritual 
               figures important during Zimbabwe's liberation struggle interact within a worldview that understands 
               political and religious authority as interrelated. Through his involvement as a mbira 
               musician, Sekuru Chigamba brought this worldview to life in many forms. These include his work composing 
               mbira songs and lyrics dedicated to senior ancestral spirits, his creative arrangements 
               of songs performed by Apostolic Christian leaders and their followers, and his active musical participation in ceremonies 
               organized by traditionalists and Apostolic sects alike. In the process, Sekuru Chigamba's musical engagement 
               and oral histories have participated in what anthropologist Joost Fontein has called the creation of 
               alternative, moral visions of the past, present and future 
               .
            
            In the fourth section of the project, titled Mbira, Sekuru Chigamba 
               offers a detailed account of his primary instrument, the mbira dzavadzimu, exploring 
               topics such as the mbira's origins, the law of mbira, 
               and the social role of the mbira player, or gwenyambira. 
               This section includes a catalogue of various songs from the mbira's extensive repertory, 
               with audio examples and Sekuru Chigamba's explanation of each song's meaning and significance. Here, 
               Sekuru Chigamba's oral narratives describe constant practices of innovation, revealing the creativity, 
               experimentation, and innovation inherent in indigenous ritual and musical traditions. In the fifth section, titled 
               Ancestors, Sekuru Chigamba turns to the ancestor spirits for whom 
               the mbira has historically been performed. This section presents Sekuru 
               Chigamba's understanding of the long perspective of Zimbabwean history.
            
            The last section of the site, titled Explore, invites readers into the project through 
               completely different modes of engagement (see Figure 4). This section offers several non-linear paths through the site, 
               inviting viewers to engage with an extensive image gallery, musical archive, and other special features. These include a 
               3D viewer of one of Sekuru Chigamba's oldest instruments, online audio streaming through a SoundCloud 
               playlist, free digital audio downloads through Bandcamp, an interactive family tree and timeline, and individual pages 
               describing several indigenous Zimbabwean instruments.
            
            
              Screenshot of the Explore page for Sekuru's Stories 
                 (https://sekuru.org/explore).
              Screenshot of the Explore page for Sekuru's Stories, 
                 featuring a short text explanation followed by two rows of three clickable buttons with thumbnail-sized photos. 
              
              
                    
        

          Design choices in Sekuru's Stories
            The single most prominent design element in Sekuru's Stories is its logo, which depicts a 
               stylized version of a fish eagle, known in Shona as hungwe (see Figure 5). Long held sacred by 
               Shona speakers, the fish eagle is closely associated with the pre-colonial empire of Great Zimbabwe in 
               Masvingo, where several soapstone carvings of fish eagles rose prominently from the imposing stone walls of 
               the kingdom's many enclosures. In the nineteenth century, colonial explorers removed these carvings from the sacred site 
               of Great Zimbabwe and sent them to various museums in apartheid South Africa and 
               Europe for display. Following independence, the carvings were subsequently returned to Zimbabwe, 
               with an initial group of four birds returned by South Africa in the early 1980s and a final sculpture returned 
               by the German government in 2003 . The carvings' history has rendered them metonyms of 
               national history writ large, In the words of anthropologist Joost Fontein, The story 
               of their removal from Great Zimbabwe at the end of the nineteenth century and beginning of the twentieth 
               century, and final return to Zimbabwe in the early 1980s has come almost to symbolise the cultural 
               colonisation of Zimbabwe, and the ultimate victory of independence 
               .
            
            
              Logo for Sekuru's Stories (media file from Sekuru's 
                 Stories).
              Logo for Sekuru's Stories, featuring a black-and-white line drawing of the Zimbabwean 
                 bird against a white background. 
              
              
            
            Fontein procedes to observe, Apart from Great Zimbabwe itself, nothing has 
               been invested with as much national symbolic sentiment as these birds. They have become an intricate part of the spiritual 
               and historical basis of the state of Zimbabwe . Epitomizing 
               these associations, the national flag hoisted to replace the British Union Jack on the eve of Zimbabwe's 
               independence — April 18, 1980 — featured a black-and-yellow line drawing of the fish eagle based on the most iconic of 
               the Great Zimbabwe sculptures.In addition to its depiction on the flag, a more intricate rendering 
               of the same sculpture has also frequently appeared on Zimbabwe's currency. Inherently tied to the moment 
               of the nation's political decolonization, this particular carving has come to be known simply as the 
               Zimbabwe Bird. It continues to serve as the most prominent symbol of Zimbabwe's political 
               independence, leading Sekuru Chigamba to remark on how its image continues to appear 
               on all things related to Zimbabwe.Kyker, J. and Chigamba, T. (2018) Masvingo's Rise 
               and Fall, Sekuru's Stories, 
               https://sekuru.org/masvingos-rise-and-fall/. Indeed, 
               the Zimbabwe Bird is rendered in various ways on the nation's currency and coat of arms, as well as in parastatal and 
               private company logos .
            
            Centrally positioned in the static header that appears on all pages on the site (see Figure 6), the logo for 
               Sekuru's Stories features Sekuru Chigamba's own rendition of the Zimbabwe Bird, 
               which he began carving into the wooden soundboard of mbira instruments shortly after it 
               was adopted as a symbol of the new nation in the early 1980s. Yet Sekuru Chigamba also holds the fish eagle 
               particularly meaningful on a personal level, as it was his mother's totem, or mutupo. 
               Indeed, Sekuru Chigamba was first motivated to carve the Zimbabwe Bird on the back of his own personal 
               instrument as a form of remembrance, or mucherechedzo. As he told me, 
               It was a form of remembrance. I did it for my mother, who is of the Shiri (bird) totem, that fish 
               eagle… I just thought, Let me add the image of the fish eagle. And then I added it. I said, 
               I am adding an image of my mother (Interview with author, 18 May 2017). Shortly 
               thereafter, Chigamba's fellow mbira maker Chris Mhlanga noticed 
               the carving and encouraged him to begin carving it on all of the instruments he made and sold. As Chigamba 
               recalled, Mhlanga saw it, and said, Oh, your 
               mbira has an image of the fish eagle. Why? I said, That is 
               my mother's totem. He said, Put it on all your mbira. 
               Yes, and I said, That's a great idea. Then I put an image of the fish eagle on all my 
               mbira (Interview with author, 18 May 2017). Sekuru Chigamba's carving 
               of the Zimbabwe Bird thus functions both as a widely recognized icon of political decolonization and as an intimate 
               remembrance of his maternal lineage, history, and kinship networks.
            
            
              Header for Sekuru's Stories (media file from Sekuru's 
                 Stories).
              Screenshot of a header featuring the project title Sekuru’s Stories in black 
                 text against a white background with a black-and-white line drawing of the project logo at the center. 
              
              
            
            The elongated shape, unique patterning, and lack of color in Sekuru Chigamba's rendition of the fish eagle 
               clearly distinguish his carvings from the Zimbabwe Bird featured on the nation's flag. In Sekuru's 
               Stories, his carving is rendered as a simple, black-and-white line drawing. While this color scheme echoes the 
               coloring of the fish eagle itself, black and white also have particular significance for 
               mbira players, spirit mediums, and other ritual specialists. As Zimbabwean scholar 
               A.C. Hodza explains, Hungwe (fish eagle) becomes 
               sacred because of its two colours, namely, white and black… the two colours are likened to two black and white pieces 
               of cloth given to a spirit medium. When the two pieces are sewn together, and have become one, it is called 
               jira rehungwe or fuko remudzimu 
               . This color combination likewise inspired the overall aesthetic of 
               Sekuru's Stories. Apart from photographs, the site's design largely features simple black 
               text set against a clean, white background, with shades of gray and tan used for most borders, buttons, and hyperlinks. 
               Like its logo, the color palette of Sekuru's Stories thus references both the black-and-white 
               coloring of the fish eagle and the jira rehungwe cloths worn by mediums during spirit 
               possession ceremonies, which are in turn the subject of many of the oral narratives presented in this digital project.
            
        

          Cultivating Readership in the Global South
            As critical digital pedagogy scholar Jesse Stommel has observed, Making scholarly work 
               legible to the public and helping it find audiences is a form of outreach, community building, and advocacy 
               . Early on, I made the decision to build Sekuru's Stories 
               publicly, giving readers access to the site as I created it. In doing so, I sought to build an audience for the project 
               from the beginning, rather than waiting for the project's completion. At the same time, I understood that readers would be 
               more likely to engage with the project's extensive materials piece by piece. Through the subscription function on 
               Wordpress, I sent out weekly emails informing subscribers about newly published pages. I also shared new material on 
               Facebook through my personal page and in groups for the global Zimbabwean music community. Finally, I circulated the 
               project through the Society for Ethnomusicology listserv and various Zimbabwean music community listservs. 
               People began reading Sekuru's Stories immediately, with 162 users on the first day. These 
               numbers picked up quickly, with more than three hundred readers in the first week, five hundred in the first month, and 
               twenty-two hundred in the first year, for a total of over twenty thousand individual page views. 
               Sekuru's Stories was also assigned in graduate and undergraduate classes in ethnomusicology 
               during the build phase. Presently, over fourteen thousand individual users have accessed the site since I launched it in 
               January 2019.
            
            During the build phase, the major readership for Sekuru's Stories was in the 
               United States and Canada, followed by a secondary concentration in Southern Africa. 
               Gradually, however, this situation has reversed, and most readers are now located in Zimbabwe and 
               South Africa, followed by the US and the UK. In one recent month, for example, 
               just over eleven hundred users visited Sekuru's Stories. Fully seven hundred of them were in 
               Zimbabwe, representing 65.23% of the site's recent readership. And of the fourteen thousand individual users 
               who have accessed the site since its inception, nearly five thousand have been in Zimbabwe, with another two 
               thousand readers in South Africa. Together, this represents roughly half of the total readership for the 
               project. The US and the UK, on the other hand, jointly account for just over four thousand 
               discrete users, or roughly a third of the project's total readership.
            
            Anthropology and related disciplines have increasingly recognized that ethnography involves work with 
               real, everyday people who deserve to know what we are up to and how we are interpreting their lives 
               . Enacting this premise in a digital realm, Sekuru's 
               Stories is designed for both scholars and general audiences, including a world-wide community comprised of 
               students and performers of the mbira dzavadzimu and related Zimbabwean musical 
               traditions. Sekuru's Stories is also specifically designed to appeal to both English and 
               Shona speakers, as well as readers with an interest in learning the Shona language. Many of Sekuru Chigamba's 
               stories are available in both Shona and English versions, with a button enabling viewers to easily move between the two 
               languages (see Figure 7). Combined with platform choices and a public build, this Shona-language component has contributed
               significantly to making Sekuru's Stories accessible to audiences in Zimbabwe and 
               its associated diaspora.
            
            
              Screenshots featuring parallel pages in English 
                 (https://sekuru.org/meeting-sekuru-gora/) and Shona 
                 (https://sekuru.org/kuzivana-nasekuru-gora/).
              On the left, a screenshot of the English-language page from Sekuru's Stories 
                 entitled Meeting Sekuru Gora, with a photograph of 
                 mbira musician Sekuru Gora followed by text accompanied by a button 
                 allowing users to change languages. On the right is a screenshot of the corresponding Shona-language page entitled 
                 Kuzivana naSekuru Gora.
              
              
            
        

          Decolonization and Fieldwork Ethics
            As Eve Tuck and K. Wayne Yang remind us, decolonization is not a metaphor; rather, it is the 
               struggle for the the repatriation of Indigenous land and life 
               . While co-authorship conveys some limited benefits within the international 
               framework of intellectual property rights, it does little to change material inequalities. To this end, after receiving 
               an ACLS Fellowship for Sekuru's Stories, I found it important to share this 
               funding with Sekuru Chigamba. With slightly over half of the fellowship money, Sekuru Chigamba 
               purchased a five-bedroom home for his wife and young children. During the COVID-19 lockdowns, I then began teaching online 
               community mbira classes to support my three primary mbira teachers, 
               Musekiwa Chingodza, Patience Munjeri, and Sekuru Chigamba, all of whom were affected 
               through canceled tours, closed post offices, and the demise of international travel. Over fifteen months, these classes 
               raised a total of around $35,000. Sekuru Chigamba's share of these funds has enabled him to install solar 
               panels and dig a generator-operated borehole, providing the family with both electricity and running water.
            
            My collaborative, digital projects with Sekuru Chigamba and other Zimbabwean musicians reflect my conviction 
               that our primary responsibility is to the community consultants with whom we work 
               . In addition to writing articles, teaching classes, and presenting at conferences, 
               I have sought to privilege working with my teachers on projects in which they derive significant economic benefit. The 
               struggle for the repatriation of indigenous life and land remains incomplete; as such, our efforts to work toward 
               collaborative projects must remain ongoing and subject to critique and revision at all times. Digital, online, and applied 
               approaches to ethnomusicology hold great promise for those of us who are committed to the co-creative process of this 
               ethical imperative.
            
        

          Moving Forward
            The digital humanities offer unique opportunities for ethnomusicologists to work toward innovative projects with our 
               research collaborators. As we worked together on developing Sekuru's Stories, 
               Sekuru Chigamba read over and commented upon all my transcriptions and translations. With funding from the 
               University of Rochester Humanities Center, he also came to workshop the material with Darien 
               Lamen, Tony Perman, and Stefan Fiol, all of whom he knew from their previous travel to 
               Zimbabwe as graduate students in ethnomusicology. Our discussions at this workshop proved essential in 
               enabling me to develop the theoretical framing for the individual stories on the site and in bringing our voices together 
               much more closely than if I had worked on this material independently.
            
            While Sekuru's Stories was co-authored, one of the project's limitations is a design team 
               based entirely in the Global North, without the participation of institutions and individuals working in the digital 
               humanities in Zimbabwe. This was largely due to the combined pressures of balancing the demands of a 
               tenure-track academic career and family life. In the first place, I built Sekuru's Stories 
               while raising my young, Black son as a single parent and full-time academic, with limited working hours and ability to 
               travel. At the same time, I conceived the project while still a junior faculty member, which hindered my ability to 
               envision and execute complex collaborative projects spanning multiple institutions and continents. The circumstances 
               under which I built Sekuru's Stories reflect Kim's observations regarding how 
               women and people of color may find themselves doing double or triple the work as they seek 
               to engage in the necessary labor — political, social, and cultural capital — to work ethically and 
               with respect for various communities . They do not, however, erase critical 
               distinctions between the content of Sekuru's Stories, which was produced through a long-term, 
               collaborative effort between Sekuru Chigamba and myself, and the project's design, which I undertook largely 
               on my own.
            
            Following directly on Sekuru's Stories, I am currently working toward a second digital 
               project that will bridge various departments at the University of Rochester and the University of 
               Zimbabwe, representing a more sustained, collaborative foray into the digital humanities. Provisionally titled 
               Portrait of Zimbabwe/Mufananidzo weZimbabwe, this project will curate and present an 
               extensive selection of images from the Chicago Dzviti Photographic Archive.See 
               https://rbscp.lib.rochester.edu/finding-aids/D537. 
               Several of these images were also featured in Sekuru's Stories (see Figure 8), paving the 
               way for this new project. Through a multimedia approach linking Dzviti's photographs of Zimbabwean musicians to 
               audio examples, physical instruments, and ephemera, our collaborative digital humanities project will offer a unique depiction 
               of Zimbabwean musical life as viewed through the eyes of a pioneering Zimbabwean visual artist. Expanding my initial work on 
               Sekuru's Stories, Portrait of Zimbabwe/Mufananidzo weZimbabwe 
               represents a more complex and sustained collaborative effort in digital publication, in which scholars located on both sides 
               of the Atlantic engage as digital subjects and producers.I thank an anonymous reviewer for this wording.
            
            
              Screenshot of the Chicago Dzviti Collection image gallery in Sekuru's Stories 
                 (https://sekuru.org/chicago-dzviti-collection/).
              Screenshot of the Chicago Dzviti Collection image gallery in Sekuru's Stories, 
                 featuring a title and description at the top of the page followed by a grid of twelve photograph thumbnails.
              
              
            
            Sekuru's Stories illustrates several promising facets of the digital humanities, with great 
               significance for future projects. This includes their capacity to present narrative content in multiple languages, 
               ability to integrate special interactive features, compatibility with online music platforms such as Soundcloud and 
               Bandcamp, and accessibility for readerships located in the Global South. Yet, the digital humanities continue to occupy 
               an uneasy space in academic scholarship. The ACLS Fellowship I received for Sekuru's 
               Stories confirmed the project's scholarly importance and served a function akin to peer review. 
               Sekuru's Stories has also been favorably reviewed in many academic journals, including 
               Reviews in Digital Humanities 1(1), Journal of the American Musicological 
               Society 73(2), African Music 11(2), Yearbook for Traditional 
               Music 52, and Ethnomusicology Forum 29(3). In the absence of a formal peer-review 
               process for digital humanities projects, fellowships and scholarly reviews are two modes of providing evidence of a 
               project's scholarly rigor.
            
            There are many other ways in which ethnomusicology and other academic disciplines can and should work toward facilitating 
               full acceptance of digital humanities projects. These might include actions at the level of our professional societies 
               such as creating prizes specifically for digital projects, as well as opening existing prizes to digital work as well as 
               printed publications. Of equal if not greater importance, professional societies should develop guidelines for evaluating 
               work in digital humanities for the purposes of hiring, tenure, and promotion. Such guidelines have been adopted by some 
               organizations, such as the American Musicological Society, the Modern Language Association, and 
               the American Historical Association. Yet many of these statements do little more than refer readers back to 
               guidelines developed by the Modern Language Association in 2012. By developing their 
               own detailed guidelines for the evaluation of digital projects, professional societies can establish useful baselines both 
               within the disciplines and for individual universities dealing with questions of hiring, promotion, and tenure.
            
        
