Title: N/A
Volume:  010
Issue:  1
Date:  12 February 2016
Abstract:  
                
                The Almanac Archive, a project in its early stages
                    of development, seeks to create a corpus of annotated British almanacs from
                    1750-1850. Cheap and useful, the almanac was one of the most commonly purchased
                    and frequently read print genres during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
                    By focusing on readers’ annotations in almanacs about everything from social
                    engagements and weather to historical events and the breeding of livestock,
                        The Almanac Archive offers insights into
                    everyday life and ideologies of time. Creating a searchable, digital corpus of
                    high-resolution images from annotated almanacs will encourage new research
                    questions about the relationship between historical events, individuals’
                    everyday lives, and the materiality of Romantic-era interfaces for tracking
                    time. By theorizing and sharing the ultimate goals and, indeed, challenges of
                    the project even at its early stages, our aim in this paper is to answer Johanna
                    Drucker’s call to pay [m]ore attention to acts
                        of producing and [to put] less emphasis on product during the creation of an interface in order 
                        to expose and support the
                            activity of interpretation, rather than to display finished
                            forms
                        
                    . In openly describing the unfinished form of The
                        Almanac Archive and its relationship to current scholarly trends, we
                    outline the technical and theoretical work going into its creation.
            
Full Body Text: 
The Almanac Archive is a digital
                project in its early stages of development that seeks to create a corpus of
                annotated British almanacs from the Romantic century. The
                        Almanac Archive’s focus on the Romantic century refers to the
                    category proposed by William Galperin and Susan Wolfson to describe the intellectually and historically
                        coherent period between 1750 and 1850 .
                    This period involved significant changes both in the production and consumption
                    of almanacs, including the end of the Stationers’ Company long-held monopoly on
                    the production of almanacs in 1775, the abolition of the stamp duty on printed
                    almanacs in 1834, and a general increase in the size of the British reading
                    public. On the legal decisions influencing the end of the monopoly on almanac
                    production, see Cyprian Blagden ; on the reading
                    public and the rise of literacy during the Romantic period, see William St Clair
                        . Cheap and useful, the almanac was one
                of the most commonly purchased, read, and annotated print genres during the
                eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. By focusing on historical readers’ annotations
                in almanacs about everything from social engagements and weather to historical
                events and the breeding of livestock, The Almanac
                    Archive will offer insights into everyday life and ideologies of time
                prevalent in Britain from 1750-1850. Upon its completion, it will bring duplicate
                copies of almanacs from multiple library collections together, and one key goal of
                the project is interoperability with aggregated sites within the NINES network. Creating a searchable,
                digital corpus of high-resolution images from almanacs annotated by contemporary
                readers will encourage new research questions about the relationship between
                historical events, individuals’ everyday lives, and the materiality of Romantic-era
                interfaces for tracking time.
Anyone involved in building a digital project knows that technological,
                methodological, and theoretical challenges often bleed into one another. However,
                here we’d like to step back from some of the concrete technical aspects of The Almanac Archive’s design and implementation to address
                the theoretical and methodological questions that a project like ours poses across
                fields, particularly Book History, Bibliography, and Digital Humanities.Since
                    our initial presentation at the Digital Humanities Summer Institute where this
                    article originally began, we’ve solidified library partnerships, drafted a Metadata
                        Application Profile for the archive, and begun building a prototype
                    for the database’s design in collaboration with Siva Kondeti, a computer science
                    graduate student whose work on the project was funded by Georgia State
                    University’s Student Innovation
                        Fellowship Program. By theorizing and sharing the ultimate
                goals and, indeed, difficulties of The Almanac Archive,
                even at its early stages, our aim in this paper is to answer Johanna Drucker’s call
                to pay [m]ore attention to acts of producing and
                    [to put] less emphasis on product during the creation of an interface in order 
                    to expose and support the activity of
                        interpretation, rather than to display finished forms
                    
                . In openly describing the unfinished form of The Almanac
                    Archive and its relationship to current scholarly trends, we outline the
                theoretical work going into its creation. Therefore, this article also engages
                Kenneth Price’s assertion that we 
                    need descriptions of digital thematic
                        research collections that highlight the editorial work and other types of
                        scholarly value that are added to the raw materials populating the
                        collection
                    
                .As Kenneth Price points out, the language scholars choose to define and
                    describe their projects shapes how we
                        conceive of and also how we position digital scholarship. Price’s
                    thoughtful discussion of the terms edition,
                    project,
                    database, and thematic research collection has informed our
                    decision to call our digital corpus an archive because of the term’s print
                    cultural associations with preservation and inclusiveness, as well as the
                    associations with thematic editorial attention that the term has acquired in the
                    digital realm . In particular, our
                approach to the issue of theorizing and encoding manuscript annotations in printed
                books is especially relevant at a time when digital scholars’ interest in marginalia
                has been increasing. In articulating the goals and challenges of The Almanac Archive we also make a case for both
                questioning what defines a duplicate copy in a digital project and, by extension,
                seeking out and reproducing these so-called duplicate copies.
This article begins with a brief explanation of almanacs’ historical importance,
                which shapes the form and goals of our resource’s creation as well as its unique
                research potential. Understanding how readers used eighteenth- and
                nineteenth-century almanacs makes clear how the genre offers scholarly research
                possibilities that are not easily harnessed without digital tools. In the second
                section of the article we consider the theoretical questions that our project raises
                in dialogue with other theorists of digital and print media. In particular, we
                explain The Almanac Archive’s intended organizational
                structure with reference to trends in digitization that often highlight what Jerome
                McGann terms a text’s linguistic
                    codes over its bibliographic
                    codes; our archive aims to make the material features of almanacs,
                including their annotations, as accessible as the printed content of the texts
                themselves . Finally, we end with a brief discussion of
                the research potential of The Almanac Archive.

                Almanacs in the Romantic Century and the Digital Almanac in the Twenty-First 
                Unlike other print genres, almanacs and the marginalia that readers added to them
                    give us insight into both everyday life in the Romantic century and the
                    organization systems that people used to manage it. Offering information about
                    holidays, university term dates, hours of sunrise and sunset, predictions for
                    the future, and chronologies of historical events, almanacs were vital books for
                    a mass number of readers who recorded their observations and daily activities in
                    their pages. Importantly, almanacs didn’t simply provide a variety of
                    information; they provided diverse readers with the same standard information.
                    Variation certainly existed between different almanacs aimed as specific groups
                    of readers, such as farmers or lawyers; however, the genre as a whole was
                    largely unified (and, indeed unifying) in the basic, utilitarian information it
                    provided users about time, geography, tidal shifts, and history.
                While almanacs were crucial reference tools, they were also for many readers
                    repositories of daily observations and records of both public and private life.
                    Studies of life writing from the Early Modern period to the nineteenth century
                    have noted that writing in almanacs was one of the earliest and most common
                    forms of diary keeping. Famous diarists such as William Gladstone and George
                    Washington began their diaries in almanacs, and far more common, of course, were
                    anonymous readers who noted births and deaths, daily activities, and memoranda
                    in their margins (see Figure 1) 
                    . For example, Adam Smyth has identified
                    the practice of writing personal notes in almanacs as 
                        the most common form of
                            self-accounting in early modern England
                        
                    .Similarly, in The Accidental Diarist
                        Molly McCarthy attributes the development of the daily planner in America to
                        the practice of almanac annotation common in the eighteenth and nineteenth
                        centuries . The almanacs’ prevalence and
                    their use as diaries increased in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries as
                    growing numbers of people were able to purchase, read, and write in their
                    almanacs.

                
                    In this 1752 edition of Wing’s almanac, a reader has made notes about
                        cattle-breeding. Image courtesy of Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library,
                        University of Toronto.
                    

                


                Our own research has recognized that many readers’ notes in almanacs respond
                    directly to the information and forecasts offered by the printed text. These
                    notes often contradict an almanac’s forecasts or record observations about
                    meteorological events that are not predicted by the almanac (see Figure
                        2).For more about the ways readers responded to almanac predictions
                        and forecasts, see Julia Grandison . As
                    a result, almanacs are templates for comparing how numerous readers reacted to
                    the same natural and historical events and responded to the same or similar
                    texts. 


                
                    A Shock of an Earthquake noted by a reader on
                        January 16, 1817 in Vox Stellarum. Image
                        courtesy of Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library, University of Toronto.
                    

                


                Such comparisons are assisted by the capabilities of digital tools, and The Almanac Archive is designed not only to showcase
                    the influential printed content of almanacs from the Romantic century, but also
                    to facilitate the large-scale study of reader habits and observations. Although
                    many single copies of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century almanac issues can be
                    found in digital repositories such as Eighteenth Century
                        Collections Online (ECCO), HathiTrust Digital Library, or Internet Archive, The Almanac Archive
                    provides users with distinctive ways of accessing and interacting with
                    this unique genre.In fact, the initial corpus of almanacs from Thomas
                        Fisher Rare Book Library that are being used for a prototype of The Almanac Archive currently under development
                        are also available on Internet Archive. We are grateful for IA’s support
                        processing images from these texts.
                    The Almanac Archive’s acquisition strategy is
                    motivated by what we might call thickness rather than breadth. Instead of
                    acquiring one digital copy of as many issues of as many titles as possible, our
                    archive aims to present many annotated copies of a single issue. And instead of
                    prioritizing transcriptions of the printed content of almanacs produced with OCR
                    or human transcriptions, our archive focuses on the accessibility of textual and
                        material features of these texts. To this end, we are using
                    carefully tagged page images rather than textual transcriptions as the primary
                    organizational units of the database.Our decision to focus on metadata and
                        manual transcriptions of historical readers’ annotations rather than OCR is
                        theoretically-driven, yet it is also informed by practical, technological
                        limitations. Almanacs’ printed content is largely in tabular form with
                        numerous columns; there is little text that’s readable (to humans or
                        computers) in a traditional, literary sense. Almanacs contain significant
                        quantities of numbers, symbols, and abbreviations that are inconsistent
                        across different almanacs. The almanacs’ original form, then, makes them
                        difficult to OCR. Other resources that provide access to digitized almanacs
                        such as HathiTrust and Internet Archive do OCR the texts. The resulting
                        transcriptions, however, are of limited usefulness since they are plagued by
                        errors. When completed, our resource will permit users to search for
                    a variety of fields related to both the material and the textual features of
                    almanacs from the binding of a particular copy of an almanac and its original
                    cost to the notes, marks, and drawings made by eighteenth- and
                    nineteenth-century readers. Users could, for example, search for any annotations
                    related to the weather made in the month of January 1801. The search results may
                    well turn up multiple copies of a single issue of a given almanac, enabling
                    users to compare how different contemporary readers responded to the same
                    information and the same text. Beyond simply reproducing almanacs for readers in
                    the digital age, then, The Almanac Archive will
                    expose various and unique ways of organizing time and recording personal history
                    and will facilitate comparisons of reader observations. Moreover, as the
                    following section will discuss, these foci make visible the layered interactions
                    between text and Romantic-era reader that are cognate with those between digital
                    text and user.

            

                Almanacs as Interfaces and the Problem of Duplicates
                Almanacs are interfaces that embody ideologies about personal and historical time
                    as well as individual and national experience.Drucker, for example,
                        suggests that 
                            content models, forms of
                                classification, taxonomy, or information organization embody
                                ideology
                            
                        . For more on the almanacs as interfaces, see Lindsey Eckert ; a podcast of the lecture will be made available on the website for
                        the Centre for the History of the Book, University of Edinburgh.
                    Drucker’s work on theoretical approaches to interface design applies to our
                    approach to representing this genre in digital form, for we are not only
                    interested in the almanacs as interfaces but in reflecting on the practice of
                    making the interface through which users of The Almanac
                        Archive will engage with its content. In particular, Drucker argues
                    for interface design that makes evident the role of performativity in systems of
                    organization. She explains: 
                        Multiple imaging modes that
                            create palimpsestic or parallax views of objects make it more difficult
                            to imagine reading as an act of recovering truth, and render the
                            interpretative act itself more visible
                        
                    . The Almanac Archive avoids conveying a
                    uniform idea of the Romantic-period reader by representing how
                    different readers approached, organized, and interpreted both time and their
                    books in unique ways. While the archive as a whole — its presentation of
                    published calendars and readers’ annotations about their lives and schedules —
                    may reveal certain patterns of thinking about time, individual copies with
                    readers’ annotations speak to the relational and interpretative nature of
                    reading and annotation. The resource, then, offers the type of palimpsestic
                    representation that Drucker has so convincingly praised. Thus, The Almanac Archive is not primarily about discovering
                    truths about almanacs or annotation practices in the Romantic century, but
                    instead it is about conveying the numerous ways that readers adapted and
                    subverted, employed and rejected the structures of truth and temporality that
                    individual almanacs seemed to promote. Moreover, in allowing digital users to
                    access and analyze marginalia from different readers, The
                        Almanac Archive will expose that historical users of the almanac
                    interface did not, in fact, view their own reading as an act of recovering truth but
                    rather as a layered act of reading and writing that overlaid
                    printed facts with handwritten (and sometimes contradictory) observations .
                Exploring readers’ annotations of and engagements with almanacs speaks to recent
                    trends in the study of reading history. H.J. Jackson’s Marginalia: Readers Writing in Books (2002) and Romantic Readers: The Evidence of Marginalia (2005)
                    are notable examples of this growing interest in readers’ annotations and their
                    potential value for tracking the history of reading. Even more recently, several
                    digital projects have sought to represent the history of reading and marginalia
                    through the creation of databases. For instance, Annotated Books Online
                    (ABO) is a digital archive of early
                        modern annotated books that gives users 
                        full open access to these
                            unique [annotated] copies, focusing on the first three centuries of
                            print
                        
                    . Spearheaded by the Universiteit Utrecht, ABO includes a variety of
                    materials from more than ten libraries and has several major partners, including
                    The Centre for Editing Lives and Letters (CELL) at University College London,
                    the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research, and the University of
                    York. Like ABO, The Archeology of Reading in Early Modern
                        Europe is large in the scope of its primary materials and its
                    partners, which include Johns Hopkins University, the Princeton University
                    Library, and CELL. The project will
                        explore historical reading practices through the lens of manuscript
                        annotations preserved in early printed books and has been awarded a
                    $488,000 development grant from the Mellon Foundation . On a more grassroots level, Book Traces, sponsored by NINES and the
                    University of Virginia under the leadership of Andrew Stauffer, 
                        is a crowd-sourced web project
                            aimed at identifying unique copies of nineteenth- and early
                                twentieth-century books on library shelves
                        
                     (emphasis in original). Rather than focus on readers per se, Book Traces acts as an argument for preserving unique
                    copies of nineteenth- and twentieth-century books that are at risk of being lost
                    or discarded after the content of a clean copy of the same text has been
                        digitized.Another crowd-sourced project worth mentioning is the Open
                        University’s The Reading Experience
                                Database (RED), which tracks readers’ responses to the
                        books they read between 1450-1945. While some of these experiences take the
                        form of marginalia, other records of reading in RED come from letters and
                        diaries.
                
                While each of these resources is unique, they are alike in the relative breadth
                    of their focus. By selecting a specific genre of books published within a
                    specific period and geographical location, we aim to create a much more focused
                    dataset, which highlights the importance not just of annotated copies but of
                    seemingly duplicate copies of almanacs that have been annotated.
                    The originality of the resource is that it seeks to present and catalogue as
                    many copies of the same almanac as possible to facilitate comparison
                    between readers and different modes of reading. In presenting multiple
                        duplicate copies of almanacs and showing the diverse uses to which
                    users have put them, The Almanac Archive presents
                    digitization as an argument for physical preservation, and the project
                    challenges the idea that material books are 
                        in a kind of competition with
                            their own [digital] surrogates
                        
                    . The Almanac Archive uses digitization to
                    draw attention to the importance of retaining duplicate copies that, in
                    actuality, are quite different.
                Moreover, The Almanac Archive’s focus on 1750-1850
                    is especially relevant to duplicate copies, since the rise of the machine-press
                    period in the early nineteenth century made mass producing printed texts a real
                    possibility for the first time. Indeed, the Romantic century encompasses a vital
                    and volatile time in the material production of printed knowledge, yet the media
                    transition from the hand-press era to the machine-press era is one that is all
                    too often simplified and has led to unfounded, persistent assumptions about the
                        sameness of books from the machine-press period. Many scholars
                    working across disciplines and temporal periods acknowledge the crucial changes
                    in material knowledge production that marked the transition from the hand-press
                    to the machine-press period at the end of the eighteenth century. Laid paper
                    shifted to wove paper and, soon thereafter, to machine-made paper. The wooden
                    press that had remained substantially the same since Gutenberg gave way to the
                    iron-hand press in the early nineteenth century followed by an assortment of
                    other (steam-powered) presses that produced printed materials in unprecedented
                    quantities. Yet it wasn’t just the scale of print that grew; the uniformity of
                    the printed materials themselves also increased. The prominence of edition
                    binding, for instance, expanded rapidly from the 1820s onward, so that the
                    standardization of the covers of printed books aligned with the perceived
                    uniformity of their printed content.For succinct introduction to the
                        technological shifts from the hand-press to the machine-press period, see
                        William Proctor Williams and Craig S. Abbott . Such a narrative, of course, obscures the granularity of
                    technological changes while representing the production of material artifacts as
                    a flat teleology of technological advancement occurring at the expense of text’s
                    physical uniqueness or aura, to borrow Walter Benjamin’s term . 
                In fact, the transition between the hand-press and machine-press period was
                    gradual and the ability and desire to create uniform, duplicate copies has been
                    overestimated. As bibliographers have long realized, the variety and uniqueness
                    associated with early modern books is also 
                        true of books printed after the
                            hand-press period
                        
                    . One way to quantify this variation is to examine not only
                        duplicate copies of individual texts or editions (which Stauffer has
                    done with ten copies of the 1902 edition of the poet James Whitcomb Riley’s
                        An Old Sweetheart of Mine, each containing
                    significant bibliographical variants ) but also to
                    trace a largely-standard genre such as the almanac through this period of media
                    transition. Comparing duplicate almanacs as well as examining runs of particular
                    almanac titles across decades challenges the notion of sameness and duplication
                    in historical forms of printing and reading practices.
                Yet, even while we advocate for digitizing and preserving duplicates, we still do
                    struggle with the logistics of digitally representing them. The question we
                    return to again and again is how much physical variation or annotation makes a
                    copy unique for the purposes of our project? A single word written in the
                    margins? A doodle? A mark? And how do we describe indecipherable or amorphous
                    marks in our database? In posing these questions, we recognize the necessity of
                    balancing our resource’s comprehensiveness with its usability. We are reluctant
                    to flood users with redundant search results containing duplicates with only the
                    most minor or indecipherable annotations, but we also want to create a resource
                    that users with research questions very different from our own can employ to
                    their advantage. The challenge, which continually returns us to the most
                    interesting and fundamental of digital humanities questions, is how to create a
                    database structure that categorizes and tags information in a way that permits
                    users to navigate and search effectively, while also minimizing interpretive
                    decisions on the backend that foreclose client-side interpretative
                    possibilities. For example, we initially considered dismissing some of the less
                    intelligible marks we encountered in almanacs — short horizontal lines penciled
                    next to given dates. However, even these small marks hold important research
                    potential. Maureen Perkins’s study of nineteenth-century almanacs notes that
                    women may have used almanacs discretely to keep track of their menstrual cycles,
                    for example, and such marks may constitute interesting and valuable data for
                    researchers interested in women’s studies or the history of sexuality . The variety of uses that readers brought
                    to their almanacs — and which we are trying to illuminate through our own
                    resource — reminds us that digital resources risk precluding user
                    interpretations through the decisions their designers make while structuring
                    data. To mitigate these lost opportunities as much as possible, we aim for
                    transparency regarding the organizational principles structuring The Almanac Archive. An article such as this one and
                    our decision to make available the archive’s Metadata
                        Application Profile (currently in progress) embodies our desire to be
                    unabashedly open about the project’s development. Our goal is to make clear the
                    choices that have gone into the archive’s design from its initial inception to
                    its actual encoding by emphasizing on the frontend the inherently interpretative
                    choices that have gone into designing the backend.
                Our decision to use page images rather than printed text as the primary
                    organizational units of the database is one means by which we hope to widen our
                    resource’s versatility, and it also stems from our questions about current
                    trends that privilege printed textual content as the primary unit of analysis.
                    Privileging print risks de-materializing books through digitization because it
                    substitutes an object’s original organizational structures for a bag of
                        words approach that, while useful for text-mining, has theoretical
                    limitations. Focusing on the unit of the page in The
                        Almanac Archive’s design emphasizes and attempts to preserve the
                    importance of the page as a conceptual unit that shaped almanacs’ historical
                    uses in significant ways . Prioritizing the page and
                    supplementing it with metadata, The Almanac Archive
                    attempts to limit the appropriative, flattening elements that Hillel Schwartz
                    associates with copying technologies that take without homage and obscure the historical steps that gave
                        rise to the original and, in turn, its original uses . 
                Theorizing The Almanac Archive has therefore led us
                    to think critically about prominent ways of categorizing digital objects. In
                        Digitizing Latin Incunabula: Challenges, Methods, and
                        Possibilities, Jeffrey A. Rydberg-Cox describes five different
                    categories of digitization: Image Books, Image Books with Minimal Structural
                    Data, Image Front Transcriptions, Carefully Edited and Tagged Transcriptions,
                    and Scholarly and Critical Editions .
                        The Almanac Archive fits into the category of
                    Image Books with Structural Data, yet we resist the connotations of
                    Rydberg-Cox’s term minimal,
                    for the metadata attached to each image and almanac will allow refined searching
                    by individual categories, such as publisher, place of publication, library
                    collection, type of almanac (i.e. astrological or agricultural), and type of
                    annotation (i.e. textual or pictorial). Thus, we challenge the idea that there
                    is a hierarchy of digitization involving various degrees of access to textual
                    content. Instead we conceive ways of digitizing that prioritize the
                    bibliographic unit of the page. Because the project recognizes and highlights
                    that almanacs were physical interfaces that users interacted with, we want to
                    avoid creating a digital interface that privileges either printed text or
                    manuscript annotations, but instead always displays the two side by side, in
                    relation to each other. John Bradley’s work on digital annotation has emphasized
                    how annotated texts involve 
                        two rather different applications
                            [that] must co-exist
                        
                    . While we agree that the different agents, intentions, and technologies
                    of the publishers and the annotators must be recognized, our archive seeks to
                    emphasize the codependence of these two applications. In this respect, our
                    approach prefers thinking of these applications as overlapping hierarchies, as Joanna Drucker
                    does, thereby recognizing the competing ways of valuing different linguistic and
                    bibliographic components of a digitized object . 
            

                The Research Potential of The Almanac
                    Archive
                The unique research potential of our archive is a function of the fascinating
                    corpus and little-studied genre we have chosen and of our commitment to making
                    both bibliographic and linguistic features of the almanacs accessible to users.
                    By valuing equally annotations, printed text, as well as key metadata that will
                    be included in the archive, we resist privileging one type of information over
                    another. For our own research we will use the resource to track how eighteenth-
                    and nineteenth-century readers related to time and historical events, and we
                    will therefore focus primarily on the annotations found in the almanacs to
                    compare reader responses to time. Yet annotations also offer other avenues for
                    scholarly research. For readers unable to afford both an almanac and a dedicated
                    pocket-book diary, these volumes functioned as diaries. Because they were so
                    inexpensive, often costing between just one and three shillings, almanacs were
                    affordable to people who were unable to purchase other printed matter. Given the
                    characteristics and uses of the almanac in this period, the potential
                    applications for this project are diverse. Historians of weather, for instance,
                    might track weather patterns or climate change since users frequently noted
                    weather anomalies. Thus, material from The Almanac Archive
                    might support other digital resources such as Old
                        Weather, which invites users to transcribe weather-related
                    entries found in ships’ logs. Some almanacs include annotations about payments
                    to employees and other financial records, indicating that they may be untapped
                    resources for information about labour and economic history. Readers’ notes in
                    farming almanacs provide insight into historical agricultural practices. 
                While in some instances information about an almanac’s annotator remains unknown,
                    in others inscriptions of ownership or records of provenance provide key
                    information about annotators such as gender, occupation, geographical location,
                    and socioeconomic status. Aggregating these entries and this information will,
                    as the corpus expands, offer a new tool for historians, particularly those
                    interested in questions of everyday life and gender in Britain. 
                As compelling as the almanacs’ annotations and annotators are, we are designing
                        The Almanac Archive to foster other potential
                    areas of research. For example, the database will contain a metadata field for
                    the prices of almanacs. This information about price combined with information
                    about readers’ marginalia could help researchers make more concrete arguments
                    about annotation practices related to cost of books. The metadata will also
                    include information about provenance and how copies of almanacs are organized in
                    library collections. We have, for instance, noted that some users bound a series
                    of almanacs together. As our corpus of almanacs grows, it will be possible to
                    draw conclusions about not only the culture of annotating individual volumes but
                    also larger cultural value systems that impacted how groups of almanacs were
                    preserved and organized. As Thomas R. Adams and Nicolas Barker have suggested,
                    the survival and durability of different kinds of texts is an important variable
                    in any model of book history .
                Of course, just as eighteenth- and nineteenth-century readers used the interfaces
                    of their almanacs in surprising ways, we anticipate that once the resource
                    becomes live scholars and teachers will use it in similarly original ways. The
                    flexibility and the variety of our archive’s applications, then, seem to embrace
                    in a digital, scholarly form the original aspects of the historical artifacts
                    that will comprise the archive itself. Ultimately, our archive’s unique research
                    potential lies in the light it sheds on the diverse and unexpected ways users
                    respond to structured data, whether in eighteenth-century printed texts or in
                    contemporary digital resources.

            
