Title:  Digital Humanities in the 21st Century: Digital Material as a
                    Driving Force 
Volume:  010
Issue:  3
Date:  15 August 2016
Abstract:  
                
                In this article it is argued that one of the major transformative factors of the
                    humanities at the beginning of the 21st century is the shift from analogue to
                    digital source material, and that this shift will affect the humanities in a
                    variety of ways. But various kinds of digital material are not digital in the
                    same way, which a distinction between digitized, born-digital, and
                    reborn-digital may help us acknowledge, thereby helping us to understand how
                    each of these types of digital material affects different phases of scholarly
                    work in its own way. This is illustrated by a detailed comparison of the nature
                    of digitized collections and web archives.
            
Full Body Text: 

                1. The Humanities – What’s the Problem?
                For decades the challenges and crises faced by the humanities have had an impact
                    on debates about their status and future. In his seminal article Beneath and Beyond the Crisis in the
                        humanities, Geoffrey Galt Harpham even talks about the perennial crisis in the
                        humanities that has characterized the humanities over the past half-century
                    , and he continues: Sometimes the crisis — whose dimensions can be
                        measured by declining numbers of enrollments, majors, courses offered, and
                        salaries — is described as a separate, and largely self-inflicted,
                        catastrophe confined to a few disciplines; sometimes it is linked to a
                        general disarray in liberal education, and sometimes to the moral collapse
                        and intellectual impoverishment of the entire culture. But one point emerges
                        with considerable regularity and emphasis: humanistic scholars, fragmented
                        and confused about their mission, suffer from an inability to convey to
                        those on the outside and even to some on the inside the specific value they
                        offer to public culture; they suffer, that is, from what the scholar and
                        critic Louis Menand calls a crisis of rationale.
                        
                Most of the signs of crisis highlighted by Harpham have been widely debated , , , , and other signs have
                    been added, for instance the contraction in public funding , the lack of interdisciplinarity , and the impact of the so-called inhuman on the
                    humanities .
                These characteristics of the humanities may be very true and relevant, but they
                    tend to overlook a major shift that has slowly affected the humanities since the
                    late 1960s and that is now emerging rapidly on a large scale, namely the
                    introduction of the digital in the humanities.
                Within the last decade debates about the digital computer and the humanities have
                    by and large taken place under the umbrella term Digital Humanities. The
                    humanities have become digital by making the objects of study available in
                    digital form, by introducing digital analytical tools, and by establishing
                    digital means of communication for collaborating during the research process,
                    for discussing and disseminating research results, and for interacting with
                    society at large. A more self-reflexive approach to the Digital Humanities has
                    also emerged, ranging from manifestos such as the Digital
                        Humanities Manifesto
                     and edited volumes, monographs, and
                    articles that map the field , , , , , , , , , , , to special issues of journals , , , 
                    and reports , , . However,
                    there have not been many attempts to systematically identify (some of) the
                    driving force(s) behind the introduction of the digital in the humanities: if
                    the digital is actually becoming more and more predominant within the
                    humanities, what could be the reason for this?
                Undoubtedly, a major and irreversible shift has taken place at the very heart of
                    the humanities, since the sources and the data that are studied in many of the
                    humanistic disciplines have changed from analogue to digital. A few figures may
                    illustrate this. In 2000, 75% of all stored data was analogue (paper, film,
                    photographic prints, vinyl, magnetic cassette tapes, etc.), but in 2007 this had
                    shrunk to 7%, and in 2012, to 2% . From 1453 to 1503, after the introduction of the printing press, eight
                    million books were printed, thus doubling the amount of written material in the
                    world in 50 years. Today the volume of digital data doubles a little more than
                    every third year, whereas the volume of analogue data hardly grows at all . Google processes more than
                    24PB of data per day, thousands of times the quantity of all printed material in
                    the Library of Congress. Facebook gets +10 million photos uploaded every hour,
                    and over an hour of video is uploaded on YouTube every second .
                Although these figures may be questioned, the tendency is undoubtedly clear:
                    within the last decade we have been witnessing a major shift from analogue to
                    digital material, and we have probably only seen the beginning of this. Thus, it
                    can be argued that one of the major transformative factors of the humanities in
                    the 21st century is the move from analogue to
                    digital source material (obviously, other factors also play a role, cf. ). Before the year 2000 the introduction of
                    the digital in the humanities in the form of digitized collections, tools and
                    communication platforms may have been an additional choice, but this may not be
                    the case in the future. Since more and more source material comes in digital
                    form — and in more and more cases in digital form only — there is no opting out
                    of the digital, and the fundamental question for the humanities is probably not
                        if the digital should be introduced in the humanities, but
                    rather how. And it is worth noting that as a function of the
                    transformation of source material from analogue to digital, the analytical,
                    tools and the means of communicating about scholarly activities will in many
                    cases also have to change, since the use of digitally- supported methods that
                    were previously just a possibility tend to become a necessity when interacting
                    with digital objects of study.
                If this characteristic of the humanities at the beginning of the 21st century is correct, we must ask ourselves how
                    this shift should be conceptualized, how it will affect the humanities, and to
                    what degree the humanities will become digital.
                Taking the figures above as a point of departure the figures above, this article
                    will address these general questions by focusing on the core question, namely
                    the nature of digital source material. The main argument is that all kinds of
                    digital material are not digital in the same way, just because they are digital.
                    To support this argument a distinction is introduced between digitized,
                    born-digital, and reborn-digital sources. With this distinction as a stepping
                    stone, the major differences between two examples of digitized and
                    reborn-digital material are illustrated by a detailed comparison of the nature
                    of digitized collections and web archives, and how these differences affect the
                    scholarly use of these sources in various ways.
                But before going into greater detail about this, it is necessary to reflect
                    briefly on what could be understood by the digital and how it relates to
                    the humanities when combined to produce the Digital Humanities.
            

                2. Digital, Humanities — Digital Humanities
                One of the main challenges when investigating the questions above is not only
                    that the Digital Humanities is a battlefield of competing definitions —
                    is it a big tent
                     or a trading zone and meeting
                        place? (, — this is also the
                    case with the digital as well as with the humanities. Attempts to define the
                    Digital Humanities often tend to forget what the humanities were before they
                    apparently became digital, which adds to the confusion and
                    complexity.
                With a view to introducing the understanding of the Digital Humanities that will
                    be used to frame and support the article’s arguments about digital sources, this
                    section will briefly reflect on the digital computer as well as on the
                    main themes that definitions and mappings of the humanities must address,
                    followed by a combination of these two lines of reflection into an understanding
                    of the Digital Humanities.
                
                    2.1. Digital
                    It is striking that in the literature about the Digital Humanities not much
                        attention has been focused on the digital (e.g. , . References
                        to the digital tends to focus on the historical development of computers as
                        artefacts and of their use within the humanities, without systematic
                        reflections about the digital and the digitality of the computer,
                        which is what characterizes its way of being digital.
                    One exception is Evens, who regards the binary code of 0s and 1s as the point
                        of departure for the development of digital artefacts and culture: 
                            The common element in all
                                digital technologies, the unifying aspect of the cultures, arts, and
                                media that we call digital, is the discrete,
                                binary code.
                            
                        . Thus, the binary code is a condition of possibility for
                        technological artefacts (Barry also stresses the digital by focusing on
                        software and drawing on work in software and critical code studies), but
                        without defining the digital . Evens
                        understands the binary code of 0s and 1s as numbers that can be calculated
                            , but another possibility would be to
                        understand 0s and 1s as letters, thus displacing the digital from being a
                        matter of mathematics to being a matter of text. The latter approach can be
                        found in Finnemann’s definition of the digital computer.
                    In his conceptualization the digital computer is characterized by three
                        invariant traits: 1) a mechanical alphabet composed of a finite number of
                        letters, each of which is void of meaning, 2) an algorithmic syntax, and 3)
                        an interface which determines the semantics of the syntax , see also . The idea that the 0s
                        and 1s can be understood as letters and not numbers is based on the
                        assumption that numbers are not void of meaning — 0 means zero, 1
                        means one — but in order to be able to combine them via the
                        algorithmic syntax they must be void of meaning, like other kinds of letters
                        that are combined into words. All three invariant traits are necessary as
                        such, but they are not necessary in any specific form. Today the mechanical
                        alphabet composed of a finite number of letters is the binary alphabet with
                        the two letters 0 and 1, the algorithmic syntax comes in a number of forms,
                        from machine to user level, and the interface can be any kind of device that
                        can handle the digital alphabet and its algorithmic syntaxes, ranging from
                        PCs and handheld devices to mainframe and networked computers.
                    The consequence of this approach to the digital is that on a very fundamental
                        level the digital computer can be understood as a writing machine,
                        with the letters being combined to form texts on all the levels of
                        the computer, and these texts are editable at any time, down to the
                        individual bit. In line with the point made above by Evens, it is important
                        to include the fundamental digitality of computers in the understanding of
                        the Digital Humanities since it constitutes the condition of possibility of
                        all the concrete forms of the Digital Humanities.
                
                
                    2.2. Humanities
                    It is worth noting that the humanities always come in the plural. Of course,
                        the plural refers to the many humanistic disciplines, but one could also see
                        this as an indication of the fact that the humanities is a very
                        varied field, and that there is no common definition of what it is.
                        Nevertheless, it is possible to identify a number of themes that are often
                        addressed in definitions of the humanities.
                    First, the question of boundaries has to be addressed: what is in-/outside
                        the humanities? Is anthropology a social science or part of the humanities?
                        Should, for instance, law be considered part of the humanities or part of
                        the social sciences , and is communication a
                        humanistic or social science discipline ? And
                        how should we perceive new disciplines such as literature and medicine , or studies in the borderland between the
                        humanities and the cognitive sciences ?
                    Second, discussions of the humanities tend to revolve around the issue of
                        whether a single, clearly delimited object of study can be identified, as
                        well as a set of predominant theoretical and methodological approaches to be
                        used in all disciplines.
                    Third, the aim of the humanities is often regarded as a defining feature of
                        this field, for instance whether the humanities should contribute to the
                        advance of mankind and of human culture, or be of a more descriptive nature,
                        or be transformed into individual, societal or industrial value.
                    And fourth, the humanities can be delimited based on purely administrative
                        divisions of higher education and research, which is a more formal argument
                        with institutional affiliation determining what the humanities are (the
                        humanities are simply what belong to an institutional entity such as a
                        faculty of humanities).
                    Although there is no precise and concurrent definition of the humanities,
                        these four themes constitute recurring issues in most attempts to define the
                        humanities. Thus, any such definition constitutes a specific constellation
                        of answers to the questions raised within each of the four themes: what are
                        the boundaries, the object(s) of study, the theories and methods, the aims,
                        and the institutional affiliation? And these constellations of answers vary
                        throughout history and may depend on the national setting. Therefore, it is
                        difficult to identify the humanities in an unequivocal manner with a
                        view to using this definition as a stepping stone in an understanding of the
                        Digital Humanities. Instead, one must content oneself with the idea that the
                        humanities constitute a fuzzy and complex field, constantly under
                        construction, and that the humanities vary a good deal. And therefore any
                        understanding of the Digital Humanities should start by being very specific
                        about how the humanities that become digital are understood.
                
                
                    2.3. Digital Humanities
                    As mentioned above, one of the greatest challenges facing any attempt to
                        define the Digital Humanities is that neither Digital nor
                            Humanities comes with a clear-cut definition, and in particular
                        it is worth noting that the fuzziness and complexity of the
                            humanities does not disappear or dissolve just because the term
                        is combined with digital. On the contrary, the many differences
                        remain and may even multiply, and any attempt to define the Digital
                        Humanities without having defined the humanities will rebound into
                        discussions of what is understood by the humanities.
                    Therefore, it may be a better solution to start with the digital, for
                        instance, based on the fundamental definition of the digital outlined above.
                        Such an approach does not solve the complexities of the humanities, but it
                        gives a minimal common ground for debating how the interface between the
                        humanities and the digital may be understood.
                    Thus, the following understanding of the Digital Humanities is suggested as
                        the overall framing of the following discussion of the specific nature of
                        digital sources: Humanities (regardless of what is understood by
                            humanities) which to some extent use digital computers and
                        thereby shape the invariant traits of the computer to fit specific scholarly
                        needs, based on how they define themselves as humanities, their
                        research questions and their practices. The advantage of this definition is
                        that on the one hand it offers a shared common ground for any detailed
                        definition of the Digital Humanities — that is, the conceptualization of
                        digitality — while on the other hand it is open and flexible enough to
                        incorporate the variety of detailed understandings of the humanities that
                        have been established in theory or by the concrete scholarly practices, and
                        instantiations of the use of the computer. It is important to stress that
                        the interplay between the digital and the humanities is not
                        regarded as a one-way deterministic logic from digital to
                            humanities. Instead, it is understood as a dialectical interplay
                        of shaping and re-shaping between digital and humanities — the
                        two are interdependent.
                    With this understanding of the Digital Humanities, let us now have a closer
                        look at some of the concrete ways in which the invariant traits of the
                        computer — the digital alphabet, the algoritmic syntax and the interface —
                        are (and have been) shaped by the scholarly practice within the
                        humanities.
                
            

                3. Three Types of Digital Material within the Digital Humanities
                The nexus between the humanities and the digital is related to the material to be
                    studied in a very fundamental way, in the main because the use of digital
                    analytical tools does not make any sense if the object of study does not somehow
                    exist in digital form. What follows in this section are three approaches to
                    understanding the importance of the different digitalities of digital material.
                    First, a general typology of three types of digital material is presented, based
                    on the assumption that although all kinds of digital material share the same
                    digital alphabet, they are not identical in all respects just because they are
                    digital — digital material is not just digital material. Second, a systematic
                    approach is introduced as to where exactly we can locate the digital in
                    the humanistic scholar’s research process. And, third, a brief outline of the
                    historical development of the interplay between the humanities and the digital
                    is presented.
                
                    3.1. Digitized, Born-digital, and Reborn-digital Material
                    On the one hand, all kinds of digital material share the same feature, namely
                        that they are digital. But on the other hand, this digitality is always
                        already embedded in a set of semantic, technical and academic structures,
                        which implies that digital material is not just digital, but that it is
                        digital in a variety of ways (a similar argument of embeddedness in already
                        existing structures is put forward in relation to digital tools in ). In the following section a general typology of
                        digitality is suggested, based on the provenance of the digital
                        material, and on a distinction between three main types of digital material:
                        digitized, born-digital, and reborn-digital material.
                    Digitized material is analogue material that has been digitized, for
                        instance, written documents on paper, parchment etc., or electronic media
                        such as radio and television, and even pictures or 3D-models of artefacts.
                        The process of digitization is any form of transformation of analogue
                        material into digital form, be it the laborious keyboarding of written
                        documents to punched cards, the more easily performed scanning of documents
                        to image files, or the digital recording of sound and moving images. The
                        main characteristic of digitized material is that its becoming
                            digital is based on an original that was not digital — an original
                        that can in many cases still be retrieved and thus function as a baseline
                        (for reflections on digitized collections, see , .
                    Born-digital material is digital material that has never existed in any other
                        form than digital. This includes all types of material on digital media such
                        as CD-ROMs, DVDs, or the internet and the web. This type of digital material
                        does not have an analogue original to go back to, we only have the digital
                        original ( as well as  and  also use the
                        term born-digital).
                    Reborn-digital material is the term that is suggested to characterize
                        born-digital material that has been collected and preserved, and that has to
                        a large extent been changed in the process of collecting and preserving.
                        Examples of this are emulated computer games or material in a web archive,
                        the latter being presented in greater detail in section 4 below.
                    Each of the three general types can be subdivided, as the examples above
                        illustrate, and as seen with (for instance) digitized documents such as
                        newspapers that are different from digitized temporal media such as radio or
                        television; just as born-digital material such as computer games on DVDs is
                        very different from online web or apps on iPads (cf. also section 3.2).
                
                
                    3.2. The Digital in the Humanities Scholar’s Research Process — a
                        Systematic Approach
                    The specific nature of each of the three types of digital material has an
                        impact on how each of them can be used and approached by the scholar in the
                        research process. But before going into more detail about how this unfolds
                        in the digital world, let us have a look at a schematic representation of
                        how the research process usually unfolded before the advent of the digital
                            (Figure 1). This very general model does
                        not necessarily fit all parts of the humanities, but it provides a good idea
                        of where the digital can later be located within the research process of
                        most disciplines. In addition, it has to be stressed that what are presented
                        as two distinct worlds — an analogue and a digital — are in practice in
                        today’s digital world very often intermixed in the sense that even scholars
                        claiming to be Digital Humanists switch between analogue and digital in
                        various phases of their research. But for the sake of argument, they are
                        presented as two distinct scholarly environments.
                    
                        A schematic representation of the research process, before the advent
                            of the digital.
                        
                    
                    The research process is boiled down to four main phases: the material of
                        study is collected, it is analyzed and the results may be debated and later
                        disseminated. This may be an iterative process, for instance, the analysis
                        may mean that new material has to be procured, the debate may lead to
                        corrections of the analysis, and the dissemination may affect all the
                        previous steps (the iterative nature is indicated by the arrows looping
                        back).
                    The key argument in this approach is that the nature of the material to be
                        studied to a large degree determines — or at least sets up a range of
                        possibilities for — each of the four steps. Analogue material has to be
                        collected in an analogue way, which may imply that the scholar has to
                        visit the collections or objects by moving physically to where they are; the
                        analysis must rely on ancillary tools such as printed indexes, records on
                        index cards, and on how things are ordered in some of the physical buildings
                        and institutions holding the collections (e.g. in GLAM institutions,
                        which stands for galleries, libraries, archives and museums). Discussions
                        generally have to take place either face-to-face, for instance at
                        conferences, or in pre-publications such as conference papers, with the
                        process of dissemination taking place in print media such as books, journals
                        or newspapers, or possibly in electronic media (radio, television).
                    But not only does the analogue nature of the objects of study affect each of
                        the four phases of study. Their nature also has an impact on a more detailed
                        level. Therefore, a systematic distinction is introduced between, on the one
                        hand, semiotic and non-semiotic objects of study, and on the other hand
                        material that is either handed down to, found or created by the scholar.
                        Semiotic documents that are handed down from the past could, for instance,
                        be objects carrying semiotic systems, based on discrete units (e.g.
                        documents, books, newspapers with writing or still images, or
                        film/television with writing, sound and moving images), whereas non-semiotic
                        objects that are handed down are any kind of artefact. As to the objects of
                        study that have been created by the scholars themselves, this type of
                        material can also be either semiotic (for instance a taped interview, field
                        study notes, surveys on paper, or the like), or non-semiotic, such as design
                        mock-ups, or reconstructions of artefacts from the past (e.g. experimental
                        archaeology). It has to be stressed that the two sets of distinctions are
                        analytical distinctions that are made with a view of identifying the most
                        predominant feature of the different types of objects of study. Thus, the
                        clear distinction between semiotic and non-semiotic plays down the fact that
                        semiotic materials are also artefacts (books are also artefacts), and that
                        artefacts also mean something in themselves, although they do not
                            carry a semiotic system, such as written letter for instance (an
                        ancient weapon can be a sign of cultural power); and with regard to the
                        latter distinction, material handed down from the past is never approached
                        unbiased but is always selected by the scholar with a view to creating his
                        or her own object of study, whereas the scholar’s own creation of the
                        material of study here and now often relies on material that was handed
                        down.
                    As mentioned above, the aim is to underline that the characteristics of each
                        of the different types of objects of study has an impact on how they can be
                        approached in the four phases of the research process (as indicated by the
                        thin arrows). The analytical approach to the object of study varies
                        depending on whether we are studying handed-down documents or artefacts, or
                        interviews or archaeological experiments that have been created by the
                        researcher, just as the debate and dissemination of the results may vary for
                        the same reasons.
                    Now let us have a look at how this unfolds in a digital world, where the
                        scholar is confronted with the three main types of digital material outlined
                        in section 3.1.
                    
                        A schematic representation of the research process in the digital
                            age.
                        
                    
                    The fact that the nature of the material to be studied sets up a range of
                        possibilities for each of the four steps in the research process also
                        applies to digital material. In contrast to analogue material, digital
                        material can be collected at a distance if it is online, digital tools for
                        searching, filtering, and analysing the objects of study can support the
                        analysis, and digital material opens an array of new ways of debating (e.g.
                        blogs, wikis, pre-print databases) and of disseminating and interacting
                        (e.g. computer files, databases, websites, visualisations such as virtual
                        worlds, GIS, interactive maps and time lines).
                    However, although these opportunities for interacting with digital material
                        are by and large a function of the digitality of the material as such, on a
                        more detailed level they are also a function of each of the three main
                        digital types mentioned above. Digitized, born-digital, and reborn-digital
                        material all have their own array of possible forms of scholarly use,
                        although overlaps may occur: digitized material can be collected, analyzed,
                        debated and disseminated in ways that are specific to this material’s
                        digitality, whereas born-digital material has to be approached in other
                        ways, and reborn-digital material in other ways again. This point will be
                        elaborated in greater detail in section 4,
                        where the nature of digitized and reborn-digital material is compared.
                    The three main types of digital material affect the research process in
                        various ways, but there are other questions worth raising here as well: is
                        the material semiotic or non-semiotic, and has it been handed down/found or
                        created? With regard to digitized material, one main issue is that analogue
                        artefacts and objects created by researchers cannot become digital as such
                        but have to be transformed into images of some kind. And with regard to
                        born-digital material, the non-semiotic objects are probably not entirely
                        digital, but only come with digital components. As to reborn-digital
                        material, each of the four subtypes of material will probably differ because
                        they are most likely to be transformed in different ways when they are moved
                        from the born-digital area to an archive. 
                
                
                    3.3. Interplay between the Digital and the Humanities — A Brief Outline of
                        a Historical Development
                    The systematic approach outlined above situates the digital within the
                        scholarly process by introducing the lens of the three main types of digital
                        material, based on their various provenances. But this analytical lens can
                        also be used to give a brief outline of the historical shifts in the
                        interplay between the humanities and the digital. As a working hypothesis,
                        three waves of the nexus between the humanities and the digital can be
                        identified (for other types of periodisation, see for instance , , and .
                    The first wave starts in the 1960s, when new research fields such as
                        humanities computing, literary computing, computational linguistics, and
                        later digital history emerge , , , and . These new disciplines are initially based on
                        the use of stand-alone mainframe computers; later, proprietary computer
                        networks are introduced, and later again, the open internet. In terms of
                        digital material, these traditions are in the main focused on digitized
                        material.
                    The second wave starts in the mid-1990s, when two partly overlapping new
                        research fields emerge, namely New Media Studies and Internet
                            Studies. New Media Studies as well as Internet Studies are often not
                        considered part of the Digital Humanities, but probably they should be, if
                        the focus is on how the humanities — or at least a number of humanistic
                        disciplines — have integrated the digital as an object of study. New Media
                        Studies and Internet Studies are very broad fields of study, including a
                        range of disciplines, but they all converge in the study of new media and of
                        the internet (cf.  for a brief
                        account on the Digital Humanities and internet studies). In contrast to the
                        first wave, the second wave has had a digital object of study from the very
                        outset, and therefore it is focused on born-digital material.
                    The third wave is a further development and a subset of the second wave,
                        since it adds a historical dimension to the study of born-digital material:
                        historical studies of the internet within internet studies emerge in the
                        early 2000s. One of the main objects of study is the archived web, but other
                        types of preserved born-digital objects of study are also included; in this
                        third wave the focus is on reborn-digital material (for an overview of web
                        historiographies, see ).
                    It is important to stress that the three waves have not replaced one another,
                        but have continued to co-exist, which is why today we have the three main
                        types of digital material identified above: digitized, born-digital, and
                        reborn-digital. 
                
            

                4. Reborn-Digital Text — the Case of the Archived Web
                As mentioned above, one of the main types of reborn-digital material is the
                    archived web. In the following section, the case of the archived web will be
                    introduced because it illustrates the importance of identifying the differences
                    between digital material, despite its being digital, and consequently it may
                    illustrate the importance of approaching digital materials in different ways.
                    The archived web is compared to digitized material, since both types are
                    transformations of already existing material, analogue and born-digital,
                    respectively, but the material that is being transformed as well as the
                    processes of transformation are very different, and so are the results. Thus,
                    contrasting the two will highlight these differences (for a more detailed
                    discussion of this topic, please see , , , , , ; see also , , , and ). However, it has to be stressed that since the
                    process of digitization can range from keyboarding written documents to punched
                    cards, text encoding, scanning documents to image files, or the digital
                    recording of sound and moving images, digital collections are more complex and
                    varied than the general presentation below indicates. Thus, a more detailed
                    analysis of digitized collections in their own right should take into account
                    the many differences characterizing these collections, including a focus on the
                    provenance of as well as access to the collections.
                
                    4.1. Why Transform the Web from Born to Reborn Material?
                    Before going more into detail about the characteristics of the archived web,
                        it is relevant to reflect on why the web is archived at all since it is a
                        born-digital medium that is out there all the time. Even though we
                        may have the impression that things can always be found on the online web,
                        the web content changes at an unprecedented pace , , . The acknowledgement of this
                        ever-changing nature of the online web, combined with an awareness of its
                        growing importance for our societies and its importance as a historical
                        source in the future, probably constitute the major impetus for cultural
                        heritage institutions and individual scholars to transform the web into the
                        archived web.
                
                
                    4.2. Macro and Micro Web Archiving
                    Web archiving refers to any form of deliberate and purposive preserving of
                        online web material . Two ways of web
                        archiving can be distinguished: macro and micro web archiving .
                    Macro web archiving means web archiving carried out by professional archiving
                        institutions, such as national libraries, with the aim of preserving the
                        cultural heritage of, for instance, a nation state, and allowing as many
                        different kinds of research projects as possible in the future.
                    Micro web archiving means web archiving carried out by people who are not
                        professional web archivers, such as individual scholars or groups of
                        scholars in relation to, for instance, a specific research project with the
                        aim of preserving material of relevance for the research project in
                        question.
                    What follows primarily applies to macro archiving, but much of it also
                        applies to web archiving in general and to relatively small
                        researcher-generated web collections.
                
                
                    4.3. Stable and Ephemeral Original
                    Digitization is based on the existence of an analogue original that in most
                        cases is stable, whether it is a document on parchment, a newspaper, or a
                        radio or television broadcast on tape.
                    In contrast, the web original to be archived is much more ephemeral in the
                        strict sense of the word. As mentioned above, it is very likely to have
                        changed or disappeared within a very short time interval, and there is thus
                        no original to go back to (cf. ,
                            ).
                
                
                    4.4. What and How to Archive
                    Before starting to digitize an analogue collection, the main concern is
                            what to digitize; whereas the how to digitize
                        is in the main limited to questions about which software and hardware to use
                        and how to arrange it.
                    The web can be archived in a variety of ways that will each result in
                        genuinely different versions. For instance, it has to be decided where the
                        archiving should start and stop, if specific file types should be
                        included/excluded, if the archiving should be allowed to retrieve material
                        on other servers, etc. Thus, the question of what to archive also applies to
                        a web archive, but what is even more important is how to
                        archive the web. The consequences of this are (1) that strictly speaking the
                        archived web does not exist as such before it is archived, but is only
                        created in the process of archiving; and (2) that if two archiving
                        institutions decide to archive the same website at the same point in time,
                        the results are very likely to be different, due to the different archiving
                        settings. Thus, in contrast to digitized collections, where differences as
                        to how to perform the digitization of the same analogue object
                        will probably only lead to minor differences in the two collections, the
                            how to perform the archiving in web archives often creates
                        two unique, but different versions (it is also necessary to add that
                        differences in assembling the archived bits and pieces in the archive may
                        even complicate these differences).
                
                
                    4.5. Transparency and Opacity
                    The process of digitization is to a large extent transparent: the archiving
                        institution has an overview of the collection to be digitized and of what is
                        happening during the digitization process.
                    This is not the case with the process of web archiving. For a variety of
                        reasons web archiving is a much more opaque process, mainly because one
                        never knows exactly what happens out there, once the archiving
                        software has been launched. Technical problems may occur, for instance the
                        archiving process may simply stop, it may get off track, for instance, when
                        encountering crawler traps such as calendars, or bot traps such as pages
                        generating new links (both cases create an infinite circuit of requests to
                        the webserver), or it may encounter file or software formats that cannot be
                        archived (streamed video, java scripts, etc.). And a phenomenon that is
                        specific for web archiving may add to the opacity, namely what can be termed
                            the dynamics of updating (cf. ), that is the fact that the website being archived may
                        change during the very process of archiving, and we do not know if, when,
                        and where this may happen — as if the pages of a newspaper were continuously
                        being edited while the newspaper was being digitized. And we cannot rely on
                        going back and checking the original, since it may be either gone or
                        changed.
                
                
                    4.6. Point(s) in Time and Continua
                    In general, the analogue media being digitized are usually related to either
                        one point in time (for instance the publication date of printed media) or
                        periods of time with clear-cut starting and stopping times (as with radio
                        and television).
                    The web has a totally different publication cycle. Entire websites are
                        published neither at a specific point in time nor within a clearly delimited
                        time span, but are a continuous publication with no clear-cut starting and
                        stopping time(s). In addition, the publication time is often not mentioned
                        on the web by the publisher. The consequence of this is that the
                        temporal subdivisions of the archived web material (in days, for instance)
                        is added by the archiving institution, and is thus not an inherent part of
                        the archived material — and therefore it is random and editable.
                
                
                    4.7. From Copies to Versions
                    The different ways of archiving the web combined with the opacity of the
                        process means that the result of the web archiving process cannot be
                        considered a copy on a 1:1 scale, as can a digitized object that is close to
                        an identical copy of an original. Instead, the archived web must be regarded
                        as a unique version — a version of a (probably) lost original, and very
                        likely one version among other versions, none of which can be identified as
                        the original.
                
                
                    4.8. From One Copy of Each to Too Few and Too Many Versions
                    In a digitized collection there is usually only one copy of each document, be
                        it a handwritten manuscript, a newspaper, or a radio broadcast, basically
                        because there is only one original and there is no good reason to create
                        more identical copies.
                    In contrast, in a web archive there are very often both too few and too many
                        versions of the same thing. On the one hand, it is very unlikely that
                        any website has been archived all the time, for instance every day, which
                        means that the scholar will be missing some of the material that was
                        initially online (in addition, elements on a website (images, video, adds,
                        etc.) may be missing too). On the other hand, some websites (or parts of
                        websites) may have been archived several times at very short intervals, so
                        there may be several versions from (almost) the same point in time. Thus, it
                        is very likely that the scholar who wants to study material in a web archive
                        does not only have one copy of each document. Instead, the processes and
                        strategies of archiving the web and the preservation of the web in the web
                        archive entail that in some cases a lot of what was once online is missing;
                        whereas in other cases there may be too much material that is partly
                        identical, but not exactly a duplicate. Finding one’s way through this
                        network of (possibly) overlapping versions is especially difficult because
                        the various extra versions of the same may not be versions of the
                        same. There may be partial overlaps between, for instance, a webpage on a
                        website archived in the morning and in the afternoon on the same day — as if
                        a newspaper existed in several versions from the same day, with some pages
                        (or elements on pages, e.g. images) being different in each version, or some
                        being with fewer/more pages.
                
                
                    4.9. The Absence of a Register
                    Digitized collections are in the main based on an original analogue
                        collection of which the archiving institution has a systematic overview, for
                        instance there may be a register or catalogue.
                    This may also to a certain degree be the case in a web archive, namely if the
                        web archive creates metadata for each archived website (as does, for
                        instance, the Australian web archive Pandora, pandora.nla.gov.au). But this
                        is not always the case, especially in web archives that use the so-called
                        bulk archiving strategy, where vast amounts of websites are archived, either
                        based on a list of all the domain names to archive (e.g. the Danish
                        Netarkivet) or on following links from what has already been archived (e.g.
                        the US-based Internet Archive). In these cases the mere number of domain
                        names makes it impossible to manually register the websites being archived.
                        For instance, the UK country code top level domain .uk consists of
                        approximately 10 million domain names. In these cases the only types of
                        register are either the list of archived domains or the technical crawl log,
                        where information about the archiving can be found, although the first of
                        these two does not tell much, and the latter has to be transformed into
                        information that makes sense to a scholar, and manually added information is
                        still not an option. 
                    For the reasons mentioned in the sections above, a web archive may not
                        exactly know what is in the archive, and this state of affairs is even
                        aggravated by the absence of a systematic register (and even the making of a
                        register of a small number of websites is a challenge because of the nature
                        of the archived web ).
                
                
                    4.10. From Hyperlinks as Add-ons to Hyperlinks as Inherent
                    The advent of the hyperlink in the mid-1980s opened up new ways of searching
                        and connecting documents in digitized collections. For instance, hyperlinks
                        can be added to digitized newspapers or radio broadcasts, making it possible
                        to get from one entity to another.
                    In contrast to digitized collections, where the hyperlink is an optional
                        add-on, the hyperlink is an inherent part of the online web: in the main
                            no hyperlink is the same as saying no web. And for the
                        very same reason it is not optional to include the hyperlink in a web
                        archive. At first sight one may not consider the necessity of including
                        hyperlinks in a web archive a problem, but on a closer inspection it becomes
                        evident that the inclusion of the online web’s hyperlinks in the web archive
                        may challenge the scholarly use of the archive in ways that are unseen in
                        digitized collections, basically because in digitized collections there is
                        only one copy of each entity, and the publication of the material has
                        already taken place in the past, at a specific and identifiable point in
                        time.
                    The necessity of including hyperlinks in a web archive is a challenge, partly
                        because archiving takes time (e.g. it takes two months to archive the entire
                        Danish web on .dk), and partly because all web entities are not necessarily
                        archived in the same depth below the front page (due to deliberate choices
                        in the archiving settings, or to unexpected problems). Therefore, the
                        presence of hyperlinks creates two sorts of inconsistencies in the web
                        archive as a whole. First, a temporal inconsistency, because there may not
                        be temporal coherence between the link source and the link target, that is
                        the webpage where the link is found and the webpage to which the link points
                        — they may have been archived with an interval of several days, weeks or
                        even months. Second, when comparing the hyperlinks from a subset of archived
                        websites, for instance in a network analysis, this hyperlink network may be
                        inconsistent as such if the websites in question were not all archived in
                        the same depth. Some may appear to have many links whereas others do not, as
                        if we were comparing digitized newspapers which only had a front page in
                        some cases but which had several sections in others; or comparing radio
                        programmes which only had the first 30 seconds in some cases but only 10
                        seconds every minute in others. All in all, the compulsion to include
                        hyperlinks in a web archive tends to make the collection temporally and
                        spatially inconsistent when focusing on the software-based relations between
                        websites or other web entities.
                
            

                5. The Scholarly Use of the Web Archive
                Compared to a digitized collection that tends to be more homogenous, web archives
                    are by and large heterogeneous, messy and opaque at the outset. And this is true
                    of web archives in ways that are much more fundamental than other types of
                    collections, partly because the online web that was initially archived is in
                    many ways also heterogeneous, messy and opaque; and partly because the archiving
                    process itself as well as the preservation and access to the web in the web
                    archive adds yet another layer of heterogeneity and messiness to the archived
                    web. In short, the fundamental heterogeneity cannot be removed or resolved by
                    technical means because it is a constitutive part of the web and of the web
                    being archived. And to add insult to injury, the heterogeneity of the web
                    archive also has a history of its own because the web and the web archive
                    continue to develop, thus accumulating previous heterogeneities.
                In continuation of the argument put forward above — the digital is not simply
                    digital just because it is digital — let us now examine how the differences
                    between a digitized collection and an example of a reborn-digital collection — a
                    web archive — determine the range of possible ways in which they can be used by
                    scholars.
                
                    5.1. Creating the Digital Object of Study
                    The first step when setting out to create the digital object of study in
                        either a digitized collection or a web archive is to search the collection.
                        This is one of the tasks where the advantages of the binary digital text
                        (cf. section 2.1) become evident.
                    In digitized collections searches can usually be performed in a variety of
                        ways, depending on the preferences and technical possibilities of the
                        collection. But in many cases searches by name and date as well as some kind
                        of free text searches are possible, often combined with various sorts of
                        filtering of the results.
                    Within a web archive, searching for the name of a website may not be
                        possible, basically because websites usually do not come with names , but also because very often the only way to
                        search the archive is to search for a specific URL, which is the web domain
                        name which can be found in the location bar on the online web. However, some
                        web archives have recently started to support free text searches, which are
                        a great help for the scholar. But this leap forward also comes with a number
                        of challenges which highlight the difference compared with digitized
                        collections.
                    The well-known and relatively simple act of presenting search results may be
                        slightly more challenging, partly because it is unclear what entity to show,
                        partly because there may be many overlapping versions of the same
                        thing in terms of time and space. Imagine a search for the term
                            humanities in a collection of digitized newspapers: the result
                        page will show all the pages where the word appears, and the results may be
                        filtered further by the name of the newspaper, the date range or other
                        parameters. But no matter what, there is only one copy of each of the pages
                        on which the word is found; in other words, there is no temporal depth of
                        each page. If we search for the term humanities in a ten-year-old web
                        archive, the result page may show the individual webpages on which the term
                        was found, and we may also be able to filter by the URL of the websites to
                        which each page belongs, by date range, etc. But the results page also has
                        to handle the existence of several — often overlapping — versions of the
                            same webpage, since in the web archive one found page does
                        not necessarily equal one copy from each point in time, but rather,
                        as outlined above, something like one webpage equals several
                            versions. In other words, each webpage may come with its own
                        temporal and spatial depth in the form of partly overlapping versions,
                        overlapping in both time and space (size). In addition, if the web archive
                        does not have any metadata to display, it can be very difficult for the
                        scholar to evaluate different versions.
                    Thus, the messiness of the web archive is replicated in the search results in
                        such a way that the simple fact of displaying the results of a free-text
                        search may prove to be much more complicated in a web archive than in a
                        digitized collection. And there is no easy technical solution to this,
                        because the core of the problem is the nature of the archived web
                        itself.
                
                
                    5.2. Identifying, Evaluating and Selecting Versions
                    The next step after having searched the collection is usually to select and
                        isolate the material that has been found for later study. This is also the
                        case in a web archive, but before doing this one has to perform a step that
                        is usually not necessary in digitized collections: deciding which of the
                        many possible versions of the same should be included in the object
                        of study.
                    As mentioned above, there are a number of reasons why a web archive may
                        contain a large number of versions of the same web material; but it
                        is important to stress that these versions are usually not identical
                        duplicates, but genuinely different versions, and the differences may range
                        from being very important to being insignificant. Therefore, the scholar
                        using a web archive has to perform the tasks of identifying, evaluating and
                        selecting the possible versions to include in the study. An example: we may
                        want to study the BBC website (bbc.com),
                        for instance the front page and the two sub-sections News (bbc.com/news) and Sport (bbc.com/sport). The front page may
                        have been archived eight times per day, the front page of News and Sport
                        three times every day, and the sub-pages at varying intervals (once every
                        day, every second day, etc.). We then have many versions of some of the
                        pages, fewer versions of others, and no versions of others; so the task is
                        to decide which of these versions to choose to combine to form our object of
                        study, even though one should be aware that because of the temporal and
                        spatial inconsistencies of the archived web elements, one cannot reconstruct
                        the website’s front page and the two sub-sections exactly as they looked at
                        a specific point in time, but only as they may have looked at several points
                        in time. Identifying, evaluating and selecting versions can be quite
                        difficult, and it is therefore important that tools are developed to help
                        the scholar to perform this task in such a way that his or her choices are
                        as informed as possible. This will include tools that can provide as much
                        information about each of the versions as possible (e.g. starting/stopping
                        time of the archiving), along with visualization tools to make it possible
                        to display the different versions in a manageable manner, and tools to help
                        select — or maybe even combine — which version should be used as the object
                        of study.
                
                
                    5.3. Isolating the Versions Found
                    Once the scholar has chosen which versions to study, it is time to return to
                        the step mentioned above, which involves isolating the material for later
                        study. In a digitized collection this is in general a trivial task, mainly
                        because each document is clearly identifiable as one (or more) file(s), and
                        in general it is not linked to other documents (and if it is, this is
                        usually done in a very unequivocal manner). For instance, digitized
                        newspapers are usually kept as pdf files, whereas radio programmes are often
                        preserved as avi files. Therefore, the relevant files can either be taken
                        out of the collection and analyzed outside the archive, or bookmarked, put
                        into a folder etc for further study.
                    Again, things work differently in a web archive, mainly because of the
                        existence of hyperlinks as an inherent part of most web documents, since the
                        hyperlink makes it slightly more complicated to remove the files from the
                        archive. An example: in the study of bbc.com we have identified the versions to be studied, but if we
                        then remove them from the archive, for instance by exporting them to our own
                        computer, we also remove them from the communicative environment in which
                        they were initially embedded in the archive, and suddenly things may appear
                        either not to work anymore or to behave strangely. Links may no longer work
                        because the link target is not part of our corpus, and this is true of the
                        links that are immediately visible on the webpage and the more invisible
                        links that make the webpage look as it does, for instance links to adds,
                        images, or embedded videos located on other servers. Or links may work, but
                        in strange ways if the material is removed from a web archive with no access
                        to the live web and placed on a computer with online access. For instance,
                        if a script on the front page of the archived version of bbc.com requests
                        today’s weather from the server of the national meteorological service, this
                        server-side information may still be displayed if the server is still
                        online, thus displaying today’s weather and patching the website of the past
                        with today’s web (cf. ).
                    Thus, the best way of isolating archived web material for study is to do this
                        within the archive, for instance by generating an index of what has been
                        chosen, and then limiting the study to this index. However, for technical
                        reasons this may not be straightforward. For instance, the so-called
                        deduplication procedure has to be taken into consideration; that is the fact
                        that the web archive continually checks if a file is already in the archive
                        (e.g. a pdf file), and if it is, it is not archived again with a view to
                        saving disk space. But if a scholar later delimits a corpus to a certain
                        date range, and the file was archived before the starting date of this date
                        range, the file will not be displayed, even if it is in the archive. There
                        are technical solutions to this, but the phenomenon illustrates that a web
                        archive is a rather complex collection because of the existence of
                        hyperlinks.
                
                
                    5.4 Analyzing, Debating, Disseminating
                    Once the object of study has been delimited and isolated, the scholar can
                        start analyzing it. It is not possible to go into much detail about the
                        great variety of analytical tools that can be applied in analyses of
                        archived web material, but the main challenge for all these tools is that
                        their possible use is a function of how the web archive has been constructed
                        as well as how the concrete construction of the object of study within the
                        web archive has been performed, and with what result. Thus, in a very
                        fundamental way the nature of a reborn-digital collection such as a web
                        archive constitutes the condition of possibility of the analysis.
                
                
                    5.5 Solutions? — The Need for a Web Philology
                    When faced with the web archive’s challenges with regard to its scholarly
                        use, are there any possible solutions for the scholar to address these
                        challenges?
                    Since the heterogeneous, messy and opaque nature of the web archive is an
                        inherent part of the archiving and of the archive itself, there are no easy
                        solutions to overcome the challenges. However, this should not leave the
                        humanities scholar paralysed, because one of the most important tools in the
                        traditional humanities toolbox is the skill of dealing with sources and
                        their provenance. These skills just have to be reinterpreted and translated
                        to fit a new digital environment. For instance, the task of comparing
                        versions outlined above is in many ways similar to traditional philology,
                        which means that a future web philology does not have to start from
                        scratch but can be developed to fit the specific nature of the archived web
                        by identifying and focusing on the differences between texts written on
                        parchment or paper and texts archived on the web (for an outline of a web
                        philology, see .
                    The first steps towards a web philology would be to acknowledge the specific
                        digitality of archived web, and to recognize that access to the digital code
                        may even be a great help to the scholar, since this layer of invisible text
                        beneath the visible text holds a lot of important information and metadata,
                        among others about the provenance. Thus, what is needed is a new web
                        philological toolbox that can help the scholar gain as much information as
                        possible about the object of study. Such an approach will not solve the
                        challenges, but it will help scholars to make as informed choices as
                        possible.
                
            

                6. Conclusions
                Taking as a point of departure that one of the major transformative factors of
                    the humanities at the beginning of the 21st century
                    is the shift from analogue to a great variety of digital source material, it has
                    been argued that this shift will affect the humanities in a variety of ways. To
                    conclude, I shall briefly return to the question asked at the outset: to what
                    degree will the humanities become digital?
                On the one hand, the humanities are tending to become increasingly
                        digital. The reason for this is the above-mentioned shift from
                    analogue to digital material, and the possibility of using digitally supported
                    methods that this material allows and increasingly renders necessary. Thus, this
                    spread of the digital will probably push the humanities closer to becoming the
                    Digital Humanities.
                On the other hand the Digital Humanities must by and large remain the humanities.
                    The fundamental questions, theories, methods and aims of the humanities largely
                    remain unchanged, despite the widespread digitality and the challenges that this
                    raises for the humanities. The Digital Humanities do not in themselves
                    constitute an entirely new paradigm. Instead, they open up an array of
                    possibilities either for doing what was previously done in new ways, or for
                    rethinking well-known practices of the humanities, for instance by integrating
                    software-supported methods and by using digital research infrastructures.
                What is needed is a well-balanced Digital Humanities allowing for the fact that
                    the foundation of the scholarly activities of the humanities is fundamentally
                    changed, but also acknowledging that this fact does not necessarily change the
                    humanities fundamentally. All the humanities need not become Digital Humanities,
                    but most humanities will not remain unchanged since they are challenged by the
                    digitality of the object of study in itself or of the digitally supported
                    methods and tools to be used within the humanities — or both. Therefore, in the
                        21st century the difference between the
                    humanities and the Digital Humanities is quantitative rather than qualitative:
                    all parts of the humanities will become digital to some extent, but not all will
                    become digital to the same extent. Thus, the main question is not one of being
                    digital or not, but rather one of being more or less digital.
                And no matter where one wants to strike the balance between more or less
                    digitality, the introduction of the digital in the humanities is a game changer
                    that has already sparked relevant and important discussions about what the
                    (Digital) Humanities could be.
            
