Title:  Exploring Citation Networks to Study Intertextuality in
                    Classics
Volume:  010
Issue:  2
Date:  6 June 2016
Abstract:  
                Referring constitutes such an essential scholarly activity across disciplines
                    that it has been regarded by  as one of the
                    scholarly primitives. In Classics, in particular, the references to passages of
                    the ancient texts — the so-called canonical citations (or
                        references) — play a prominent role. The potential of these
                    citations, however, has not been fully exploited to date, despite the attention
                    that they have recently received in the field of Digital Humanities.
                In this paper I discuss two aspects of making such citations computable. Firstly,
                    I illustrate how they can be extracted from text by using Natural Language
                    Processing techniques, especially Named Entity Recognition. Secondly, I discuss
                    the creation of a three-level citation network to formalise the web of relations
                    between texts that canonical references implicitly constitute. As I outline in
                    the conclusive section of this paper, the possible uses of the extracted
                    citation network include the development of search applications and recommender
                    systems for bibliography; the enhancement of digital environments to read
                    primary sources with links to related secondary literature; and the application
                    of these network to the study of intertextuality and text reception. 
            
Full Body Text: 
Exploring Intertextuality in Classics through Citation Networks

                1 Introduction
                Over the last two centuries Classics scholars have developed sophisticated tools
                    and strategies to find relevant information they need for their work. These
                    tools are aimed at making resources more easily accessible and include indexes
                    of cited passages, specialised concordances and extensive bibliographic reviews,
                    both critical and analytical. The fact that they are manually curated and
                    therefore highly accurate, is what makes these resources valuable but time
                    consuming to produce. This constitutes also the main limit of these resources as
                    they cannot cope with the sheer amount of materials made available by
                    large-scale digital libraries.
                The result of this situation is that, when it comes to finding relevant resources
                    within digital archives such as JSTOR, classicists are usually left with search
                    functionalities based on string matching algorithms. In order to be exhaustive,
                    a query to retrieve all journal articles that discuss a given ancient work needs
                    to contain all variant spelling and abbreviations of the work title in several
                    languages. For example, an exhaustive search for publications on Virgil's Georgics would need to include variant spellings of
                    the title such as Georgica, Georgics, Géorgiques, Georgiche, Geórgicas and
                    abbreviations such as Georg. and the less
                    common G.. However, since building manually
                    similar queries is rather inconvenient, a more scalable approach is required in
                    order to provide scholars with the means of finding resources that are relevant
                    to their research within large-scale digital archives.
                The workbench of the 21st century classicist ought to
                    offer more advanced means of searching for bibliographic information: a search
                    for Georgics should return records that mention the title of the work in
                    any of its variant forms or that cite specific sections of the poem (e.g.
                        Verg. G. 1.34, Verg. Georg. III 481 , etc.). Furthermore, it should
                    be possible to search for articles on both Vergil and Lucan or articles that
                    cite a specific set of text passages (e.g. Verg. Aen. 12.942 and Lucan 1.244). Such a specialised
                    search, deemed by  to be one of the essential
                    components of a cyberinfrastructure for Classics, is likely to have a particular
                    impact on areas of study such as intertextuality where citations to primary
                    sources play a key role.
                Previous studies in the field of Digital Humanities have almost exclusively
                    focused on the hypertextual dimension of canonical citations. Issues that were
                    tackled by these studies include how — and with what consequences — such
                    citations can technically be transformed into links and what new functionalities
                    can thereby be provided in a digital reading environment 
                    
                    
                    . In this paper I turn my attention to two
                    additional aspects of these citations. First, how can they be extracted
                    automatically from text? Second, how can the web of relations that these
                    references constitute be formalised as a network? To illustrate my approach to
                    these two issues I use a sample of reviews taken from L’Année Philologique in which canonical references were
                    semi-automatically annotated.
                This paper is organised as follows. In the first part I describe how canonical
                    citations can automatically be extracted by applying Natural Language Processing
                    (NLP) techniques. In the second part I discuss the creation of a citation
                    network starting from the automatically extracted canonical references. The
                    importance of such a network lies in that it gives formal representation to the
                    web of relationships between texts that these references implicitly already
                    constitute. I conclude this paper by sketching out what are the applications and
                    further uses that such a citation network enables.
            

                2 Extracting Citations as a Computational Problem
                A considerable amount of time in Digital Humanities research is spent in trying
                    to give a formal, computational formulation to problems of interest to
                    humanities scholars. Broadly speaking, this is done by translating the problems
                    into computational terms, turning them into computable tasks and representing
                    them by means of data models. This process involves adapting existing methods
                    and tools developed in disciplines such as Computer Science or Physics to these
                    new scenarios as well as developing new ones. This certainly holds true for the
                    extraction of citations to classical texts that are found in modern
                    publications, such as commentaries or journal articles.
                The approach to this problem that I adopted and built upon was first suggested by
                    G. Crane  and consists of treating citations as a
                    special kind of named entities. There is a whole area of research in Computer
                    Science called Named Entity Recognition that deals with the automatic extraction
                    of mentions of, among others, people, places and organizations (i.e. named
                    entities). Capturing named entities implies also identifying the relations that
                    exist between them (relation extraction) and disambiguating entity mentions by
                    means of unique identifiers (named entity disambiguation).
                
                    2.1 The Data: L’Année Philologique
                    The dataset that is considered in this paper is a sample of reviews drawn
                        from L’Année Philologique (henceforth
                            APh). The annotated corpus is available under a Creative Commons
                            licence at http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.12762. For further technical
                            details on how the corpus was created see . Since 1924 the APh has been reviewing annually what is
                        published in every part of the world on a wide variety of topics in the
                        Classics. Such a wide coverage makes the APh a fundamental bibliographic
                        resource and the starting point for virtually any study of classical
                        antiquity. However, this dataset covers only a very small portion of all the
                        APh data: it contains slightly less than 30,000 words of text originating
                        from 400 reviews that were drawn from a single volume out of the 80 volumes
                        published to date. The volume used to create this dataset — APh vol. 75 —
                        contains reviews of publications that appeared, or were reviewed, in
                        2004.
                    The main goal in the creation of this dataset was to train a piece of
                        software to automatically extract citations and to evaluate the accuracy of
                        the performed extraction. It should be noted that citations to primary
                            sources in the online version of the APh are manually encoded as
                            OpenURLs. These links can be resolved via the Classical Works Knowledge
                            Base (CWKB) service available at http://cwkb.org/resservice. The specific method that was
                        used to create the dataset also determined the criteria for the selection of
                        the reviews. This method is called Active Annotation and it aims to optimize
                        the effort of manually annotating the data by selecting for inclusion in the
                        training set the most informative documents .
                        In other words, the reviews that form the dataset were selected as they
                        contain the citations whose automatic extraction proved to be most
                        challenging for the software.
                
                
                    2.2 The Annotation Scheme
                    The first modelling choice that had to be made was to identify the named
                        entities necessary to represent a range of canonical citations as wide as
                        possible. Although it is true that such citations tend to have a rather
                        homogeneous and somehow standardised format, the narrative within which they
                        are situated leads to a wide range of possible variations in their
                        structure. What can vary substantially, for example, is the position within
                        the sentence or the document that the components of a citation can take. The
                        solution to this was to represent such citations as relations between the
                        constituent components of a citation rather than as entities
                            themselves. The former solution was the one adopted in  but further refinements to the annotation
                            scheme led to the development of the latter solution .  For instance, when several
                        passages of the same text are cited in a sequence the reference to the cited
                        work (Ath. and Pol.) is given only once and then implied in
                        all subsequent references: this can be captured by means of relations
                        between entities (see Fig. 1).
                    
                        An example of annotated APh document (75-0113) visualised in Brat: the
                            highlighted portions of text indicate named entities, while the arrows
                            represent the relations existing between them.
                        
                    
                    The example in Fig. 1 introduces the first two
                        entity types: REFAUWORK and REFSCOPE. The former
                        aims to capture the string indicating the text being cited — Pliny,
                            nat. and Vergil georg. referring respectively to Plinius'
                            Naturalis Historia and to Vergil's Georgica — whereas the latter captures the scope
                        of the reference, that is the indication of which text passage is being
                        cited (11,4,11, 11,16,46 and 4,149-218).
                    In addition to REFAUWORK and REFSCOPE, the
                        annotation scheme contains two other entities that capture respectively the
                        name of an ancient author (AAUTHOR) and the title of an ancient
                        work (AWORK) as shown in Fig.
                        2.
                    
                        Representing canonical references as relations between named entities
                            allows us to capture the discursive reference (line 2) Ammianus [. .
                                . ] (15, 8, 7) , and [...] (14, 10, 1-16 and 30, 3, 3-5), which
                            is made up of non consecutive tokens. 
                        
                    
                    Although only the first two of the entities above capture the citation
                        itself, the others are worth extracting as they may become useful when
                        attempting to disambiguate the extracted citations. Let us consider the
                        following example (named entities are highlighted in bold): [...] sind auch bei Calpurnius
                                Siculus (4.137ff.), Sidonius Apollinaris (Carm.
                                5 und 7) und Ausonius (Epist. 17)
                            Anspielungen auf die « Apocolocyntosis » festzustellen. Since
                        there exist dozens of works titled Epistulae
                        that can be referred to by the abbreviation Epist. — the same applies
                        also, for instance, to collections of carmina — it is almost
                        impossible for the system to guess the correct disambiguation unless the
                        neighbouring mention of the author Ausonius is captured.
                    In addition to these four named entities the annotation scheme includes a
                        relation that captures the citation itself, named scope. A
                        citation is defined as a relation existing between any two entities, where
                        one must be the indication of the citation’s scope (i.e.
                            REFSCOPE) while the other can be any of the other entities
                        (i.e. AAUTHOR, AWORK and
                        REFAUWORK).
                
                
                    2.3 The Extraction Pipeline
                    How do we go from a plain text input to an output text that is annotated
                        according to the scheme discussed above? This is done by a sequence of steps
                        that form an extraction pipeline, each of them addressing a separate layer
                        of annotation (see Figure 3). The code I
                            developed to implement this pipeline can be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10886. The
                        annotations were first produced automatically by running the data through
                        the process described below and then corrected manually by two annotators.
                        This semi-automatic process led to the creation of a dataset suitable to
                        assess the accuracy of the automatic extraction of citations — in NLP jargon
                        such a dataset is called gold standard.
                    
                        The various steps of the citation extraction pipeline.
                        
                    
                    The first step is the extraction of named entities from each document in the
                        corpus. In order to do so a machine learning-based approach is employed,
                        meaning that a statistical model is trained to predict, for each token (i.e.
                        word) in the text, which label is to be assigned. During the training phase
                        the model learns from the previously annotated data which features
                        characterise tokens that are annotated with a given label, where each label
                        corresponds to a named entity. Once trained, the model is then able to
                        predict with some degree of accuracy the most likely labels for an unseen
                        input sequence — i.e. a sequence that is not already contained in the
                        training set.
                    The second step is the extraction of relations between named entities: as
                        noted above, currently only the scope relation is considered.
                        In the current implementation this is performed by using a rule-based
                        approach: as opposed to the machine learning approach where the model learns
                        how to perform a specific task based on a training set, in the rule-based
                        approach a set of rules is defined based on some observations of the data.
                        These rules take into account the position of named entities within the
                        sentence as well as their position within the broader context of the
                        document itself, as relations between entities may span across
                        sentences.
                    In the third (and final) step the extracted named entities and relations are
                        disambiguated, that is they are assigned a unique identifier. The
                        identifiers of choice are Uniform Resource Names (URNs) that comply with the
                        syntax specified by Canonical Text Services (CTS) protocol 
                        
                        . The CTS is a network protocol that was developed
                        in the framework of the Homer Multitext project The Homer Multitext
                            Project, http://www.homermultitext.org/. and was designed to
                        provide access to texts in a way that is consistent with how scholars have
                        been working with such texts for centuries. In the case of canonical texts
                        this means replicating in a digital environment what canonical citations
                        have allowed scholars to already do in print, that is to create references
                        to texts that are fine-grained and at the same time independent from any
                        specific version (i.e. edition) of a text.
                    CTS URNs are used within the annotated data to identify unambiguously
                        authors, works and even specific text passages: for example, the CTS URNs
                        for Vergil, the Aeneid and the passage
                                Aen. 6.851-853 are respectively
                            urn:cts:latinLit:phi0690,
                            urn:cts:latinLit:phi0690.phi003 and
                            urn:cts:latinLit:phi0690.phi003:6.851-6.853 (see Fig. 1). A more challenging example of
                        disambiguation is provided by mentions of author names such as
                            Aristophanes that can refer either to the Alexandrian grammar or
                        to the comic playwright: in similar cases the broader context of the
                        document needs to be considered in order to decide which author is being
                        referred to, and thus which CTS URN is to be assigned to the entity.
                    Moreover, since a CTS URN encodes the scope of a notation in a normalised
                        format in order for it to be machine readable, the citation needs to not
                        only be disambiguated but also normalised: in the example above the scope
                            6.851-853 is normalised into 6.851-6.853. Similarly, the
                        notation 6.851 s. — meaning book 6, line 851 and the following —
                        needs to be made explicit and transformed into 6.851-6.852. The
                        normalisation of citation scopes is also necessary because there are
                        multiple ways of expressing the same citation. The citation scope
                            11.4.11, for instance, can be written also as 11,4,11 or
                            XI 4,11.
                
            

                3 Texts Through the Lens of a Network
                The extraction pipeline that was just discussed is the first step towards making
                    fully explicit and computable the web of relations that canonical references
                    implicitly constitute. The second step, which is discussed in this section,
                    consists of transforming the extracted entities and relations into a formal
                    network. This process implies decisions on, for example, which entity types will
                    become nodes of the network and on the directionality of the connections between
                    nodes (i.e. edges). For the formal definitions of the network science
                        terms used in this paper the reader can refer to the glossary contained in
                            . The glossary is also available online at
                            https://archaeologicalnetworks.wordpress.com/resources/#glossary.
                     The decisions that are taken while creating the network are of crucial
                    importance. Indeed, they shape the meaning of the network representation itself
                    and determine what algorithms can be used for its exploration and analysis .
                Research in the field of citation network analysis has been focussing mainly on
                    networks representing citations between modern publications (i.e. secondary
                    sources). Such networks are used primarily to quantify the impact of
                    publications by looking at the number of citations received or consider citation
                    and co-authorship networks in order to analyse the structure and evolution of
                    academic disciplines or their publishing and citing behaviours. For an
                        introduction to citation networks see  and . 
                        provides an interesting example of how citation network analysis can be
                        applied to literature in the field of Archaeology. On the contrary,
                    the study of citation networks that consist of references between primary and
                    secondary sources, such as those discussed in this paper, remains a largely
                    unexplored area of research. This fact may seem paradoxical given that roughly
                    half of the citations contained within humanities publications refer to primary
                    sources . A notable example from this
                    area is the work by  and .
                    They have focussed in particular on canonical references to the Bible that are
                    found within theological writings. Their analysis of the co-citation network of
                    these references — i.e. which text passages of the Bible are cited in relation
                    to each other — highlighted different conceptualisations of Christian dogma.
                
                    3.1 Citation Networks and the Study of Classical Texts
                    Networks of citations between modern publications represent 
                            networks of relatedness of
                                subject matter
                            
                        . The assumption underlying the use and analysis of these networks is
                        that publications sharing a common subset of bibliographic references are
                        also related to each other. But what is the meaning of a citation network
                        created from canonical references? And what is its relevance for the study
                        of classical texts?
                    Canonical references can be seen as traces that scholars leave
                        in their publications in the form of citations. These traces provide an
                        indicator of what authors, works and text passages were studied — i.e. cited
                        — and, at the same time, reflect how they were studied in relation to one
                        another. Thus, the relatedness expressed by a citation network created from
                        such references is two-fold. First, it is a relatedness between publications
                        based on the primary sources they cite. Second, it is a relatedness between
                        ancient authors or between ancient works that derives from how they are
                        cited within modern publications.
                    Such a citation network lends itself to various uses. It can be used for
                        information retrieval purposes in order to allow scholars to find
                        publications that cite a specific set of text passages. Scholars with an
                        interest in intertextuality would benefit most from such a means of
                        searching for bibliographic information. In fact, the relations between
                        texts that intertextuality investigates, such as allusions and other kinds
                        of intertextual parallels, are indicated within modern publications by means
                        of canonical references. Following  I use
                            the word intertextuality to mean a wide range of
                            relationships between texts. For an extensive annotated bibliography on
                            the various aspects and literary traditions that the study of
                            intertextuality encompasses see . Once
                        they are captured and formalised as a network, it becomes possible to search
                        for publications that discuss a specific set of intertextual parallels.
                    Moreover, such a citation network can be used for quantitative studies on the
                        reception of classical texts. The number of times a given author or text
                        passage is cited can be taken as a proxy of the attention it received from
                        scholars. If this citation network is extracted from publications covering a
                        wider temporal span, it becomes possible not only to track variations in the
                            popularity of ancient authors, expressed by the number of
                        citations received by a given author, but also to observe how the sets of
                        authors and works that are studied in relation to one another change over
                        time.
                
                
                    3.2 A Three-Level Citation Network
                    The most challenging aspect of representing canonical citations as a formal
                        network is how to preserve the multiplicity of hierarchical levels that such
                        citations embody. For example, the reference Verg., Aen. 6.851-853 can be regarded as: a) a reference to Vergil; b)
                        a reference to the Aeneid and c) a reference to
                        lines 851-853 of book six of Vergil's Aeneid.
                        Which level is to be taken into account depends from the context in which
                        the citation network is used. When studying intertextuality, for example,
                        one may want to consider intertextual relationships at the global level,
                        that is between the entire body of works of two (or more) authors, or at a
                        local level, meaning relationships between two (or more) specific works or
                        even single text passages.
                    The approach I have taken to tackle this issue, inspired by a similar
                        approach developed by , is to create a
                        three-level network that allows us to look at the same citation data at
                        different levels of abstraction, namely macro-, meso- and micro-level.
                        Similar to how a lens works, these networks make it possible to produce a
                        number of views on the citation data with an increasing degree of
                        granularity and specificity. Each of these networks addresses a specific
                        hierarchical level of analysis and is therefore likely to be useful to
                        analyse and observe only certain phenomena.
                    These networks are all two-mode (or bipartite) and directed networks.
                        Two-mode means that there are two types (or modes) of nodes in the network
                        and that, by definition, edges can exist only between nodes with different
                        modes. The definition of types, as I explain below, varies depending on the
                        network level being considered. Moreover, since citations themselves have a
                        directionality, that is from the citing document to the cited one, all three
                        networks are directed, meaning that the citations are
                        represented as edges going from the citing node to the cited one.
                    The network visualisations that follow were created from the manually
                        corrected subset of the APh data, which consists of 366 documents — i.e. APh
                        reviews — for a total of approximately 25,000 tokens and 850 canonical
                        references. These visualisations use a force-layout algorithm to position
                        the nodes on the canvas. As its name suggests, this algorithm works by
                        applying different forces to each node in the network, namely repulsion,
                        gravity and attraction. All nodes push each other away (repulsion), whilst
                        connected nodes are pulled toward each other (attraction). Simultaneously,
                        gravity pushes all nodes towards the center so as to oppose the repulsion
                        and prevent the nodes from being pushed out of sight. The final
                        configuration of the nodes results from the interplay of these three forces
                        after several iterations of the algorithm. As a result, nodes that are
                        highly connected with each other tend to remain in the middle of the canvas,
                        whereas less connected nodes are pushed towards the periphery.
                    
                        Basic statistics for each level of the citation network. The network
                            was created using the manually corrected subset of APh reviews.
                        
                            
                                Level
                            
                            
                                Modes
                            
                            
                                No. of nodes
                            
                            
                                No. of edges
                            
                            
                                Density
                            

                        
                        
                            Macro
                            Document; ancient author
                            396
                            404
                            0.0026
                        

                        
                            Meso
                            Document; ancient work
                            393
                            332
                            0.0022
                        
                        
                            Micro
                            Document; text passage
                            2,340
                            2,305
                            0.0004
                        
                    
                    
                        3.2.1 Macro-level Network
                        The macro-level network offers the most abstract view on the data and
                            aims to provide a high-level perspective on the citations that are
                            contained in a set of documents. Figure 4
                            shows a visualisation of the macro-level network extracted from the APh
                            data, while some basic statistics on the size of the network are
                            provided in Table 1.
                        
                            A visualisation of the macro-level citation network extracted from
                                the APh data. The green nodes represent APh abstracts whilst the red
                                nodes represent ancient authors. Although the directionality of the
                                edges is not shown, the network is directed. The size of the nodes
                                is proportional to their indegree (i.e. number of incoming
                                citations).
                            
                        
                        Such a network is created by treating each canonical reference as a
                            reference to the cited author while leaving aside the more detailed
                            information about which work and specific text passage are cited. For
                            example, the references Pliny, nat. 11,
                                4, 11 and Vergil, georg. 4,
                                149–218 contained in the document APh 75–00113 are treated as
                            references to the cited authors — Pliny and Vergil.
                        This network is bipartite as there are two modes of nodes — APh documents
                            and ancient authors — and there are no edges between nodes with the same
                            mode. It is worth noting that an edge in this network can have two
                            meanings: it can mean that a given author is explicitly cited but it can
                            also mean that the author is simply mentioned in the text. In fact, as
                            was described above, mentions of authors and works are extracted in
                            addition to canonical references. Although it is desirable to capture
                            both cases, it is also important for the meaning of the resulting
                            network to be able to distinguish them.
                        Moreover, this two-mode, directed network can be projected into a
                            one-mode undirected network where the nodes represent ancient authors.
                            In this projection two authors are connected by an edge when they are
                            cited by the same document. Such a projected network could be used in
                            order to study to what extent the sets of authors that are studied and
                            discussed in relation to one another change over time.
                    
                    
                        3.2.2 Meso-level Network
                        The meso-level network shown in Figure 5
                            offers a more detailed view of the data while maintaining some degree of
                            abstraction compared to the micro-level. Canonical references are not
                            treated as references to the cited author — as it is done at the
                            macro-level — but to the cited work. For instance, the references
                                Pliny, nat. 11, 4, 11 and
                                Vergil, georg. 4, 149–218 of the
                            example above are compressed respectively into a
                            reference to Pliny’s Naturalis Historia and
                            to Vergil’s Georgics.
                        
                            A visualisation of the meso-level citation network extracted from
                                the APh data. The green nodes represent APh abstracts whilst the
                                orange nodes represent ancient works.
                            
                        
                        The meso-level network shares the same properties as the macro-level
                            network. Indeed, it is bipartite as it consists of two types of nodes,
                            documents and ancient works. Moreover, the edges are directed and,
                            similar to the macro-level network, they can represent both mentions of
                            titles of works and explicit references to specific sections of the
                            work. Similarly, this network can be transformed into a one-mode
                            undirected network where a relation between two ancient works is
                            established whenever they are cited by the same APh document.
                    
                    
                        3.2.3 Micro-level Network
                        The highest degree of specificity and granularity is reached in the
                            micro-level network (Figure 6). In this
                            network each cited text passage is represented by a distinct node.
                            References that point to a range of passages are expanded when creating
                            this network: representing the reference Vergil, georg. 4, 149–218, for example, leads to creating
                            additional nodes representing the lines comprised within the range
                            149-218. Performing this operation, which considerably increases the
                            total number of nodes, has the advantage of making explicit references
                            that are left implicit in the notation with which canonical references
                            are usually expressed.
                        
                            A visualisation of the micro-level citation network extracted from
                                the APh data. The green nodes represent APh abstracts and the yellow
                                nodes represent text passages.
                            
                        
                        The low degree of density characterising this network is what makes it
                            most useful from an information retrieval point of view. In fact,
                            searching this network makes it possible to retrieve documents that cite
                            the very same set of text passages. It can be argued that such granular
                            searches are already possible by using indexes of cited passages.
                            However, since the networks on which the search is based are extracted
                            automatically from text, it becomes possible to search through
                            large-scale archives as if an index of all the text passages cited by
                            the documents contained in these archives had been compiled.
                        Similar to the two previously examined levels, a further one-mode network
                            can be projected from this micro-level network. In the resulting
                            document-document network, two documents are connected when they share
                            references to the same set of text passages. Such a network can be
                            exploited in order to identify clusters of publications that are likely
                            to be highly related to one another as they are concerned with the same
                            primary sources. It should be noted that the projected
                                document-document network resembles closely a bibliographic coupling
                                network, which can be extracted from a citation network (i.e. two
                                publications are coupled when they cite a common third publication).
                                For further details on bibliographic coupling networks see .
                    
                
            

                4 Conclusions and Further Work
                In this paper I presented an approach to creating citation networks by
                    automatically extracting canonical references to classical texts from modern
                    publications. A relatively small dataset consisting of reviews drawn from L’Année Philologique was used to exemplify the
                    extraction of such references as well as the creation of a three-level citation
                    network that represents them. However, only the mining of these references on a
                    larger scale may realise the full potential of this approach both in terms of
                    user applications and of data analysis. This is an area that I am still
                        researching as I am currently working on the extraction of canonical
                        citations from the Classics journal articles contained in JSTOR. 
                Several kinds of user applications could be developed building upon the citation
                    networks that were described above. These applications include: 
                        search applications;
                        recommender systems for bibliography;
                        enhanced reading environments.
                    
                Search applications would allow users to explore collections of publications
                    using citations to primary sources as a key entry point to bibliographic
                    information. In addition to searching by cited author and work, users would be
                    able to retrieve documents that cite a specific text passage. This functionality
                    is already provided, albeit on a smaller scale, by indexes of cited passages
                    which constitute a scholarly resource of essential importance. Moreover, the
                    fact that the relationships between texts are formalised as a network allows for
                    using the graph — in addition to the hierarchical index — as a visual metaphor
                    when designing the user interface for such a search application. In fact, the
                    graph seems an apt way of representing visually and making browsable the
                    connections between resources that are created by canonical references.
                Recommender systems for bibliography — an increasingly common feature of digital
                    libraries and reference management systems — often rely on the references
                    contained in a given article to suggest related publications to the reader.
                    While these systems take into consideration only references to other modern
                    publications, the approach I described allows us to develop similar applications
                    that leverage instead the references to classical texts. The cited primary
                    sources become, in other words, the criterion to determine the relatedness
                    between publications. The three-level network presented in the last section —
                    and especially the document-document networks that can be projected at any level
                    of the network — provide the citation data to which clustering algorithms could
                    be applied in order to extract clusters of related publications.
                Finally, canonical citations extracted from journal articles and other secondary
                    sources can be employed within digital reading environments for primary sources
                    so as to contextualise the text passage being read. This use of the citation
                    data was explored within the Hellespont project .
                    One of the outcomes of this project is an online environment to read the text of
                    Thucydides' Pentecontaetia (Thuc. 1.89-118).
                        GapVis for Hellespont, http://gapvis.hellespont.dainst.org/#book/1/read/89/. 
                    Such a reading environment presents to the user various layers of annotations
                    with which the Greek text has been enriched. Additionally, a dedicated panel of
                    the interface displays a list of articles contained in JSTOR that refer to the
                    passage currently being read (see fig. 7). A
                        similar functionality is provided by the criticism facet of Segetes,
                            http://segetes.io/. For an
                        example of interfaces built using the Segetes framework see http://segetes.io/aeneid/. To make this possible, canonical
                    references to the Pentecontaetia were automatically
                    mined from a sample of classics articles from JSTOR.
                
                    The secondary literature view in the Hellespont reading environment. The
                        Greek text of the passage in focus is displayed in the panel on the left,
                        while the JSTOR articles related to this passage are shown on the
                        right.
                    
                
                In addition to enabling the possible uses outlined above, the research presented
                    here opens up new areas for further research. A first area concerns the design
                    of a user interface that allows classicists to explore in an intuitive way
                    collections of publications through this three-level citation network. Such an
                    interface should enable the user to move back and forth between the different
                    levels of analysis and to follow chains of citations within the network. A
                    second area of research is constituted by the longitudinal study of this
                    network, which looks at how the network evolves over time. This aspect was not
                    considered in this paper as the APh reviews in the corpus cover only articles
                    that were published or reviewed within a single year. On the contrary, a
                    resource such as JSTOR would be ideally suited for this kind of analysis as it
                    contains thousands of articles spanning across more than two centuries. Having
                    at hand citation data covering a wider period of time has the potential to
                    enable new approaches to the study of text reception in Classics. It will become
                    possible, for example, to observe trends in the way ancient authors, works and
                    even single text passages were objects of attention by scholars over time.
            

                Acknowledgments
                Preliminary versions of this paper were presented at the Digital Classicist
                    Association conference held at the University of Buffalo in 2013 and at the
                    workshop To Mine and to Tie: Text Mining and Network
                        Analysis for Historians held at the Ruhr University Bochum in 2015.
                    I would like to thank the respective organisers of these events, Neil Coffee and
                    Frederik Elwert, for having given me the chance to present and discuss my
                    research. I am particularly grateful to Eric Rebillard and Adam Chandler for
                    their help in getting access to and annotating the L’Année
                        Philologique data and to Tom Brughmans, whose work on archaeological
                    networks has inspired and influenced this research.
            
