Title:  TaDiRAH: a Case Study in Pragmatic Classification
Volume:  010
Issue:  1
Date:  12 February 2016
Abstract:  
                
                Classifying and categorizing the activities that comprise digital
                        humanities has been a longstanding area of interest for many
                    practitioners in this field, fueled by ongoing attempts to define digital
                    humanities both within the academy and in the public sphere. The emergence of
                    directories that cross traditional disciplinary boundaries has also spurred
                    interest in categorization, with the practical goal of helping scholars
                    identify, for instance, projects that take a similar technical approach, even if
                    their subject matter is vastly different. This paper tracks the development of
                    TaDiRAH, the Taxonomy of Digital Research Activities in the Humanities developed
                    by representatives from DARIAH, the European cyberinfrastructure initiative, and
                    DiRT, a digital humanities tool directory. TaDiRAH was created specifically to
                    connect people with information on DiRT and in a DARIAH-DE bibliography, but
                    with the goal of adoption by other directory-like sites. To ensure that TaDiRAH
                    would be usable by other projects, the developers opened drafts for public
                    feedback, a process which fundamentally altered the structure of the taxonomy
                    and improved it in numerous ways. By actively seeking feedback from the digital
                    humanities community and reviewing data about how the source taxonomies are
                    actually used in order to inform term selection, the development of TaDiRAH
                    provides a model that may benefit other taxonomy efforts.
            
Full Body Text: 

                1. Introduction
                Classifying and categorizing the activities that comprise digital
                        humanities has been a longstanding area of interest for many
                    practitioners in this field, fueled by ongoing attempts to define digital
                    humanities both within the academy and in the public sphere. The emergence of
                    directories that cross traditional disciplinary boundaries has also spurred
                    interest in categorization, with the practical goal of helping scholars
                    identify, for instance, projects that take a similar technical approach, even if
                    their subject matter is vastly different. This paper tracks the development of
                    TaDiRAH, the Taxonomy of Digital Research Activities in the Humanities developed
                    by representatives from DARIAH, the European digital infrastructure initiative,
                    and DiRT, a digital humanities tool directory. TaDiRAH was created with the
                    short term goal of enhancing discoverability of resources in the DiRT directory
                    and the DARIAH-DE bibliography while also anticipating adoption by other digital
                    humanities directory-like sites. To ensure that TaDiRAH would be usable by other
                    projects, the developers opened drafts for public feedback, a process which
                    fundamentally altered the structure of the taxonomy and improved it in numerous
                    ways. By actively seeking feedback from the digital humanities community and
                    reviewing data about how the source taxonomies are actually used in order to
                    inform term selection, the development of TaDiRAH provides a model that may
                    benefit other taxonomy efforts. 
                
                    2. Motivating factors
                    
                        2.1 DiRT
                        Since the inception of the DiRT Wiki in 2008, the site has used an ad-hoc
                            set of categories. In its original form, each category represented a
                            wiki page where tools were listed. In 2010, a migration to the Drupal
                            content management system gave each tool its own profile page. However,
                            even under this new structure, the original categories persisted as a
                            way to organize the individual profiles. Starting in late 2012, the DiRT
                            Directory undertook an assessment of its categories, with the goal of
                            identifying any gaps, phasing out rarely-used terms, and adding new
                            terms to better reflect the scope and nature of the tools presented in
                            DiRT. Early investigation into how the categories were being used
                            produced striking results. Entire classes of commonly-used digital
                            humanities tools were largely rendered invisible through the lack of an
                            obviously matching category. For instance, optical character recognition
                            (OCR) tools were scattered between the categories of data
                                conversion, transcription, data collection and
                                annotation. The DiRT categories clearly needed revision; when
                            an opportunity arose to collaborate with DARIAH-DE on a taxonomy that
                            could be shared across multiple sites with different purposes, doing so
                            was clearly preferable to undertaking another isolated effort.
                    
                    
                        2.2 DARIAH-DE Doing Digital Humanities bibliography
                        The other partner in the development of TaDiRAH was a working group in
                            DARIAH, the European initiative to build a digital research infrastructure for the arts
                                and humanities (see ). This
                            working group was concerned with research and education and formed part
                            of DARIAH-DE, the German contribution to DARIAH. The group aimed to
                            establish a principled overview of the research methods and procedures
                            shared by humanities scholars. Presented as prose, such an overview
                            (published in  could help newcomers
                            understand the field more quickly and could connect established and
                            digital research by demonstrating their fundamental methodological
                            similarities. Presented as a taxonomy or ontology, the same overview
                            would form the basis for discovery systems for bibliographic references,
                            tutorials or research projects. The first use case for such a taxonomy
                            was DARIAH-DE's Doing Digital Humanities
                            public bibliography on Zotero  The bibliography is available at:
                                    https://www.zotero.org/groups/113737/. , which
                            became a test bed for a keyword system that would become one source of
                            seed terms for TaDiRAH.
                    
                
                
                    3. Digital humanities taxonomies 
                    The taxonomy of digital research methods described here builds on previous
                        work towards a structured and principled overview of the complex field of
                        digital humanities. The following three approaches were particularly
                        influential for the development of TaDiRAH.
                    The goal of providing an orientation to and a means to think about the field
                        are at the heart of McCarty and Short's idea of the methodological commons.
                        Using the metaphor and the tool of mapping to represent the complex
                            terrain of the digital humanities, McCarty & Short (2002)
                        suggest a map which has the methodological commons at its center.
                        They define the methodological commons as an abstraction for the computational methods that the various
                            disciplines of application share, which functions as a space of
                        encounter between disciplinary groups and areas of learning.
                        The research methods are not named, but are represented through broad data
                        types with which they are associated, such as narrative text,
                            images, or music. McCarty and Short's data types are
                        roughly equivalent to TaDiRAH's Object category.
                    With a similar goal of structuring and abstracting from individual research
                        undertakings, but using a somewhat different approach, John Unsworth
                        proposed in 2000 a short list of Scholarly Primitives of research,
                        particularly in the humanities. Contrary to McCarty and Short, Unsworth
                        defines scholarly primitives as activities
                            [which] are basic to scholarship across eras and across
                            media The figure of A rough
                                intellectual map for humanities computing can be found in
                                .; so fundamental that
                        they form basic functions common to
                            scholarly activity across disciplines, over time, and independent of
                            theoretical orientation. Unsworth's tentative list was the
                        following: Discovering, Annotating, Comparing, Referring, Sampling,
                        Illustrating, Representing. Unsworth’s formulation laid the groundwork for
                        the TaDiRAH team to include both methods and objects into the taxonomy, and
                        to keep them as separate entities with the potential to enter into multiple
                        and changing relationships.
                    Another, very ambitious undertaking, situated at an even higher level of
                        abstraction, is documented by . Their outline
                        of a Conceptual Model of Scholarly Research
                            Activities is based on an activity model which includes
                        inter-related entities such as research activities, research goals, methods,
                        procedures, tools, information objects, and actors. The initiative
                            concluded in the NeDiMAH Methods Ontology (NeMO) and the Digital Methods
                            and Practices Observatory (DiMPO). For more information on NeMO, see
                            Hughes et al. (in print). This model does not analyze research
                        methods in isolation, but contextualizes them in the framework of the entire
                        research process. From the beginning, TaDiRAH was meant to be designed in a
                        way that would allow it to be integrated into such larger undertakings.
                
                
                    4. Sources and alignment 
                    TaDiRAH terms were derived from three very different sources: the DiRT
                        categories, the DARIAH-DE tag set and the arts-humanities.net taxonomy. The
                        sources were not selected as part of a long process of research and
                        deliberation but were pre-determined based on the particular use cases that
                        motivated the work. The task of alignment involved mapping the taxonomies to
                        one another, while attempting to address differences in structure, scope and
                        granularity as they arose.
                    
                        4.1 DiRT categories: tools classed by function
                        The categories used by the DiRT directory were developed as an ad hoc
                            classification of digital research tools used in the arts and
                            humanities, for use on the original DiRT wiki. Despite the positioning
                            of DiRT as a humanities-oriented digital research tools
                            directory, most of the tools listed in DiRT originated in other domains,
                            and have non-research applications. The categories form a flat list of
                            32 tool functions without scope notes, and are accompanied on the site
                            by a rapidly growing and unwieldy list of uncontrolled tags. As
                            illustrated in the frequency distribution chart below, three categories
                            (data analysis, visualization, and annotation) have a significantly
                            higher number of tools associated with them than the other categories;
                            these were candidates for division into a series of more granular
                            categories.
                        
                            Frequency distribution of the DiRT categories as applied across
                                DiRT tool profiles. Categories on the high end of the distribution (e.g. Data
                                Analysis) were candidates for dividing into a series of more
                                granular categories, while those on the low end (e.g. Staying
                                Current) would be candidates for merging with other related
                                categories.
                            
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        4.2 Arts-humanities.net taxonomy: projects classed by method
                        Arts-humanities.net was developed by the Centre for e-Research at King’s
                            College London and had its origins in a 2008 collaboration between the
                            Information and Computer Technology Guides database and the Arts
                            Humanities Research Council ICT Methods Network. Its primary purpose was
                            to promote and provide access to information on the use of digital tools
                            and methods for research and teaching in the arts and humanities. In
                            support of that mission, it was home to a directory of projects, events,
                            centers, case studies and other information. It was also home to a
                            methods taxonomy where methods refer to computational methods
                                used by artists and humanists.
                        
                         According to the project’s former website, the taxonomy is based on one
                            originally developed by the former Arts and Humanities Data Service
                            (AHDS) for classifying projects. The taxonomy structure is broad and
                            deep containing seven top level methods categories, which include
                            between eight and twenty-five specific methods each; see below for the
                            distribution of top-level categories across all content on
                            arts-humanities.net. All but the top-level categories, which appear to
                            be used primarily as guide terms to navigate through the taxonomy,
                            include detailed scope notes. Taxonomies such as this, with complex
                            hierarchies that are both broad and deep, tend to be faced with
                            challenges regarding consistent application, updating and maintenance
                            (NISO).
                        
                            Frequency distribution of top-level arts-humanities.net categories
                                as applied to content on arts-humanities.net
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        4.3 DARIAH-DE tag-set: digital humanities literature classed by
                            research activity
                        The DARIAH-DE taxonomy was developed specifically for implementation in
                            the Zotero-based Doing Digital Humanities
                            bibliography. It was informed both by the arts-humanities.net methods
                            taxonomy, Unsworth’s formulation of scholarly primitives, and the idea
                            of phases in the research lifecycle. The focus was primarily on
                            research-based activities and objects. It originally consisted of nine
                            top-level interdisciplinary activities that matched methods from the
                            arts-humanities.net taxonomy, as well as a second level of forty-nine
                            methods and a limited list of object types.
                    
                    
                        4.4 Taxonomy alignment
                        There are two basic approaches to human-mediated taxonomy development:
                            top-down and bottom-up. A top-down approach begins at the top level of
                            the hierarchy, followed by the second level and so on. It starts with
                            developing the basic structure or framework. In contrast, the bottom-up
                            approach is informed by an existing collection of content (documents,
                            objects, datasets, vocabularies, etc.) with the resulting scheme
                            emerging from that content (see . All of the
                            source vocabularies described above were designed using some combination
                            of the above approaches. The development of TaDiRAH, which is based
                            entirely on existing taxonomies, was the product of a bottom-up process. 
                        Adopting a bottom-up approach made the most sense given our limited
                            resources and pragmatic aims. To begin with a top-down process would
                            have meant starting over. It also had the advantage of being user
                            centric and was aligned with the principles of user warrant
                            and literary warrant (see 
                            leveraging terms already in use – terms which had been applied to
                            existing content by different classes of users in the DH community: tool
                            users, developers and practioners adding and tagging content in DiRT and
                            scholars adding and tagging content in the DH bibliography. 
                        Given the differences in structure, scope and granularity across the
                            selected sources, the team was faced with a number of challenges
                            including:
                        
                            Making distinctions between goals, methods, and techniques (i.e.
                                all are related to activities).
                            Specific terms that could be mapped to more than one category
                                (e.g. modeling).
                            Terms with several different meanings (e.g. visualization as an
                                activity or as an object).
                            Categories combining multiple concepts which required decisions
                                about whether something was distinct enough to stand on its own as a
                                separate category (e.g. storage vs. storage and
                                dissemination).
                            One to many relationships between goals/methods and techniques
                                (e.g. mapping).
                        
                        Each source taxonomy was created with a slightly different purpose.
                            Aligning the sources detailed above was an iterative process that
                            included human-mediated matching, review and discussion. The larger
                            challenge was to go beyond identifying similarities among the
                            taxonomies, and review differences in turn, considering the nuanced ways
                            in which a term or series of terms might be interpreted and applied. 
                        Following some general guidelines,  See Bedford’s interpretation of
                                Ranganathan’s Principles, Table 1. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/bult.2013.1720390206/epdf
                            the team began with an analysis of the existing DiRT taxonomy and how it
                            was applied across DiRT content. That was followed by a series of
                            mappings, starting by mapping DiRT to DARIAH-DE, identifying and
                            resolving points of poor alignment. It was much more challenging to map
                            the results of the DiRT/DARIAH alignment to the very granular
                            art-humanities.net taxonomy. Fortunately, the latter included detailed
                            scope notes which facilitated discussions and decision-making throughout
                            the process. The final step before releasing TaDiRAH for public comment
                            was adding scope notes to all terms in the final draft. 
                    
                
                
                    5. Public review process & revisions
                    On September 12, 2013, the team sent out a call for feedback on the first
                        public draft of the taxonomy, via the Humanist Discussion Group. The public
                            draft Available at https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uosCjUW_dpSjdRNxBaFdDY0W-D0dTMHbLwTFuEvbDFg/edit?usp=sharing
                        was open for comments for a two-week period, where it received over 60
                        comments from individuals outside the project team. In addition, the team
                        received multiple emails pointing to published and unpublished work in the
                        area of digital humanities taxonomies. The comments ranged from suggesting
                        that scope notes be rephrased to discussions about the best choice among a
                        set of near-synonyms to use as the label for an overall concept
                            (scanning vs. imaging vs. digitizing was the
                        subject of particularly active debate).
                    Prior to the first round of feedback, specific techniques (such as
                            stylometry and topic modeling) occupied the second level
                        of the taxonomy, as did much broader terms, like publishing and
                            annotating. Multiple commenters pointed out this issue, and
                        recommended that techniques be moved to a separate list. This was
                        preferable to creating a third level of the taxonomy, as it would be
                        difficult in some cases to unambiguously assign a technique to only one
                        parent term. Having a separate list for techniques had the added benefit of
                        better supporting the rapid evolution of new techniques, without requiring
                        constant revision to the core TaDiRAH terms; like the objects list,
                            techniques would be an open list.
                    Due to an extensive amount of detailed and thoughtful feedback, the process
                        of revising the taxonomy took almost five months of periodic meetings and
                        asynchronous work. In early February 2014, the taxonomy team opened a
                        revised draft for feedback, this time for a week. While there was still
                        considerable engagement (with over 20 external comments), comments in the
                        second round were mostly focused on smaller issues of phrasing, and there
                        were no fundamental challenges to the structure of the taxonomy. Within a
                        week after the feedback period closed, the taxonomy coordinators were able
                        to incorporate the proposed changes and release the first public version of
                        the taxonomy, version 0.5.
                
                
                    6. Current version of TaDiRAH 
                    Realizing that there needed to be some easy way to refer specifically to this
                        taxonomy, the organizers devised the name TaDiRAH, which stands for
                                Taxonomy of Digital Research Activities in the Humanities. The name is also a near-anagram of
                        DARIAH and DiRT, the organizations responsible for its development. The only
                        Google result for TaDiRAH at that time indicated that it was the name of a
                        child’s dragon on the virtual pet website Neopets; in honor of that
                        creation, the team adopted a silhouette of a dragon as the TaDiRAH logo.
                    In its current version, TaDiRAH consists of several sets of terms: two closed
                        sets of so-called Research Activities, one with eight top-level categories
                        that represent broad research goals, and below that a second
                        set of more fine-grained research methods. In addition, there
                        are two open lists, one representing specific research
                            techniques and one representing research
                            objects to which methods and goals can be applied.
                    The goals roughly cover the entire research process — Capture, Creation,
                        Enrichment, Analysis, Interpretation, Storage and Dissemination. An
                        additional meta category includes activities that transcend all other
                        categories (e.g. Assessing or Community Building). Each goal
                        includes three to seven methods, with the methods section of TaDiRAH
                        containing 40 terms in all. For example the research goal of "Capture" can
                        be achieved using the following methods:
                    Capture
                    ..Conversion
                    ..Data Recognition
                    ..Discovering
                    ..Gathering
                    ..Imaging
                    ..Recording
                    ..Transcription
                    There are two separate open lists of terms that can be associated with terms
                        from the goals/methods section. They include 36 terms representing a wide
                        range of digital research objects (e.g. text, metadata,
                            manuscript) as well as 34 terms representing specific research
                        techniques (e.g. Topic Modeling, Debugging or
                            Gamification). For example, a tool such as SIGIL, which is used
                        for creating eBooks, could be tagged with the terms Creation (goal),
                            Writing (method), Encoding (technique) and Text
                        (object). A tool such as QGIS could be tagged with the terms Analysis
                        (goal), Spatial Analysis (method), Georeferencing (technique)
                        and Maps (object). 
                
                
                    7. Early adoption
                    Apart from DiRT and the DARIAH-DE bibliography that were the initial test
                        environments for the taxonomy, other initiatives have shown interest in
                        TaDiRAH or have already begun to apply it to their content.
                    Applications that emerged from the taxonomy development team’s own work
                        include the use of TaDiRAH within the DARIAH Teaching Resources Registry
                        available on the project website  See https://de.dariah.eu/schulungsmaterial-sammlung. and
                        the DHCommons project directory. DHCommons is still in the process of
                        developing a new project profile schema that can accommodate the projects
                        originally stored on arts-humanities.net; TaDiRAH categories will be a core
                        part of the new profiles once they are deployed. An implementation on the
                        DARIAH-DE portal (DARIAH Germany’s website) is planned and currently under
                        way. The Doing Digital Humanities bibliography
                        on Zotero has also adopted the current version of TaDiRAH.
                    In addition, a variety of projects and initiatives have adopted TaDiRAH for
                        structuring their data. One example is the draft of a DH Course
                            Registry See http://dhcoursereg.hki.uni-koeln.de/ hosted by the
                        Dutch CLARIAH initiative in collaboration with DARIAH-EU. In the near
                        future, each member country will provide an overview of digital humanities
                        courses that are being offered in that country, including a visualization
                        and links to each of the programs. A consistent classification built on
                        TaDiRAH keywords will support a well-interlinked European digital humanities
                        landscape. There has also been discussion about applying TaDiRAH to the
                        classification of in-kind contributions within DARIAH-EU. 
                    Individuals working on smaller projects that deal with structured data have
                        also requested to use TaDiRAH. For these projects, it is especially
                        attractive to implement a widely-used taxonomy in order to become or remain
                        visible within the scholarly community. Examples include Zeitschrift für Digital Humanities
                             http://www.zfdh.de/, a
                        digital humanities journal that is currently being designed in Germany and
                        which is considering using the taxonomy to classify contributions, as well
                        as the German DHd-Blog
                             http://dhd-blog.org/,
                        which is considering TaDiRAH as a way of tagging posts.
                
                
                    8. Current and future development
                    
                        8.1 Dissemination
                        TaDiRAH is publicly available via GitHub under a CC-BY license. In
                            addition to the actual taxonomy containing activities, objects, and
                            techniques, the repository includes information on coordinators, the
                            initiatives using TaDiRAH, and related presentations and publications.
                            GitHub also has support for versioning and issue tracking. When users
                            report issues encountered when implementing TaDiRAH in their own
                            projects, this will lead to improvements in future versions.
                        In support of the pragmatic goal of creating a resource that would be
                            widely available to a distributed community of users and which could be
                            applied in a variety of contexts, it was important to provide a
                            standards-based machine-readable version. The taxonomy team used an
                            instance of TemaTres Vocabulary Server (Ferreyra 2014) hosted by DARIAH-DE
                                http://tadirah.dariah.eu/ It produces SKOS core
                            and makes TaDiRAH available as linked open data. The SKOS version is
                            available via GitHub
                                https://github.com/dhtaxonomy/TaDiRAH and through
                            TemaTres as a SPARQL endpoint
                                http://tadirah.dariah.eu/vocab/sparql.php.
                    
                    
                        8.2 Further revisions
                        The taxonomy team will remain in close contact with the groups
                            implementing TaDiRAH on the DiRT directory, the DARIAH Doing Digital Humanities bibliography, and
                            DHCommons, in order to identify opportunities to revise TaDiRAH. Growing
                            interest in the use of TaDiRAH may require a more formal review of best
                            practices for documentation, sustainability, and governance of public
                            value vocabularies, particularly those made available in a linked open
                            data environment. Standards for the latter are still a work in progress
                            but important discussions have begun among stakeholders in the
                            information standards community including W3C, NISO, DCMI and
                                others For example http://wiki.dublincore.org/index.php/DCMI_NKOS_Task_Group
                                and http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/lld/XGR-lld-vocabdataset-20111025/.
                        The taxonomy team intends to make TaDiRAH multilingual, a feature
                            requested by the community and supported by TemaTres. There have already
                            been volunteers from several countries to help achieve this. Interactive
                            visualizations are another potential feature that may help users
                            navigate the taxonomy. Here, first experiments have been made using SKOS play!
                                http://labs.sparna.fr/skos-play/ which might be
                            integrated in future versions.
                    
                    
                        8.3 NeDiMAH
                        Within the broader DARIAH context, the work on TaDiRAH was originally
                            viewed as part of the ongoing cooperation between the research and
                            education working group of DARIAH and NeDiMAH, the Network for Digital
                            Arts and Humanities. NeDiMAH’s goal is to contribute to the classification and expression of
                                digital arts and humanities
                                http://www.esf.org/fileadmin/Public_documents/Publications/nedimah.pdf
                                (p. 2). by developing a theoretically sound ontology that can
                            classify work in digital arts and humanities, thereby contributing to
                            its visibility and academic credibility. See the above for more
                                information on NeDiMAH and its key goals. Ontology
                            development has moved forward in collaboration with DARIAH as there was
                            a considerable overlap and synergy between the two organizations.
                            Developing this ontology is necessarily more challenging and
                            time-consuming than developing TaDiRAH, which has a pragmatic
                            orientation. Nonetheless, the TaDiRAH team intends to work with the
                            NeDiMAH team to ensure that the taxonomies are interoperable to the
                            greatest extent possible.
                    
                
                
                    9. Conclusion
                    TaDiRAH is currently available in version 0.5 in several human-readable as
                        well as machine-readable forms. It has been implemented in several different
                        contexts, has been presented at several high-profile venues (including the
                        Digital Humanities Conference, see  and the Dublin
                        Core Metadata Initiative Conference, see ,
                        described in dh+lib (see , and is likely to
                        be adopted by more projects. What can be learned from TaDiRAH's brief
                        history so far is that a bottom-up approach such as the one adopted by
                        TaDiRAH can work if a small but sufficient number of people can be brought
                        together to collaborate on a common goal. In the context of a taxonomy
                        aiming to attain a certain level of consensus from the community of
                        potential users, it has been essential to quickly publish and publicize
                        preliminary versions of the taxonomy in order to gain the broadest range of
                        feedback possible. This seems particularly true in the context of a taxonomy
                        that prioritizes pragmatic adoption over theoretical soundness. The TaDiRAH
                        team has sought to learn as much as possible from previous practical
                        implementations in the same domain of digital research methods in the
                        humanities, while seeking to address issues arising in projects that
                        implement TaDiRAH. We strongly believe that the best way to move forward and
                        learn more about the strengths and possible limitations of TaDiRAH lies in
                        actual experience with using it in various contexts. In this sense, the
                        value of TaDiRAH and the true potential of the development approach
                        undertaken here will increase as more projects adopt it and feed their
                        experience into future versions of TaDiRAH. 
                
                
                    10. Acknowledgements
                    The authors would like to thank Matt Munson for his work as part of the team
                        responsible for the initial development of TaDiRAH.
                
            
