Title:  Teaching Spatial Literacy in the Classical Studies
                    Curriculum
Volume:  010
Issue:  2
Date:  7 June 2016
Abstract:  
                
                Over a decade ago, the Collaboratory for GIS and Mediterranean (CGMA) was created
                    with two stated goals: (1) to create an on-line GIS inventory of survey projects
                    in the greater Mediterranean and Europe and (2) to introduce advanced
                    undergraduates to GIS concepts through Mediterranean archaeology. Through a
                    specialized GIS course a small group of advanced undergraduate students learned
                    how to interpret map data, create effective maps, and build map hypothesis -
                    skills that are recognized as necessary for enhancing spatial thinking and thus
                    spatial literacy. In the last decade GIS technologically has changed
                    dramatically. The advent of Geospatial Semantic Web (Web 2.0) now makes it
                    possible to integrate spatial thinking concepts at all levels of the
                    undergraduate curriculum. This paper argues that spatial literacy must be more
                    intentionally integrated into the Classical Studies curriculum and illustrates
                    how we have begun to do that at DePauw University.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Over a decade ago my colleague Pedar W. Foss and I initiated the Collaboratory for GIS and
                    Mediterranean Archaeology (CGMA).We gratefully acknowledge the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation
                        for its initial support of the CGMA Project. The collaborating schools
                        included DePauw University, Millsaps College, Rhodes College, and the
                        College of Wooster. As faculty members at a liberal arts college
                    (DePauw University), we were looking for ways to integrate undergraduate
                    students into our research program and to bring our research into the classroom.
                    The original goals of CGMA were twofold: 1) to develop a web-based GIS of
                    Mediterranean archaeological survey projects and 2) to introduce undergraduates
                    to GIS and create more research opportunities for those students. We had been
                    using GIS for some time in our archaeological fieldwork and we were aware that
                    GIS technology was rapidly becoming a tool for spatial analysis in both a
                    wide-range of academic disciplines and various industries. Indeed, GIS&T
                    degree programs (Geographic Information Science & Technology) have
                    flourished across the United States in the last twenty years . In the liberal arts environment, however, courses
                    in GIS&T are rare: to-date the technology has been resource intensive and
                    there is an ongoing perception that GIS&T is a technical skill rather than
                    an academic discipline. Yet, despite the fact that we live in a world in which
                    practically everyone carries a digital globe in their pocket, the critical
                    thinking skills at the heart of GIS are surprisingly lacking amongst
                    undergraduate students. Those critical skills – the ability to locate places in
                    space and time, evaluate spatial data, and understand relationships between
                    places across space and time – are also essential for developing a nuanced
                    understanding of the ancient world. Classical Studies courses are thus well
                    suited to introducing spatial literacy skills. In this paper I argue that
                    spatial literacy should be more intentionally integrated into the Classical
                    Studies curriculum and I provide some examples from courses that we taught at
                    DePauw University. 
                Competence in spatial literacy is now widely recognized as a necessary skill for
                    college graduates seeking employment in a wide range of industries. From
                    specific training in GIS&T to more general competence in logistics and
                    marketing, students with a background in spatial studies are more competitive on
                    the job market . In 2006, the National Research
                    Council published, Learning to Think Spatially: GIS as Support System in the
                            K-12 Curriculum. Although this study focused on K-12
                    education, its conclusion that 
                        without explicit attention to [spatial literacy], we
                            cannot meet our responsibility for equipping the next generation of
                            students for life and work in the twenty-first century
                        
                     is equally applicable to the undergraduate general education curriculum.
                    Diana Sinton has defined spatial literacy as 
                        the competent and confident use of maps, mapping, and
                            spatial thinking to address ideas, situations, and problems within daily
                            life, society, and the world around us
                        
                    . To achieve a competent level of spatial literacy, one must engage in
                    activities that enhance spatial thinking, that is, the process that
                    helps link aspects of spatial literacy together. D. Sinton thus defines
                        spatial thinking as 
                        the ability to visualize and interpret location,
                            distance, direction, relationships, change, and movement over
                            space
                        
                    .
                Place, space, and time are concepts integral to analysis in Classical Studies.
                    Our discipline has always employed spatial technologies in our teaching and
                    research, from analog map sequences in textbooks depicting the shifting
                    landscapes and cultures of the ancient Mediterranean to archaeological phase
                    plans of individual sites. Classicists and archaeologists were early adopters of
                    digital technologies for organizing, visualizing, and analyzing spatial data. In
                    the last decade open-source, web-based resources have been developed by
                    Classicists to address specific research questions. Several of these projects
                    were presented at Word,
                            Space, Time, for example Orbis, RomeLab, and MAGIS (the research component
                    of the CGMA project). The Ancient World Mapping Center (AWMC) and its child projects,
                        Pelagios, Pleiades, Antiquity À-la-carte,
                    and The Barrington Atlas for mobile devices, are poised to become the
                    foundational resources for future developments. Using these resources
                    effectively, however, is not trivial. One needs a certain amount of content
                    knowledge as well as critical understanding of the source data and visualization
                    tools. In other words, one needs a degree of spatially literacy. 
                When it comes to teaching spatial technologies and spatial thinking to
                    undergraduates, Classical Studies is now somewhat behind the curve. Courses on
                    GIS in Classics and Classical Archaeology are rare (although they are
                    increasingly part of the graduate curriculum in archaeology). Not surprisingly,
                    much of the momentum to increase spatial literacy in higher education has been
                    motivated from the Geosciences, and to a lesser extent the Social Sciences . Programs such as SPACE (Spatial
                    Perspectives on Analysis for Curricular Enhancement) at the UCSB Center for
                    Spatial Studies have funded workshops for faculty seeking to increase spatial
                    thinking in their classrooms.At the 2012 Specialist Meeting on Spatial Thinking Across the Curriculum hosted by
                        Center for Spatial Studies, only three of the forty-three participants came
                        from humanities backgrounds. While the Humanities overall has begun
                    to adopt (or readopt with new technologies) spatial analysis, most of this
                    debate has remained in the area of research in Spatial Humanities and building
                    content for research .An exception is the
                        work of Mostern and Gainor (2013), who have used Google Earth with students
                        to create digital historical atlases of the Silk Road. Geospatial
                    technologies may be presented to students as methods used by archaeologists and
                    historians to investigate the ancient landscape, but students are rarely asked
                    to use those technologies in the classroom. This is understandable. Until
                    recently, high-end use of GIS applications, such as ESRI's ArchView,
                    necessitated high degree of expert knowledge of the software - never mind the
                    ability to convey the concepts. Moreover, even those professors who have a
                    background in GIS will need the support of an on-campus GIS center (or
                    equivalent technology program) to manage the software licensing, provide data
                    back-up, and assist students when the professor is unavailable.
                Despite those challenges, for some of us, integrating spatial thinking skills
                    into our courses may become a matter of survival for the Classical Studies
                    Curriculum as well as the Humanities at large. As the Humanities are generally
                    losing ground in higher education, we must continue to make the case for our
                    relevance within the larger curriculum. Bryan Alexander and Rebecca Frost Davis
                    argue that, 
                        at a time when the academic humanities seems otherwise
                            threatened and contracting, the digital humanities remains a viable
                            growth area, even a potential source of salvation for threatened
                            disciplines.
                        
                    . This may be putting too much pressure on the digital humanities and
                    commentators have cautioned against investing in Digital Humanities projects as
                    a means of financially bolstering departments in jeopardy . This is not the place to engage in that debate. The point here is that the
                    Digital Humanities, and in this example spatial technologies in particular,
                    provide a way for us to revitalize our curriculum and reimagine our pedagogy in
                    a way that engages students in our discipline and imparts transferable knowledge
                    and skills. 
                At DePauw University, we are now building off the success of the CGMA project,
                    which included a high-end GIS course, by developing low-end
                    mapping and visualization exercises into our general education courses.The
                        distinction between high-end and low-end can be read as both
                        technological and financial. High-end assignments necessitate
                        expertise that not all instructors have acquired and both the software and
                        hardware require resources not available on every college campus. On the
                        other hand, low-end assignments take advantage of free technologies
                        with a less significant learning curve. Like many Classical Studies
                    programs, our department is able to maintain major offerings in Greek and Latin
                    by teaching large sections of general education courses. But, we are
                    increasingly asked to justify our existence based not only on the significance
                    of our content but also on the skills we impart to our students. Critical
                    thinking, reading, and writing are no longer sufficient; we now need to be
                    incorporating the intentional teaching of the spatial thinking skills that are
                    necessary for a wide range of careers. 
                The advent of the Geospatial Semantic Web (Web 2.0), which allows users to
                    access, produce, and share map data through sites such as Google Maps and
                    applications like Google Earth, makes it possible to integrate spatial thinking
                    concepts at various levels of the curriculum. Our students use this technology
                    everyday, from mapping directions on their smart phones to geo-tagging their
                    photos on Instagram. Teaching spatial concepts in a hands-on manner is no longer
                    limited by hardware and software requirements. Any classroom with a computer and
                    an Internet connection can access an array of resources useful for teaching.
                    Sinton and Schultz  provide a list of ideas and resources
                    for integrating mapping and spatial visualization exercises into the classroom.
                    In what follows, I highlight a high end and a low end approach to
                    teaching GIS and spatial literacy in the Classical Studies curriculum at DePauw
                    University.
            

                High-End GIS Teaching in Classical Studies: The CGMA Course
                Over the last two decades, graduate programs in Classical Archaeology have begun
                    to offer courses, or at least training, on the use of GIS in Archaeology. At the
                    undergraduate level, however, such opportunities are less common. Students may
                    get some field training in GIS, if they happen to participate in an
                    archaeological field project utilizing GIS, or they may elect to take a GIS
                    course in a Geoscience department. Yet, GIS training has not only become
                    expected for graduate work in Classical Archaeology, GIS concepts (i.e., the
                    fundamentals of spatial literacy) are necessary for success in a wide range of
                    careers. With this in mind, Pedar W. Foss and I, along with colleagues at three
                    other undergraduate institutions, designed the Collaboratory for GIS and
                    Mediterranean Archaeology (CGMA) to
                    provide archaeological research opportunities to undergraduates and develop a
                    discipline specific undergraduate course in GIS. 
                On the research side, we constructed a web-based, platform-independent, GIS for
                    Mediterranean wide survey archaeology. Mediterranean Archaeology GIS (MAGIS) was released in 2007 and
                    continues to operate. On the teaching side, undergraduate students were involved
                    with the project through a seminar class, grants and internships to work on
                    MAGIS, and participation in the meetings with the CGMS advisory board. For the
                    purposes of this paper, I will focus on the seminar class. Further information
                    on how we built MAGIS and the involvement of the students can be found on the
                    project website. 
                The CGMA seminar was designed to be taught over the Internet synchronously
                    between the four participating institutions. The course has been taught every
                    two to three years since 2003, with a longer hiatus between 2010 and
                        2014.In the most recent iteration, P. Foss has broadened the course
                        not only to address GIS but also other trends in electronic archaeology such
                        as gaming simulation and digital modeling. This version of the course was
                        taught for the first time in fall 2014, after the original version of this
                        paper was presented at the 2013 DCA conference. Details can be found in the
                        syllabus on the CGMA website: http://cgma.depauw.edu/seminar.html. Technological support
                    was originally provided by the Associated Colleges of the South through their
                    course delivery system, which has now been subsumed under the National Institute
                    for Technology in Liberal Education (NITLE),When NITLE became involved we had plans to make the
                        course nationally available, but that has not yet become a reality.
                    and by the GIS centers on the participating campuses. The course begins with
                    lectures, exercises, and discussions on the history, theory, and method of both
                    Mediterranean survey archaeology and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). In
                    the first iteration of the course, students contributed data to MAGIS, but the
                    core of the course has always been a multi-stage practicum on GIS. Working in
                    teams on each campus, the participants design a local survey project (that can
                    be completed within the semester), collect data, create a database, map the
                    information in a GIS, and develop some preliminary analyses of their project.
                    Students have to write a report on their projects and present their results to
                    the rest of the class. We have also encouraged students to participate in the
                    annual Sunoikosis Undergraduate Research Symposium. 
                The heart of the CGMA course is the practicum, a semester-long GIS research
                    project that is designed and implemented by the students on each campus. The
                    work is divided into five stages from formulating questions to database design
                    to collection to implementation to reporting of results (see sample syllabi at
                        http://cgma.depauw.edu/seminar.html). The topics have varied widely
                    over the years, including Elvis Presley's Performance venues in Memphis, TN, a
                    historical GIS of the churches in Greencastle (dubbed "God in Greencastle" by
                    the students), and a survey of the old perimeter of Jackson, MS prior to the
                    Civil War fire that ravaged the town. We have learned that the more manageable
                    projects are either campus-based or conducted in local cemeteries. In the
                    example illustrated here (Figure 1), students at DePauw University surveyed the
                    oldest cemetery in Greencastle, IN. They began with a historical map retrieved
                    from city archives. The cemetery was too big to survey completely in the
                    allotted time, so they did a 20% sample; the 10x10 meter grids are recognizable
                    by the clusters of data points superimposed on the aerial map in the GIS. In
                    their initial research proposal, the students had hoped to trace the development
                    of the cemetery over time. However, it became clear that a 20% sample size was
                    too small to generate enough useful data. 

                
                    GIS of the Hanna Street Cemetery in Greencastle, IN made in ArcGIS by
                        DePauw University students for the CGMA course. 
                    
                

                This in itself is an important lesson and the students learned that, if they were
                    to pursue this project beyond the limits of a semester-long course, they would
                    have to redesign their collection practices. The CGMA course is, thus, more
                    concerned with process than product. In the assessment
                    of the students' work more emphasis is placed on their ability to describe and
                    reflect on their process and progress than on the final GIS product. At each of
                    the five stages of the practicum, the student groups report to the class on
                    their progress and on any questions or problems that they had encountered. 
                Despite the problems the students encounter along the way, the CGMA seminar has
                    been successful at introducing advanced undergraduates to GIS concepts, i.e.,
                    spatial thinking, and to methods and theories of survey archaeology. Some of our
                    former students have gone on to graduate work in Classics and archaeology. By
                    necessity, however, the course is limited to a few students from each of the
                    participating campuses. Moreover, the course practicum demands a lot of
                    supervision and resources. The software — we use ESRI's ArcGIS suite — is not
                    easy to learn. Faculty members teaching the course need a level of expertise,
                    often outside of their own academic training. Maintenance of the computers,
                    servers, and software also requires significant technical support not available
                    on every campus. This has been the main hurdle in expanding the CGMA course
                    through NITLE. 
            

                Low-End GIS Teaching in Classical Studies: Examples of web-based geospatial
                    assignments
                The CGMA seminar is not a general education course and we are now seeking to
                    introduce GIS concepts, and hence spatial literacy, to students throughout the
                    Classical Studies curriculum. As noted, the Geospatial Semantic Web (Web 2.0)
                    now makes this possible. With this proliferation of map 'data', there is an even
                    more pressing need for undergraduate students to understand precisely what maps
                    can depict and what they can obscure. While virtual globes are a far cry
                    from actual GIS technologies, as they have limited analytical capabilities, they
                    can be an effective introduction to spatial thinking and a means to scaffold
                    that skill through the curriculum ,
                    something most liberal arts curricula have developed with other critical
                    thinking skills, such as writing and quantitative reasoning. It is also the case
                    that the highly sophisticated, quantitative tools of GIS are, in fact, not
                    always necessary to do research in the humanities. Harris et al. argue that the
                    Geospatial Semantic Web 
                        is capable of providing the core of a humanities GIS
                            able to integrate, synthesize, and display humanities and spatial data
                            through one simple and ubiquitous Web interface
                        
                    . They suggest that web-based interfaces can serve as a Pareto GIS,
                    that is, that for the Humanities 20% of GIS capability may be sufficient to
                    produce 80% of the outcomes. 
                        The Geospatial Semantic Web may indeed become the
                            cornerstone of the future humanities GIS
                        
                    . For Classical Studies, thanks to the Ancient World Mapping Center,
                        Antiquity
                        À-la-carte now provides Mediterranean World specific web-based GIS
                    interface that can be used to create customized maps with layering and drawing
                    features that fall between a virtual globe and a full-scale GIS
                        application.Antiquity À-la-carte was released after the assignments
                        presented here were developed. Moving forward, this may prove to be the best
                        web-based resource for teaching spatial thinking concepts in Classical
                        Studies.
                The following examples use Google Maps for course content and assignments to
                    introduce spatial thinking concepts to students and enhance their appreciation
                    for the role of topography and geography in the formation of human societies.
                    These examples are all drawn from classical archaeology courses but the
                    framework of the assignments and the skill set that they are designed to address
                    could be easily modified to work Greek and Roman civilization as well as
                    Classical literature courses, or, indeed, any history or culture course. 
                The first two examples are from the 200-level archaeology sequence at DePauw.
                    Those courses are designed for students at the sophomore/junior-level some of
                    whom are majors in Classical Studies, but the majority of whom enroll for
                    general interest and/or to fulfill the arts and humanities requirement of the
                    general education curriculum. In CLST 254: Hellenistic and Roman Art and
                    Archaeology, P. Foss uses Google Maps to enhance the students' experience
                    learning about Ostia Antica. He marks the site of Ostia Antica using different
                    pin designations for different types of structures and provides links to
                    information from another web resource (Figure 2). This example leverages an
                    existing (and well maintained) digital resource, http://www.ostia-antica.org/. In
                    addition to reading about Ostia in their textbook, students are required to use
                    the site in a dynamic way, following connections that catch their interest and
                    developing new questions based on their visual analysis of the site. It can take
                    some time on the part of the professor to build a resource like this, but once
                    it is completed it can be saved and modified for future use. 

                
                    GIS of the Hanna Street Cemetery in Greencastle, IN made in ArcGIS by
                        DePauw University students for the CGMA course. 
                    
                

                In this first example, the professor creates a dynamic map and the students
                    follow along. The current generation of students, however, is accustomed not
                    only to referencing digital maps for information but also contributing their own
                    content in the form of location data and digital images. What they are less
                    familiar with, and needs to be intentionally taught, is how to generate new
                    information by connecting data with specific places in order to ask questions
                    about the use of space. The second example attempts to address this issue. 
                In CLST 263: Greek, Etruscan, and Persian Art and Archaeology, I assign an
                    article by Catherine Morgan that examines the relationship between the
                    distribution of sanctuaries in the Corinthia and the development of the Greek
                        polis (city-state) in the early Iron Age
                        . The original article asks readers to think
                    about how the distribution of sanctuaries in the landscape can be related to
                    social and political developments in early Corinth. Students have trouble
                    visualizing the connections that Morgan attempts to evoke because they are not
                    familiar with the topography of the region and they have no idea how far it is
                    from the sanctuary at Isthmia, for example, to the city of Corinth. Moreover,
                    their ability to spatially comprehend the landscape is not helped by the fact
                    that the only map published with the article is a simple line drawing with dots
                    indicating cities and sanctuaries in the regions; no topography is depicted nor
                    is there a distance scale.
                To enhance their understanding of the article, I ask my students to create their
                    own map of the sanctuaries and cities Morgan references; they can use either
                    Google Maps or Bing Maps. The goal of the assignment is to produce an
                    interactive map that allows students of early Greek history to gain a better
                    understanding of the sacred landscape in the Corinthia between 1000 and 800 BCE.
                    Students are told to accurately mark the sites and to use other tools to
                    indicate area and distance between sites. They are also required to provide some
                    description of each marker and encouraged to include photos and/or links to
                    external sites. Once they have marked the sites, they are instructed to examine
                    the relationships between the cities and the sanctuaries taking into account the
                    topography (i.e., they are supposed to look at the satellite imagery) and write
                    an analysis. They are also warned that simply Googling site names does
                    not necessary give them accurate locations for the ancient sites. They are
                    encouraged to use other web-based resources, such as Pleiades, an on-line spatial
                    gazetteer of ancient sites, to geo-reference the ancient sites in Google or
                    Bing. 
                The results of this assignment display a range of student enthusiasm as well as
                    capability. In Figure 3, Student A took advantage of the tools available in
                    Google for both display and annotation. They integrated information from
                    Morgan's article with the sites on the map (although they did not supplement
                    this with reference to other web sites or images) and they provided analysis of
                    the physical relationships between the sites. However, they did not necessarily
                    take into account the visible topography. This was one of the few students to
                    place the sanctuary at Isthmia in the correct location. In a second example
                    (Figures 4 and 5), Student B provided a lot of information in the pop-up boxes,
                    including links to useful websites. They also took advantage of the drawing
                    tools in Google Maps to highlight individual features at each site.
                    Unfortunately, they were not precise in their placement of sites, Isthmia is
                    marked at the modern city and Perachora is 'off' slightly from the site. Student
                    C really experimented with the symbolism available in Google Maps (Figure 6),
                    using different pin icons and colors to indicate different categories of
                    information. This student also did not assume a straight line between places as
                    Student A did, rather their route from Corinth to Isthmia follows the modern
                    road (I am not sure how they determined the routes across waterways). This
                    demonstrates that Student C understands that the spaces between places determine
                    relationships, but they relied on the modern determination of the relationship
                    rather than considering the physical environment as it would have existed in
                    antiquity. 

                
                    Student A's Google Map of the Corinthia in the early Iron Age created for
                        CLST 263 at DePauw University.
                    
                

                
                    Student B's Google Map of the Corinthia in the early Iron Age created for
                        CLST 263 at DePauw University.
                    
                

                
                    Detail of Student B's Google Map of the Corinthia in the early Iron Age
                        created for CLST 263 at DePauw University.
                    
                

                
                    Student C's Google Map of the Corinthia in the early Iron created for CLST
                        253 at DePauw University. 
                    
                

                Our third example comes from an upper level topics course in archaeology, CLST
                    310: Ancient Britain. This course is designed for majors in Classical Studies as
                    well as students in allied fields such as history, anthropology, art history,
                    and geology. In this case, the mapping assignment is one component of a
                    semester-long research project. The professor, P. Foss, provides an example of a
                    Google Map that documents prehistoric sites in Orkney (Scotland) by drawing
                    outlines around the sites and providing information with links to reliable
                    websites (Figure 7). The students are then asked to build their own maps of an
                    ancient landscape from a set of choices: Thornborough (Yorkshire), Avebury, or
                    Stonehenge. They are required to research the sites on their own and then create
                    their map by marking, with an outline and/or place pin, the important sites.
                    Students are instructed to make use of color, line-weights, transparency, etc.,
                    in order to convey meaningful information. They are also expected to annotate
                    each site with pertinent information from their sources, which could include
                    links to relevant web sites. 

                
                    Annotated Google Map of prehistoric sites in Orkney (Scotland) created by
                        P. Foss for use in CLST 310 at DePauw University.
                    
                

                Again with this assignment, students display varying levels of attention to
                    detail and presentation strategy. In Figure 8, Student D's map of Avebury looks
                    relatively impressive graphically and in terms of the data. A closer look,
                    however, reveals that while they include some links to scholarly articles, they
                    also link to a 1969 public domain book that, although not intrinsically
                    un-scholarly, is woefully out of date. Of course, this sort of 'mistake' affords
                    the opportunity to talk to the students about careful evaluation of sources
                    before posting them publically. 

                
                    Student D's Google Map of Avebury created for CLST 310 at DePauw
                        University.
                    
                

                In Figure 9, we can see that Student E's map has some serious deficiencies. They
                    did not bother to correlate the satellite image with maps of the Stonehenge
                    landscape that would have provided them with accurate names (rather than
                    'possible settlement') and date ranges for the sites. It does not appear that
                    they even zoomed in to look closely at the satellite image as the pin for
                    Stonehenge itself is placed in the parking lot of the (old) site museum rather
                    than on the actual stone circle. They also did not experiment with the drawing
                    capabilities of Google Maps to make their map visually interesting as well as
                    informative. 

                
                    Student E's Google Map of Stonehenge created for CLST 310 at DePauw
                        University.
                    
                


                In both the CLST 263 and the CLST 310 assignments, students are asked to
                    demonstrate several key skills in spatial literacy: 1) the accurate
                    identification of sites or features in a landscape, 2) the use of cartographic
                    symbols to convey meaning, 3) the presentation of useful data connected to a
                    specific place, and 4) the visual analysis of a landscape based on the
                    integration of that data with the spatial relationships between sites. The fact
                    that some of our students cannot even accomplish skill 1 affirms for us the
                    importance of spatial thinking exercises in our Classical Studies courses.
                    Students need to practice spatial thinking skills in the same way that they need
                    to practice writing. Thus, assignments need to be scaffolded and repetitive,
                    helping students build a set of skills that they can apply. They should also be
                    given the opportunity to fix their mistakes and we should emphasize
                        process over product. 
                While Classical Studies may not be an appropriate curricular space for a full-on
                    GIScience course, we can certainly utilize the available technologies to enhance
                    our students' spatial skills and at the same time challenge them to use those
                    technologies for critical analysis of real questions about the ancient
                    Mediterranean world. The Geospatial Semantic Web (Web 2.0) presents an
                    opportunity to advance teaching in Classical Studies beyond the textbook
                    two-dimensional map. Students, at all levels of the curriculum, can be
                    encouraged to take advantage of this technology to create their own map content,
                    visualize spatial relationships between place, and develop questions about those
                    relationships. This is not just a cool tool to get students engaged with
                    Classics, it is dynamic way to introduce spatial thinking into the curriculum
                    (implicitly or explicitly), provide stepping-stones towards spatial literacy for
                    our students, and enhance our course content. 
            
