Title:  The Why and How of Middleware
Volume:  010
Issue:  2
Date:  19 May 2016
Abstract:  
                The presentation, publication and research platforms used for scholarly work in
                    the Digital Humanities embody argument structures that are not always explicitly
                    acknowledged. This article examines these platforms, and their protocols, as
                        middleware that includes such purpose-designed projects as Omeka, and
                    Scalar, and general purpose ones such as Drupal and PowerPoint, to ask how they
                    embody rhetorical assumptions at every level of production (from back-end
                    assumptions about what constitutes the smallest unit of discourse, to the
                    front-end modes of presentation and organization of display). It extends the
                    concept of middleware to include physical and social presentation spaces,
                    activities (such as witnessing), to ask how these, also, perform the rhetorical
                    activity of enunciation, positionality, and other discursive modalities.
            
Full Body Text: 

                The Problem
                 The way research questions, data, and material manifestations come together in
                    project presentations poses key questions for the digital humanities. We propose
                    that thinking about middleware as a concept and as concrete platforms can
                    help us pay more attention to the ways tools structure our arguments or express
                    thinking in protocols programmed into these platforms. Our concept of platform
                    is broad and includes physical spaces of display and circumstances of
                    presentation, as well as tools for creating such presentations. By paying
                    attention to middleware we hope to show how it functions as a tool for
                    humanities scholars, technology experts, information specialists and designers
                    as they think through and articulate intellectual arguments
                        materially in a digital age. Part of our premise is that though
                    platform structures are often used for their ease or familiarity, they imprint
                    their format features on our thinking and predispose us to organize our thoughts
                    and arguments in conformance with their structuring principles — often from the
                    very beginning of a project’s conception. The same can be said of print forms
                    and formats, and the notion of middleware is not meant to suggest that we are
                    concerned only with digital platforms. 
                Understanding connections among the conceptual layer of these platforms as tools
                    for use is a major challenge that requires integrated critical-material
                    sensitivity and strong conceptual-experimental work. We are not interested in
                    trivializing the complexity of this challenge, but rather suggest that the way
                    we approach this question in all its complexity is likely to be an important
                    factor for understanding the conditioning performed by digital platforms and for
                    practical engagement with imagining and making new or customized platforms. A
                    key question for the digital humanities and the humanities at large is how we
                    can create middleware designed for our purposes — or perhaps, from
                    our purposes.
                Wherein lies the difficulty? We suggest that there are several obstacles that
                    make the creation of critically aware, intellectually meaningful, and materially
                    expressive and deliberately structured arguments challenging. Here they are. 
                
                     1. Inattention to Material support of Knowledge Production 
                    First, the humanities have a tendency not to be critically attuned to the
                        material features of their own contemporary knowledge production. In spite
                        of recent, useful, work in Software and Platform studies, and related fields
                        on the structural workings and assumptions of these elements ; ; , there is very little critical work on
                        presentation software (such as PowerPoint, for instance, which is
                        ubiquitous), or blogs, or the web as a default platform for digital work in
                        the digital humanities, or software like Omeka as a conditioning device
                        shaping online exhibits (or archives and other presentations). Who has
                        looked seriously at the rhetorical structure that common platforms such as
                        Scalar, Drupal, or WordPress impose on arguments? Scalar and Omeka have
                        developed from within the digital humanities communities, and their features
                        offer a good study of how their designs position them in relation to more
                        domain-agnostic platforms like WordPress or PowerPoint, whose market
                        saturation is a testimony to their supposedly generic character.
                     This often uncritical uptake continues a long tradition of ignoring the ways
                        embodiment and argument work in analogue formats, of course, where texts are
                        generally considered without regard to their instantiation in fonts,
                        layouts, or other features of material production. The complex
                        intertextuality of a codex book or the narrative implications of a display
                        in architectural space are not always given their due as an integral part of
                        the production of a work or the experience of it. Designers and architects
                        are trained to think about the ways formal organization of graphical or
                        physical space factors into the production of experience and/or meaning —
                        not in a determinative way, but as an integral aspect of a system of
                        conventions and codes. We come to take for granted the relegation of certain
                        features of argument to footnotes, as surely as we accept the role of the
                        pantry in storing an inventory of goods, though the status of the stored or
                        subordinate entities may be as much an effect as an inherent quality in each
                        case.
                
                
                    2. Attachment to a Service Model of Implementation
                    Second, the digital humanities often seem over-constrained by a service model
                        of implementation. In spite of much talk of the collaboration between
                        intellectual and technical dimensions of projects, little discussion of the
                        argument structure of design has emerged to show how methodological and
                        technical work embodies critical issues. We have hardly any examples of
                        projects whose execution can be abstracted into an
                            argument. A striking contrast is Donald Presziosi’s reading of the
                            ritual procession up the hill and through the Parthenon, with the
                            orchestrated eyelines and views, or certain readings of the graphical
                            structure of poetic works as an integral semantic armature. In
                        other words, we have precious few cases of how a work argues
                        through its structuring protocols, instead focusing on what the
                        argument or database structures might be. A critical edition is not a
                        multitext, for instance, and the demonstration of the difference between
                        them would necessarily engage with the argument structure of the platforms
                        that support them.
                     With few exceptions, digital humanists have not taken up the critical tools
                        of literary and historical studies and made them part of the implementation
                        of projects by insisting on interpretative rather than declarative modes of
                        presentation (for exceptions, see Mandell 2012; Klein 2014; Chang, Dooley,
                        and Tuovinen 2002; Emerson 2014; Portela 2013) . Humanists continue to be
                        seduced by tools to whose workings they give limited attention, so they
                        execute their projects (e.g. in network analysis software) without knowing
                        how the results were generated. In traditional humanities, this would be
                        like having a machine perform a literary interpretation that one then
                        explained, but could not account for in terms of its formation.
                            Supposing the reading were as basic as putting all words in a
                            text in alphabetical order, something a computer does handily, and
                            which, then, would require a human reader to interpret in a meaningful
                            way for its structure not merely its word list.
                        Instead, digital humanists need to push critical issues into the
                        implementation.
                     The difference between Scalar, with its intent to support customization of
                        argument structures, and WordPress, which has a hierarchical page, theme,
                        and sub-theme structure, provides a useful contrast. Both have relational
                        databases in their back-end infrastructure (which in itself is a
                        conditioning factor, cf. ), but Scalar is meant
                        to allow multiple points of entry in a presentation, and to support widely
                        varied pathways that are not strictly hierarchical. Whether these
                        distinctions are sufficient to create a critical difference can be debated,
                        but at least they are evident to a front-end user/reader and to an author
                        starting the composition process. Data structures remain a rather unfamiliar
                        area of compositional competence for most humanists, however, and this is
                        crucial since the middleware platforms are all structuring and structured
                        environments. This quickly brings us to the next obstacle.
                
                
                    3. Need of Competencies
                     Humanistic scholars who engage with digital projects sometimes seem to leave
                        their critical sensibility behind with regard to the rhetoric of the digital
                        manifestations they imagine and create. Paradoxically, such projects can
                        demonstrate more positivism than the positivism we often (and sometimes
                        erroneously) associate with science and technology. References to a digital
                        artifact displayed on screen are often stated in a construction that begins,
                            This is... (rather than This is constructed as...and by... to
                            show...) as if the digitization, display, and other features of
                        production did not factor into what is present on the screen. Also, scholars
                        trained traditionally in humanistic disciplines often do not to have the
                        methodological competence and computational rigor for working with data and
                        materials. The digital humanities has a weak track record of incorporating
                        the critical insights developed in critical theory into database structures
                        and ontologies into the design of projects (see e.g. ).
                     These critical engagements are harder than they look — what constitutes a
                        data structure that incorporates cultural diversity, exposes inequities of
                        gender, or shows biases of nationalist perspectives? The question is not
                        simply answered by addressing the way a data structure is populated, what is
                        put into its fields or tags, for instance, but how the organization of the
                        fields and tag sets already prescribes what can be included and how these
                        inclusions are put into signifying relations with each other. (An easy case
                        for understanding this is thinking about how gender might be a structured
                        data category. Is a database set up in a binary, two-column, male-female
                        pair of fields? Or is there a single field in which any number of values —
                        some controlled vocabulary and others free text — could be entered? Or are
                        there multiple fields across a spectrum of possibilities with pick
                            one or pick all that apply options. Or can we imagine another
                        type of data organization altogether to accommodate for a continuum or
                        intersectional model of gender?) An argument is made in the ways the
                        database itself is structured, in advance of the values it contains.
                        Cultural values, terms of belief, political attitudes, sentiments, emotional
                        attitudes, and nearly every aspect of human experience have culturally
                        specific, historically determined, and individually inflected expressions of
                        these areas. These are expressed in texts, images, performances, and rituals
                        of all kinds. As we re-represent these in data structures, we have to ask
                        how these structures can be expanded to have some of the sophistication of
                        poetic or aesthetic ones. The critical tools to answer these questions
                        exist, but they come more often from information studies and archival
                        studies than digital humanities. And when they do, they are couched in
                        cultural studies terms of critique rather than as features that support
                        informed practice and alternative design.
                     Some of this is a labor/training issue — learning enough computational skill
                        to sketch arguments and ideas in digital form is a non-trivial
                        matter. Some is a cultural issue — the critical reflections on data
                        structures and ideologies that are developed in information studies rarely
                        find their way into the humanities (where the information professionals are
                        too often mischaracterized as mere technologists). 
                
                
                    4. Absence of Design Knowledge
                    A lack of developed material aesthetics and incorporation of design processes
                        (such as prototyping) into the digital humanities and the humanities means
                        that the material manifestations are often not fully developed. Platforms
                        are often adopted by default. The focus on digitalized cultural heritage in
                        the digital humanities has lead to substantial effort being spent on
                        creating datasets as content (digitizing the papers of someone) rather than
                        understanding the necessity for designing interpretative frameworks (how
                        should the digitization structure present the papers of a political figure
                        versus a poet?). This is true in physical spaces, human circumstances (the
                        witnessing example discussed below), and platforms (printed formats,
                        software, and so on).
                     Insufficient resources are expended on designing such frameworks, though
                        these workflows could make for much more powerful outcomes and notions of
                        how to operationalize humanities concepts in digital scholarship. The
                        expertise of a documentary editor, for example, familiar with the many
                        systems of relations (textual, social, political, etc.) in which the
                        documents are active agents, might not have a way to push the hierarchal
                        organization of Omeka, with its files, folders, and collections to reflect
                        the multi-layered cross-currents in the documents. Such an editor might
                        decide, as an alternative, to use Drupal for its taxonomies and elaborate
                        metadata capacity, only to be confronted with the lack of structure in the
                        way that platform organizes its underlying repository. If Omeka provides a
                        view of the collections of documents and Drupal puts them into a single
                        holding pool, then is that materially significant or simply a matter of a
                        compromise and modification?
                     The argument structures implicit in these platform design decisions force
                        the user to work within built-in constraints that have implications for the
                        way the front end display will expose the documents. Simple issues such as
                        layering documents, or being able to pull multiple versions of a document
                        into view in a single screen, are almost impossible to do on the fly unless
                        the middleware has built these drag and drop or layered features into the
                        design. To enact a comparison across multiple digitized images, the user
                        might create a work-around by opening multiple windows — making an argument
                        through the desktop as a middleware platform, with the limitations built
                        into that environment (including the lack of memory of arguments made
                        over time through the placement of desktop windows). Our screen interface is
                        a powerfully ubiquitous middleware — but how often do we reflect on the
                        rhetorical difference between a swipe and a click? If the effect is to
                        change the screen display in each instance, does it matter that one seems to
                        push content from view in an infinite flip-chart and the other seems to
                        reveal specific content on request?
                    While this description of difficulties certainly stereotypes and simplifies
                        complex interrelations, and does not list numerous exceptions and much
                        excellent work carried out on different levels, it addresses weaknesses both
                        in the digital humanities and the humanities at large. The obstacles —
                        attention to material platforms, need to think beyond a service model of
                        implementation, lack of technical competencies, and absence of design
                        knowledge–are all relevant to the discussion of middleware from a
                        development perspective and from a critical analytic one. 
                     A few notes on terminology and definitions: We see the digital humanities as
                        a broadly conceived area and contact zone closely aligned with the
                        humanities disciplines and other relevant actors. It is an inclusive field
                        with intellectual, aesthetic and technological engagement and drive. Much
                        work in the digital humanities is organized around projects, and when we use
                            project we do this with the realization that projects are not the
                        only organizational form for work in the digital humanities. Also, the idea
                        of projects in the digital humanities is linked to certain epistemic
                        commitments going back to the early days of humanities computing.
                     What we are suggesting is a way of thinking critically about the design at
                        work in the digital humanities, whether done in projects or not. We use the
                        term platform to describe infrastructural, scholarly and cultural
                        systems. However, we recognize that the platform metaphor can be problematic
                        in foregrounding technological resources and obscuring what is underneath
                             and in suggesting flatness and stability
                             or a kind of stage on which work is
                        performed — rather than the scaffolding that structures the work.
                        Furthermore, platforms are discursive as much as material artefacts, and
                        their social, cultural and economic embedding often calls for sales
                            speak from the makers (whether commercial, academic or both) and a
                        unitary, positivistic view of the platform shared by makers and users.
                
            

                Introducing Middleware
                Platforms that support digital humanities activity abound. As noted above, many
                    are purpose-made from within the community — such as Omeka, DocTracker, Scalar,
                    Zotero and others adopted effectively to create or manage content — such as
                    WordPress, Drupal, Islandora, Collective Access, or the ordinary stuff of
                    slideware and publishing platforms such as PowerPoint, Prezi, etc. These are
                    convenient and effective vehicles for structuring offline and web-based
                    presentations of cultural materials (documents, images, maps, sound and moving
                    image files) within the framework of intellectual arguments. But each raises
                    questions about how the platforms themselves frame arguments, define and delimit
                    what can be said through the structuring principles of its design. These
                    questions guide our examination of what we are terming middleware, the
                    platforms that sit between the front end of user experience and the back-end of
                    information architecture, data models and concepts. How do they work in
                    structuring what can and cannot be expressed, presented, or argued in the
                    enunciative system (more on the relevance of this concept in a moment) of our
                    projects? 
                 Middleware might, on first reflection, seem to be everything in general and
                    nothing in particular — just as the codex book is a highly specific structure
                    that accommodates itself to multiple disciplines and discursive forms
                    (anthologies, novels, manuals, textbooks, reference guides, and so on). But the
                    ways formal structures impose their imprint on thought and argument, and the
                    ways enunciative operations work, are not limited to the domain of digital
                    humanities. Friedrich Nietzsche, railing against the format of the school essay
                    as a form whose imprint had ruined intellectual life, was making an argument
                    against the way the constraints of middleware function . The school essay had conditioned thinking, made
                    it formulaic by its structure and organization. Architect Lars Lerup, in his
                    work in the 1980s on the no-family house was making a similar argument
                    about domestic architecture and the imposition of the program of the nuclear
                    family into organizing principles for space to accommodate its activities . Middleware might have agency, the way
                        witnessing calls forth certain aspects of experience into an
                    apparently objective record (as discussed by  and
                    others in archival studies, like , who argue that
                    witnessing is constitutive, not passive). It might be as literal as the ways an
                    academic or institutional space structures some possibilities and excludes
                    others (as per Shannon Mattern’s observations on library architectures, see ). But our discussion of middleware will focus on
                    platforms, data structures, formats, and ontologies that have quickly
                    conventionalized and thus naturalized our ways of thinking about creative and
                    intellectual production in the digital humanities.
                 A conceptual dimension of production, like the architectural program referenced
                    above, is different from a platform or a physical space. While we are not trying
                    to collapse these into a single category of coercive technology or instrumental
                    form, we do want to stress the analogies and connections. Our work is mediated
                    by environments and assumptions that are not determinative, but may be defining
                    in more subtle ways. In each case, format elements become formatting features of
                    a system, actively contributing to the way that system works, and in its
                    working, allows for some assumptions to go unnoticed, some possibilities to be
                    supported, and some aspects of argument to be achieved only with extreme
                    difficulty or compensatory adjustment. Our purpose is to expose these workings,
                    and to make their assumptions a part of the conversation about scholarly
                    argument in the digital environment.
                 Platforms, spaces and tools are designed, inhabited and used by people. They are
                    inscribed socially, culturally, and as the result of negotiation over time. The
                    notion of middleware should be taken to encompass the temporal entangledness of
                    different layers, perspectives and use patterns that make up intellectual and
                    material programs. Intellectual middleware does not describe a static situation,
                    but rather a changing set of protocols, conventions and assumptions.
                    Furthermore, there is an ecology of systems and platforms at any given time, and
                    while there may not be a de facto choice in many situations (e.g. the
                    institution may require the use of specific platforms), at other times there can
                    be agency in choosing and adapting platforms. As we show below, such choices can
                    be informed by carefully considering the intellectual middleware of such
                    platforms and systems.
            

                Middleware and the Digital Humanities
                To date, we could argue that the digital humanities suffers from an overall lack
                    of scholarly impact. Very few examples can be cited of achievements that have
                    had a substantial influence within a discipline or been intellectually
                    comparable to other significant work in humanities fields. Projects may
                        support research, but they have had little to contribute
                        as research to their home disciplines or the humanities more
                        broadly. A project like the Walt Whitman Archive, for example, is
                        clearly research, substantive in all ways, but it is never cited for its
                        arguments, only as a resource. Its makers would argue, and rightfully, I
                        think, that it does contain rhetorical features, but these are not readily
                        extracted or paraphrased. This is not the fault of the design of the
                    projects, but perhaps, underscores the limits of claims for what the
                        digital contributes to the humanities that is specifically
                        humanistic. Data mining, text analysis, and visualization tools used
                    for or with humanistic corpora produce results that do not deviate in the least
                    from those produced on social science materials, for instance (by contrast, the
                    reading of a poetic work would be considered anomalous if its techniques were
                    applied to a passage in an accounting text). Obviously in some circles
                        such a reading would be hailed as a triumph of conceptual work and poetic
                        imagination. Coming from the other direction, software designers
                    responsible for some of the tools for analysis and display are calling for
                    humanist scholars using these to give intellectual credit for the structure of
                    those displays as expressions of the intellectual design of the software. A
                    Gephi diagram is not a natural expression of structured data, it is instead a
                    distinct expression in a system authored by a programmer responsible for the
                    coming-into-being of that visual form in a precise form. This is a crucial point
                    as well, since it makes clear that what passes for a mere tool is anything but —
                    it is a structuring argument built on top of and expressing data whose own
                    lifecycle of production is usually obscured. 
                At stake in thinking about middleware directly is the need to pay precise
                    attention to the way tools structure our arguments or express thinking in
                    protocols programmed into the platform. Common platforms — Omeka, Scalar,
                    PowerPoint, WordPress etc. — do not simply display content any more than
                    a network (e.g. Gephi) diagram does. Highly specific material conditions
                    organize production at every level. The very nature of what constitutes a file,
                    the smallest unit of semantic value, the syntax of connections and relations,
                    means of manipulation or use of intellectual content is determined by the
                    platform’s capacities. Middleware is a set of mediating and remediating
                    protocols. It introduces semantic inflection through organization (are files in
                    trees, folders, flat structures, collections or linked through taxonomies?). If
                    middleware tends to disappear, it is not because it is transparent, but because
                    it sits in an in-between space, between content and consumption as a black box
                    of procedures and organizational operations invisible to view. When we go to the
                    theater, we know there is a text, a play, activity backstage and we see the play
                    unfold between the opening and closing of the curtains. Unless it is a
                    self-conscious modern work of experimental or existential theater, we are not
                    constantly called to attend to the material features of production through every
                    instance of the performance. The middleware of stage, stagecraft, lighting
                    systems, scale and size of the theater, sightlines, and other elements that
                    structure the experience throughout disappear from attention. When we take a
                    moment to consider the specific features of that construct — wings, props,
                    lights, up and down stage areas of action — the mediating conventions pop into
                    view. These elements are what make the production different in character and
                    experience from a work seen on a puppet stage or in a sports arena. The very
                    orientation of the proscenium stage to its audience is a fundamental act with
                    rhetorical force. The incommensurable quality of these three experiences —
                    puppet play, theater performance, arena event — demonstrates the structuring
                    effect of middleware. The same analysis can be applied to analog materials, to
                    the conventions and protocols of print, the features that make a book with a
                    scholarly apparatus rhetorically distinct from a collection of poems or a novel,
                    a newspaper, a phone directory, and other printed matter. 
                Our focus on digital humanities requires some narrowing for the sake of argument.
                    Middleware was invoked, above, as a term that includes witnessing,
                    databases,
                    content management systems or platforms, and physical
                        infrastructure. What does that mean in the context of digital
                    humanities? Witnessing is not equivalent to or interchangeable with the
                    testimony being heard, recorded, absorbed, listened to, or transcribed.
                    Witnessing is a mode of attention, a structuring mode. Even before it confers
                    value, weight, or significance, it makes testimony into substance. Witnessing
                    is, fundamentally, an act of structuring a discourse, bringing it into being in
                    a framework of emphases and selections. It is not the content of the testimony,
                    but part of its condition of becoming a structured and received communication. A
                    database is not just data, it is not merely the stuff of quantitative or
                    qualitative material structured into computationally tractable entities. It is
                    the structuring apparatus that makes these entities signify relationally, giving
                    them some possibilities and not others. A database is a mode of discourse, or,
                    to paraphrase Michel Foucault, a discursive modality, governed by rules of
                    inclusion and exclusion. A content management system or platform is middleware
                    that is also a discursive modality. These systems contain a host of protocols
                    scripted into their operations that disappear from view in the reception of
                    their final display. They are also structuring frames that create a semantic
                    inflection through their organizing operations. Physical spaces, particularly
                    institutional spaces, embody programs that organize experience — not
                    deterministically, but opportunistically. 
                The traditional classroom is associated with a model of pedagogy (concept) which
                    is codified through a structured set of assumptions about learning, including
                    the role of teacher (in control) distinguished from students (largely being on
                    the receiving end), the idea of a relatively fixed set of things to
                    learn, and learning taking place in a decontextualized and closed situation (cf.
                    Scott-Webber 2004 on agrarian and industrial school floorplans). This
                    constitutes a kind of intellectual middleware, although somewhat caricatured
                    here. These assumptions are materially manifested in the traditional classroom
                    through the position of students (in rows directed towards the teacher) and the
                    teacher (up front, historically often in a physically elevated position),
                    control of media surfaces (one whiteboard or projector screen close to the
                    teacher and controlled by the teacher) and the closed door (a closed-off
                    learning space separate from the world outside). These material manifestations
                    can be regarded as interface, and while specific learning situations can
                    certainly up-end the traditional use of such spaces, the pervasiveness of
                    conventional use, material affordances and institutional expectations is
                    considerable. Importantly, this pervasiveness is not just a matter of the
                    material conditions, but also a matter of deeply embedded ideas about learning
                    associated with that type of space and situation. The strong association of
                    material conditions and ideas is what makes intellectual middleware relevant. 
                Other institutional spaces offer other possibilities. The HUMlab space at Umeå,
                    with its multiple screens angled to create a set of point of view systems,
                    connections through position proximity, scale, and other features of the
                    physical space is radically different from a conventional classroom or the
                    seminar room, where a circle of chairs and desks looks at a single screen
                    focusing attention of the group to the front of the room. The very coming and
                    going of individuals is structured differently, the cost of attention and
                    inattention, the modes and possibilities of engagement and exchange are all
                    aspects of the space. In terms of space and infrastructure, the distinctions
                    among conceptual infrastructure, design principles and actualized infrastructure
                    made elsewhere , map well onto the idea of
                    intellectual middleware discussed in this chapter. 
                 The argument for middleware is not an argument for deterministic readings of
                    platforms, or of software, or of the disciplinary regimes (to use quaint
                    post-structural language) of technologies or architectures (informational or
                    physical). But it is an argument for attending to the rhetorical force and
                    structuring effect of these aspects of our work, thought, and experience. It
                    raises questions about how we think and how else we might, and what
                    the tools for thought are within the humanities as we continue to structure
                    platforms and environments for their digital enactment. 
            

                How Middleware Thinks
                Most digital humanities projects — museum exhibits, online archives, articles,
                    mapping projects, even platforms for search, query, and analysis — consist of a
                    back-end of structured files and a front-end designed as an interface. In
                    between is a suite of processes and protocols that make the digital assets into
                    a user experience. Interface, however dynamic and interactive, is a display or
                    support for behavior, but the scripts and instructions that are triggered by the
                    interface depend upon the ways the middleware works. Our attention will be to
                    the authoring side of this experience rather than to the user side, with the
                    idea of showing how middleware constructs arguments. We will consider the
                    contrast between presentation modes and content management approaches in common
                    middleware.
                 If we argue that a piece of software such as PowerPoint or Keynote (presentation
                    software) is a platform that conditions, even determines, how we make
                        presentations and what counts as presentations, then what does that mean
                        ? Presentation software has very little
                    processing or digital asset management capability. Its functions are fairly
                    limited. If I am using PowerPoint, I am constrained by the frame-by-frame
                    sequence of the slides that are its basic unit. I can embed images,
                    sound, even video, into the slides, but the frame remains. I can make blends,
                    blurs, or transitions among slides, but the slides are still intact. I can
                    reshuffle the slides — their order is flexible. No larger data structure
                    determines the identity of a slide so that it has to be the first, fourth, or
                    follow after or be placed before another. The basic modular unit of argument is
                    the slide. Within the slide I can do various things with the text and embedded
                    files, and I can establish a theme that brands the presentation throughout.
                    Intertextual play of the kind set up in the book format is rare; even if it is
                    possible to introduce a theme and variation within a PowerPoint sequence, its
                    slides are rarely orchestrated in that way. The presentation emphasizes the
                    slide-by-slide singular framed content unit rather than the presentation as a
                    whole. 
                 PowerPoints may follow print conventions to the extent that they have a title,
                    sections, sub-sections, and often end with references, but they don’t have the
                    navigation system that a book has. One doesn’t turn to page 25 of a PPT, or use
                    an index or table of contents to navigate (although hypertext links can be used
                    to jump between slides). Nor can the content of a PowerPoint be exported as
                    structured data, only as a .pdf, .rtf or a .mov format. I can’t query all my
                    bullet points or search all my headers — the data in the presentation is not
                    structured, it is merely styled. However, the basic slide unit is extremely
                    flexible since none of the data within it is linked to an external structure.
                    Thus editing is easy. Slides can be deleted, duplicated, repeated, and
                    re-sequenced as units. PowerPoint is a flat data structure in which single
                    slides are the smallest structural unit. The argument structure is based on that
                    unit-by-unit sequence no matter how much manipulation goes into the space inside
                    the frames. We don’t want to confuse the plane of discourse, the literal
                    slide-based structure, with that of reference, the argument made, but rather,
                    call attention to how they are related. The literal, linear, sequence
                        of the slides does not cancel the possibility of resonance
                    among features in the slides, but the two are distinct aspects of
                    the format.
                 By contrast, a content management system (designed to do just what this
                    descriptive phrase implies, make it possible to work effectively with
                    intellectual content), has multiple levels of structure and granularity. Drupal,
                    a common content management system (CMS), is at a considerable remove from
                    PowerPoint in terms of complexity. What is the basic unit of structure? Drupal
                    has a concept identified as the node — which means any unit of content.
                    That might be a digital asset (an image or other file). But it also might be a
                    record (the structured, field-based form of entering text about assets or as an
                    asset in its own right). Nodes are structural, but not semantic; they serve the
                    purpose of giving the smallest unit of content an identity without constraining
                    it according to what it contains. These units of content can be assembled in
                    many ways.
                 Because the Drupal platform is a front end for putting structured content into a
                    database, it is also a means of structuring the database itself. So, if I have
                    thirty-five images and thirty-five comments on them, I can store these as
                    separate nodes and associate them by calling the fields image and
                        comment through a query. This is basic database activity, and the
                    Drupal environment can perform these kinds of operations down to the most
                    detailed level of granularity provided the data is structured properly. Continue
                    with the example of images and comments: suppose they are about related but
                    different fields (images of geological formations from different processes of
                    formation — volcanic activity, silting, erosion, uplift). I can pull out subsets
                    of the slides that match search criteria for each kind of geological formation
                    provided I have included information about that subdivision in the data. That
                    might be an abstract code — I might just number the different processes from 1
                    to 4 and assign each image and comment to a group, then call them by group
                    without referencing any linguistic term. That would be a structural way to
                    organize the information. I might create a field on the image and comment
                    records that says geological period, and thus sort by term. At the same time,
                    the images might be used for other purposes — say for organizing hikes or
                    pointing out mineral deposits. In Drupal any node or unit of content (e.g.
                    image) can be associated with any topic through use of what are called taxonomy
                    terms. Thus I can take a single image and associate it with volcanic activity,
                    rough terrain for climbing, and pumice, giving it a place within multiple areas
                    of potential use. But each context has to be specified in advance in the data
                    structure in the CMS. By contrast, in the presentation mode of PowerPoint, I can
                    re-use and repeat images on the fly, and recontextualize them readily because
                    the authoring environment is not constrained by taxonomies. 
                 This is a very preliminary and minimal description of the most basic structure
                    of a database driven CMS (in this case, the Drupal environment) and its
                    expression of the relational nature of the underlying database. Drupal’s
                        discursive modalities are not reducible to this database any more
                    than PowerPoint’s text is reducible to the slide-by-slide structure. But
                    in both cases, there are statements that can be made and statements that cannot,
                    given the constraints of design.
                 Taking the example of the thirty-five images again, suppose I decide that I want
                    to create an online exhibit about my rock collection, but only some of the
                    images in the set are ones for which I have samples, and my samples, which I am
                    currently photographing, are not in Drupal yet. Suppose the description of these
                    samples includes information that was not in my geological sample set. I want to
                    recount every place and circumstance, provenance and camping trip, for my
                    personal rock collection as well as my history as a rock-hound within a long
                    family tradition. I have to create a new record format or modify my original
                    record to include whole new categories, and create taxonomy terms that might be
                    elaborated according to year, trip, location, other companions, events and
                    adventures that are all irrelevant to the first set of records. What if the two
                    sets of records overlap, but not completely? I have to go back to the record
                    design with the new purpose in mind. No longer am I making an argument about
                    geological processes, but now, about rock-collecting as an experience. One is
                    structured in discrete units of information, and the other has a narrative
                    framework. Where does the narrative live? In the individual records? Or in its
                    own records, as a text? Every decision calls the conceptual structure of the
                    discourse into question, asks that it be made explicit in the way the
                    information is structured and also related in the actions I can take through the
                    dashboard and various (several, in Drupal’s case) administrative portals. Drupal
                    is extensively customizable — but only on its own terms, and that is the point. 
                 PowerPoint has no such complicated relational data structure in its
                    organization. It might even appear so simple that it may take a conceptual leap
                    to realize that it is a platform able to store and display a range
                    of data formats, a bunch of visual effects, and all kinds of recorded temporal
                    instructions for play. PowerPoint is a black box in that sense as surely as
                    Drupal, it is just a simpler platform conceptually and technically. Drupal’s
                    little cousins, WordPress and Omeka, are designed to be more intuitive and
                    easier to learn, which means they allow fewer choices for customizing what can
                    be done in their platforms. WordPress has very little sort/search and digital
                    asset management capacity, so it does not allow for the kind of complex
                    relations and allegiances that can be created in the Drupal nodes. Omeka comes
                    with a certain standard of metadata, Dublin Core, built into it. A basic
                    bibliographical standard, Dublin Core works well to describe most digitized
                    assets in the textual humanities, but it won’t work for describing my rock
                    collection, my collecting adventures, or to allow me to link an image of a
                    beautiful hunk of volcanic rock to multiple taxonomies for search, sort, and
                    display. That will have to be done in Omeka through a different mechanism. Also,
                    the structure, ontology and interface of Omeka impose a specific sense of
                    cultural heritage or humanities materials. A key organizational structure
                    consists of collections and items, and the interface normally presents items
                    separately (literally boxed). Among other things, this structure privileges the
                    individuality of the items rather than their connections and overlaps, which in
                    turn structures the narrative and argumentative possibilities. The conceptual
                    architecture of Drupal is combinatoric, linked, and highly granular, and its
                    data processing capacity is industrial strength. It is made to work with
                    enormous repositories of digital assets and to provide or link to many services
                    for their use, some supplied by yet another layer of software (a common one is
                    Islandora, which supports many common operations for digital asset management,
                    such as storage of multiple metadata standards and crosswalks). 
                 This discussion of a tiny glimpse of the workings of these very different but
                    common platforms (PowerPoint, Omeka, and Drupal) may feel more like a quick look
                    under the hood than a discussion of argument. But these cannot be pulled apart.
                    Drupal’s web of associated assets (nodes) and their repurposing within one
                    context after another, though flexible, is difficult to manage and all has to be
                    scripted. I can’t go into the Drupal repository, for instance, and view all the
                    image assets laid out as if they were units on a light table. Nor can I
                    rearrange them the way I can with PowerPoint slides until I arrive at an order
                    that argues my points. I have to know what I want to call into my argument and
                    make that part of the data in the database, and part of the views, frames,
                    panels, and links of selection and display. Drupal’s arguments take shape in the
                    way the fields are defined in records, the way taxonomies are created to relate
                    content, and the ways the displays can order and sequence information. Moving
                    from one structured unit of Drupal content in a display to another cannot be
                    animated. It can be linked, down to the most minute detail. Navigation through a
                    Drupal site can be as a complicated as any web of connections. Drupal content
                    can be repurposed endlessly, output in XML and other structured formats, while
                    the integrity of the content of every node remains intact. In the PowerPoint
                    instance my content is locked into the structure of the presentation and no
                    explicit data structure exists, no metadata, no relational framework except for
                    sequence. In the Drupal instance, the content is independent of the
                    presentation, but locked into the data structure. Other, very different, ways to
                    take the same information into argument structures would be to use XML or a
                    spreadsheet to create a format for storing the information. The notion of a
                        content model in XML requires that the document elements define the
                    intellectual shape of the information with varying degrees of complexity, but
                    within a nested hierarchical tree, while a spreadsheet’s rows and columns format
                    assumes a similar uniformity of categories of information and instances, but
                    does not allow for attributes or element groupings that give every piece of
                    information in an XML document a specific identity.
                 Structuring information in any of these formats already creates an argument,
                    according to the terms of classical rhetoric whose terms are: invention,
                        arrangement, style, memory, and delivery. Combining the
                    structured data with a discursive format — an exhibit in Omeka, a
                        view and/or panel or book in Drupal, a report
                    from a spreadsheet, or an XSLT transformation from XML, takes advantage of every
                    feature of rhetorical activity. 
                 1) First, invention: the very names and distinctions among fields
                    or categories, has determined what the granular units are for use in the
                    argument. If I keep city and state together in a location name, then I am
                    arguing for their linkage in the argument structure, saying they must always
                    work together in identifying a location, for instance. 
                 2) Arrangement: this corresponds to the layout and conventions each
                    middleware platform enables. A spreadsheet report has very little layout
                    capability, while a Drupal view organizes the data selections and displays them
                    in various column templates (1, 2, 3 etc. and side-by-side or stacked and so
                    on). But what if I want to introduce an anomaly? Change the layout of a view
                    because the image is particularly dramatic or I happen to have several views of
                    that location? I have to engineer the anomaly and put a custom template into the
                    system. Default options have a way of winning out for convenience’s sake. 
                 3) Style: features of middleware platforms can be customized to
                    varying degrees. Most content management systems (Omeka, Drupal, WordPress),
                    have themes designed by their developer communities. These establish
                    basic features, such as headers, sidebars, font, and image sizes (the thumbnail
                    image display default in Omeka is a square, a feature that is better fitted to
                    documentary photography than the display of artworks). 
                 4) and 5) Memory and Delivery: these functions of
                    classical rhetoric are manifest in file formats. Screen resolutions, size, and
                    the ability to have multiple versions or derivatives of image or map files, for
                    instance, are all part of the arsenal of digital rhetoric. Likewise, the
                    traditional, forceful use of gestures, pronunciation, and inflection translates
                    from oral performance to the pinch, swipe, automated slide show (a horror), or
                    other elements of the on-screen display and ways these produce effects. Drop
                    down menus or pick lists, controlled vocabulary or search on strings? These are
                    part of the argument structure across all categories of classical rhetoric,
                    beginning with invention and arrangement. 
            

                Making Arguments
                Making intellectual middleware can be seen as work connecting materials/data and
                    intellectual questions with material manifestations. As pointed out above,
                    middleware is neither the interface (front-end display), nor the material
                        (contents), but the protocols that structure our arguments and
                    express thinking. The design of these protocols (which are linked to data and
                    interface) provides a crucial opportunity to consider what kind of
                        world/s we want the platform or tool to represent. It seems
                    worthwhile to spend time on such reflection and design since it affects (or even
                    determines) the data structures and interface. This is also where we can
                    envision versions of research and pedagogy beyond what is built into
                    conventional tools and established interpretative frameworks.
                Let’s say a teacher of philology wants to raise the question of how reconstructed
                    linguistic forms present particular ways of thinking about language evolution
                    and human culture. This teacher has access to a comprehensive database of
                    reconstructed Indo-European roots with meanings assigned to them and actual
                    linguistic forms from various (assumed) daughter languages over time. Below we
                    briefly outline four types of intellectual middleware (and implementations) in
                    response to this challenge. 
                The simplest type of middleware would just structure access to this content, for
                    instance facilitating a query interface, allowing students to search for
                    meanings, language distribution of words with search results listed in a table.
                    This could be a useful exploratory tool to allow students to search for
                    different meanings and see what Indo-European roots correspond to such meanings
                    and how these roots are represented in different languages at different times,
                    but would emphasize the words as atomic units.
                In a second example, a developed form of this idea (a slightly different type of
                    middleware) could also include aggregated values enabling users to see how
                    reconstructed forms are distributed over languages based on the whole database,
                    which would make it possible to see the structural underpinnings of the
                    reconstructive paradigm more clearly. The relations among languages would be
                    foregrounded in this instance.
                A third variety of middleware would start out from models for linguistic change.
                    Traditional philology is based on a branching or tree metaphor (languages
                    diverge and branches split into sub-branches). If another model of linguistic
                    change — such as change based on diffusion (wave model) — was also incorporated,
                    different models could be juxtaposed, explored and illustrated in relation to
                    the available data. The basic models would be part of the platform (hardcoded),
                    and while these could not be changed, students would be able to explore
                    different world views. An understanding of linguistic processes over time and
                    space has to be included in the model. This structuring presentation would
                    emphasize evolution and change over time as well as different models of language
                    change.
                In the fourth example of intellectual middleware, this point about student
                    activity is pushed further. Imagine that students were asked to build models of
                    change themselves based on the forms in the daughter languages (real, not
                    reconstructed forms) contained in the database. For practical reasons, these
                    models would have to be limited and not all-inclusive. Through using a simple
                    algorithmic platform, students would construct this model through a series of
                    rules and conditions, and the data could then be run through the model. In this
                    case, the student-generated model could be contrasted with the model established
                    in traditional philology. The partial nature of knowledge, the non-linear
                    patterns of language change, and multiple ways languages influence each other
                    and shift inconsistently might become apparent.
                Depending on what approach and middleware we select, the learning experience (and
                    the actual implementation) will be quite different. A key point here is that it
                    is vital to consider different options carefully before building the actual
                    system (and ideally before putting together the dataset). Even supposedly basic
                    concepts of digital assets as discrete items, parts of relations of derivation,
                    moments in processes of diffusion, and objects of analysis of change are all
                    arguments that structure the way a field of knowledge is thought of and the way
                    the display of such knowledge is modeled and thus experienced. The data
                    structures and protocols are reinforced by the design of the entire system, from
                    back-end data to access, display, and use.
                 We could extend this analysis into greater detail with regard to any of the
                    examples we have sketched so briefly, or add others. Online learning platforms,
                    for instance, often more focused on distribution of information and tracking
                    students than enacting modern pedagogical thinking, are rarely questioned in
                    terms of the structuring they impose. But we can also extend these to the
                    physical domain. What if I am making an argument that is neither a presentation
                    nor a web display, but a spatial experience? What is the process of structuring
                    content to make an argument that opens across time/space parameters in a spatial
                    situation? Cecilia Lindhé points to how classical rhetorical devices can help
                    structure experiences that are spatially bound . She
                    built an academic installation in HUMlab to explore pre-print notions of church
                    spaces in relation to Virgin Mary as a virtuous role model in medieval Sweden.
                    Rich archival material is enacted in the lab space through a series of
                    experiential platforms (using display, interaction and sensor technology). The
                    idea was not to build a reconstruction of church spaces or to account for all of
                    the archival material or to build a web platform, but rather to allow
                    participants to respond to central research questions through an experiential
                    modality.
                Furthermore, the conditioning provided by software-based intellectual middleware
                    such as presentation software also affects physical space. Slide-based software,
                    as discussed above, is tightly coupled with certain material and spatial
                    configurations. The single slide paradigm normally correlates with a single
                    screen physical setup. For instance, PowerPoint does not facilitate arguments
                    spread over many screens. An art historian interested in using three separate
                    screens in order to juxtapose three artistic traditions, perspectival notions or
                    artists cannot to do so running PowerPoint on a single computer. Three instances
                    of PowerPoint (on separate computers) could be used to carry out the suggested
                    juxtaposition. However, this would not only be clunky, but almost beyond the
                    capabilities of PowerPoint since the software does not support coordination of
                    argument structures in multiple-screen environments.
                In HUMlab at Umeå University there are a number of alternative display setups
                    including eleven screens peripherally placed in a performance space, a triptych
                    screen next to a floor screen and an angled two-screen setup. These setups
                    challenge traditional cinematic and scientific modes of visualization through
                    their very existence and have been used for scholarly projects, large events and
                    artistic installations. For instance, the new angled screen setup with a large
                    stereo projection screen flanked by a large, tall screen (implemented by two
                    projectors on top of each other) in an oblong studio space challenges the
                    immersive, singular paradigm strongly associated with scientific visualization.
                    The setup also challenges the oftentimes physical separation of production and
                    use/enactment in high-end digital projects and the common focus on single
                    platforms in the digital humanities If we are inside a platform how do we
                    engage critically with the conditions and design of that experience?
                        Precedent for this critical engagement exists in the apparatus
                        approach to cinema studies that emerged in the 1970s and 1980s in work by
                        Jean-Louis Comolli, Jean Baudry, and others. We suggest that the
                    infrastructure in itself is a reflection of such intellectual middleware and the
                    middleware in its instantiated form helps us think. Imagine running an elaborate
                    virtual model, like Rome Reborn, on the stereo projection screen and using the
                    second screen for critical annotation, ongoing discussion of the ontology behind
                    the platform and focusing on details of the scenes being rendered on the main
                    screen — instead of projecting it as a unified immersive model. The precise
                    setup of the space and the infrastructure suggests certain expressive and
                    critical possibilities, and while the lack of very clear, instrumental use can
                    be provocative, it is key to encouraging new scholarship and artwork. There is
                    also a software side to the display and interaction technology in HUMlab and
                    over the years a number of solutions (hardware, software) have been used to
                    create content for these setups. 
                For a long time, however, there was one important piece missing. A display system
                    that made it easy to sketch arguments in the various display and
                    interaction spaces. In 2015, such a tool was built to enable participants in the
                    conference Genres of Scholarly Knowledge Production
                    to create arguments embedded in the infrastructure that the venue offered . Use of software such as PowerPoint was disallowed.
                    The display system is the result of middleware thinking just like the physical
                    infrastructure discussed above. It soon turned out that this tool was a powerful
                    help in thinking how different arguments and experiences could be enacted in
                    HUMlab. The tool contains a schematic representation of the spaces and
                    management of decks of media, but it is clear that the live 3D simulation of the
                    space with content (built in Unity, another platform) adds very significantly to
                    the usefulness and exploratory power of the system. Importantly, the tool as
                    middleware also provides conditioning for the scholarly arguments made through
                    the system. For example, although the tool could be used with only one screen or
                    without any digital media at all (keeping everything dark and silent), the
                    foregrounding on multiple screens/interactions points in the software and the
                    configuration of the physical space strongly suggest the use of those
                    resources). The event as a whole became a lively intellectual discussion of
                    middleware – of how ideas, data and representation come together – and this
                    would not have been as successful had not the participants had to engage with
                    alternative modes of knowledge production. The event was designed to lay bare
                    some of the intellectual middleware. Optimizing the use of such a system,
                    however, takes an investment on the part of the author and users who have to
                    design their presentations taking these capabilities into account. 
            

                Middleware as Enunciative System
                Critical awareness of the constraints of middleware can be taken a step further
                    if we consider their operation as features of an enunciative system. The concept
                    of enunciation arises from structural linguistics, and is used to describe the
                    way subjects speak and are spoken in relation to each other in discourse.
                    The classic work in this field, by Emile Benveniste, focused on the role of
                    pronouns in creating positionality and relations in speech acts. Rather than
                    confining language or middleware systems to the role of communication — as if
                    they were merely vehicles for the delivery of information — analysis of their
                    operation as enunciative systems takes into account the fact that any act of
                    discourse creates a subject as an effect. A subject, in this post-structuralist
                    analysis, is spoken by an utterance, created relationally. Theories
                    of enunciation take into account the power relations of language and
                    representational systems (visual perspective is a powerful system of
                    enunciation, for instance, in the way it creates viewing positions to be
                    occupied). 
                 The theory was widely used in film theory and analysis (borrowing directly from
                    linguistics) where the subject of the various semiotic systems were
                    structured into point of view (of shots, narrative, sound, editing). Thinking
                    about information systems and middleware from this perspective seems useful as a
                    way to insist on the dynamic and constitutive nature of their operation. Rather
                    than reify the features of PowerPoint, Drupal, or spreadsheets, this approach
                    allows us to ask who is speaking, to whom, and for what purpose, in any
                    situation of information and digital design, and also, who is the created or
                    posited subject of that act of enunciation. Who is the implied you of any
                    display? Where and how is that spoken subject positioned? The introduction of
                    this concept moves away from user experience as a mechanistic study of
                    eye-tracking or tactile satisfaction and rewards, and towards a psychoanalytic
                    understanding of dialogic relations as power relations. For example, the subject
                    spoken by a health care database created without regard for transgender, for
                    instance, imposes a violation on the identity of individuals who identify as
                    neither male or female. The use of data structures to describe geological
                    formations might perform an equally violent act of disregard for traditional
                    uses or conceptions of a landscape within an indigenous community. Taking the
                    stance that all acts of information structuring and modeling be considered acts
                    of enunciation allows the transactional performativity of their effects to be
                    taken into account. Speaking, viewing, and use of middleware are constitutive
                    activities, not simply mechanistic exchanges among autonomous agents. The
                    construction of information systems is not just about representing different
                    value systems, but enacting them situationality. Again, in the physical space
                    this is palpable, as individuals and groups cluster around positions that are
                    advantageous to their purposes — secrecy, visibility, privacy etc. according to
                    sightlines, power positions, surveillance lines and so on. 
            

                Extending Arguments
                Though very preliminary in its analysis, this paper has tried to make a few basic
                    points that we hope will provoke future critical discussion. First, middleware
                    is a material manifestation of enunciative systems that enact positions and
                    power relations in spatial, virtual, and digital discourses. Second, we should
                    make a distinction between apparent and transparent aspects of middleware. The
                    first, like the basic single frame structure of PowerPoint, are visible but
                    overlooked. The second, like the way query structures work, is rendered almost
                    invisible. We are trying make these equally visible. Third, we think middleware
                    should be looked at in terms of the behaviors and actions they support,
                    beginning with the authoring environment (do I conceive of my argument in terms
                    of slides from a selection of 300, or in terms of the data structure, or in
                    fields in the metadata, as taxonomies, or relations among components?). What is
                    the impact of my choice of middleware on what I can or cannot say in my
                    project and presentation or what the user can know about these argument
                    structures undergirding their experience? How are decisions about the model of
                    the content made, and the connection between the selection of content and a
                    whole or final presentation enabled? How does that act register, become defined,
                    constrained, and rhetorically significant? How do the structuring properties of
                    the platform organize the composition (and inform it from the outset). A blog
                    entry is not a Drupal site is not a Twitter feed. We think a PowerPoint
                    slide differently than we do a record for describing images in a collection. The
                    argument is neither techno-determinism nor media specificity, but a call to look
                    at the performative aspects of these platforms in the way they condition us to
                    work within their forms as well as in the ways they enact argument as
                    structures.
                 Ultimately, we are arguing that all presentation space is rhetorically
                    configured (and should be engaged critically). This is true of the regimented
                    scrolling linearity of Word, which expects prose text, and the flexible
                    arrangements possible in PowerPoint, or the template structure of InDesign,
                    which assumes a document consisting of many related pages working in sequence
                    but across a consistent format where intertextual elements are in play. Consider
                    the overview functions in each environment. The slide sorter in PPT, which
                    assumes each slide is an entity, and the continuous stream of text in Word,
                    displayed in the page view, permit a sense of omniscience that is never possible
                    in Drupal. No overview exists there, only views into the data through the
                    content list or other features. Also consider novelty effects, for instance, in
                    Prezi. Does turning a virtual cube to display a new face/facet have any
                    correlation with the semantic value this implies? Is the argument on display
                    really cubical? Does it have six sides? Are the relations that structure
                    the display the same as those that organize the elements of the argument? We
                    know of very few six-sided arguments, though of course, one might make one,
                    deliberately, to explore this point. And then, might also wonder what is inside
                    that cube whose faces we have seen — what is the content of that virtual
                    volume? The silliness of this exposes the value of the investigation into the
                    structuring rhetorics of middleware.
                Keep in mind that middleware is not interface. Middleware consists of protocols
                    and processes that support and structure the content and context of
                    use. Interface is the front end, the final experience, and rarely gives any
                    insight into the infrastructure back-end. Middleware is the in-between that sets
                    terms/conditions of organization and structuring. We could elaborate further by
                    taking specific cases, wonderful examples of highly developed digital humanities
                    work (e.g. Die Fackel, Old Bailey, Perseus Project, Whitman
                        Archive) and look at the way the intellectual models of their
                    content and use are argued within the structure of their platforms, not just in
                    their final display.
                At stake are other issues as well, such as long-term sustainability. Many of the
                    middleware platforms are destined for (or used with disregard for) rapid
                    obsolescence. File formats last longer than platforms, so storing content
                    separately from platforms is a wise investment. Creating highly specific
                    middleware platforms, for instance, those for three-dimensional reconstruction
                    of historic sites, that then hold content, may prove to be an investment
                    with little long-term return. The models are spatial, and assume space as a
                    given, using it as an armature for placement of notes, primary materials, and so
                    on. But how can this be edited? Output? The middleware locks the content into a
                    structure that may not even be an argument, just an assumed given . Metadata schemes, elaborately conceived
                    according to models of an archive, a field, a disciplinary domain, sometimes
                    turn out to be unusable (all those iterations of DTDs in the early stages of
                    digital humanities) because their intellectual structure was at such odds with
                    the experiential engagement with the material objects they were meant to
                    represent. 
                Also at stake is the question of what arguments we want to make and how we might
                    create environments that support them. Contrast, comparison, details, close and
                    distant approaches to analysis, reading, and even the collaborative character of
                    scholarship, partial knowledge and blurred boundaries among types of knowledge
                    or objects are all parts of our interpretative habits and traditions. Are these
                    argument structures supported by current platforms? Can we think of other types
                    of arguments we want to make and if so, how could these be manifested? What
                    about traditional humanistic compositional strategies such as producing
                    evidence, trails of associated materials, counter-arguments, commentary, asides
                    and alternative arguments? There are several reasons why it is difficult to
                    consider argumentative needs in relation to digital platforms. Firstly,
                    argumentative structures and material manifestations cannot be easily separated,
                    which means that both need to be considered at the same time. We suggest that
                    the idea of intellectual middleware can help this process as it sits in between
                    materials and interface. A second difficulty is to simultaneously critique and
                    create middleware and digital platforms. Here we suggest that we need to expand
                    our practice to incorporate design processes that more clearly integrate
                    conceptual, critical and material sensibilities. It must be easy to critique and
                    make at the same time and the digital humanities needs to be agile and
                    experimental (especially at early stages of projects) as well as long-term
                    sustainable and capable of managing large-scale projects.
                 Intellectual middleware sits in between back end (data, concepts, research
                    concepts) and front end (interface), which means that middleware cannot be seen
                    as separate from these other levels or from the broader cultural, social and
                    material world. Not only does middleware reflect cultural and social systems in
                    their making, but it is also enacted and interpreted together with other people
                    (whether in the same room or not) in particular contexts. There is always an
                    ideational and intellectual side to middleware, and middleware is always
                    situated socially and culturally. The intellectual inflection of middleware
                    always has to have some relation to an intended material instantiation and to
                    any available data and will therefore be more tangible than abstract
                        thought. Looking at the material inflection of intellectual middleware,
                    it would similarly normally not be concrete matter, but rather the
                    structuring of such matter. In fact, ideally these inflections will come
                    together in the articulation of protocols, principles and structures. 
                An example can be provided by thinking of various principles of manipulation or
                    engagement that could be situated at the level of middleware. These might
                    include layering, perspectivation, extensible juxtaposition, opacity and scale.
                    In the philological example discussed earlier, juxtaposition would be an
                    important principle for considering and comparing different models of language
                    change, which in turn would be materially manifested in the interface.
                    Similarly, an alternative type of presentation software for art history and
                    theory might be based around this principle — extensible juxtaposition — to
                    allow the comparison of different periods, pieces of art or artists (drawing on
                    the traditional dual use of slide projectors extended to realize the dream of
                    Mnemosyne envisioned by Abby Warburg in the 1920s .
                    Layering of information is another important principle, which is both conceptual
                    and material. Layering is key to geographical information systems, but could be
                    used more extensively than now to break down the flatness of many digital
                    projects and to enable the provision of critical readings, annotation, and an
                    awareness of how different datasets contribute to the establishment of a
                    seemingly singular point of view. Another way of deepening data analysis and
                    interpretative power is to engage with different perspectives of a data set or a
                    research challenge simultaneously, rather than approaching digital projects with
                    the goal of a single outcome. A scholar interested in representations of the
                    struggles of any particular culture or sub-culture may want to enact alternative
                    viewpoints based on materials from the community in question as well as
                    different governmental bodies and not just give access to the materials or
                    ready-made positions, but enact different perspectives. In terms of interface
                    this could be done through using multiple screens (one for each perspective). Or
                    as a scholar at Umeå University working on this theme suggested when seeing the
                    HUMlab angled screenscape with its 3D projection screen and associated glasses
                    for the first time: have each pair of glasses call up a different perspective
                    and worldview.
                In interface theory, a basic design decision is made between showing the
                    knowledge structure/organization of the information in a site/collection/project
                    (maps, photographs, documents etc.) and presenting options for behaviors
                    (search, browse, display etc.). In general, simply making the collection
                    contents available is like sending a museum viewer into the storeroom. The
                    organizational structure imposed by the registrar (in the museum example) can be
                    made more useful to a user through supporting behaviors (Show me all
                        paintings by Rembrandt, rather than Let me into the shelving area
                        where all works of Renaissance art are stored by size). The behaviors to
                    be supported, it turns out, are not those that depend upon memory, but rather,
                    those that support search and use. Memory doesn’t work effectively through
                    structures but instead through processes, cues to behavior generate response.
                    The arguments of middleware are protocols of use that talk to the memory
                    structures, the shaped, already processed, arguments of the digital assets. Then
                    the middleware features produce a secondary argument through
                    language/presentation in a graphical, spatial, or audial interface where
                    hierarchy, proximity, juxtaposition, scale, sequence, proportion, color and
                    timing of display are enabled by the click, drag, drop, enter, search, and play
                    functions that order our behavior. In all of these, we are subjects spoken by a
                    system — of rules and positions that discipline our authoring process and the
                    intellectual arguments we can produce. Each platform permits some things and not
                    others. Middleware shapes our access to inventory, organization of materials and
                    of their mustering into use, of the style in the particulars of discourse, of
                    memory in the roles of refresh, recovery, and rate of display, and of delivery
                    in the specifics of responsive design, timing, tactile interface and so on. But
                    it also programs us to perform our arguments to conform with the learned habits
                    of its features and formats.
                 As to enunciation? It is always context co-dependent. It relies on
                        shifters — terms whose value can only be determined in situ. I
                    and you are such shifters (by contrast to she/he/they/them which may take
                    on a stable relation to their referents). Space and time, here/there, now/then
                    are shifters, though the second term in each pair can be given a stable
                    referent. These shifters are constituting structures of discourse. Because the
                        you is always being created in the process of speaking, constructed,
                    positioned, defined, it is linked to an articulating I which is also in
                    process. The dynamic between them can change their relation to the power and
                    meaning of the language act. Linguists intent on finding features of
                        language as a universal human system note that the distinction
                    between I/you is something that is present, at the very least, implicit, in
                    every human language system. If we suggest that middleware contains rules for
                    conditions of utterance, of production, then we ask who occupies the I or
                        you position in any digital enunciation? You know that only by being
                    present to the utterance, or its representation, that a place holder is filled
                    by the speaker. This matters because the production of enunciated discourse also
                    produces and enunciated subject, that is, not an individual, but a position in
                    relation to the discourse, its power structures, and its operations. For Julia
                    Kristeva, this formed the basis of the analysis of the subject in a politics of
                    linguistics and semiotics. For Jacques Lacan, this became the foundation of a
                    theory of the subject of language. Neither assumed a speaker who uses language
                        as a subject, but rather, see the constitution of a
                        subject as a language act. (Language is not something the subject
                    uses, but something that makes the human subject.) This changes the dynamic
                    production of a subject through enunciation that can also be identified in the
                    structuring principles of interface and middleware.
                 Teasing out the precise modes of address that middleware builds into its
                    protocols so that these are manifest in an interface is a little tricky — I/you
                    he/she are present in language, but seeing/describing the working of point of
                    view systems of the graphics, the positioning of viewers into a place/time,
                    suturing and interpellation of subjects into discourse is more complicated. If a
                    web page offers a window with an ad in which I am directly addressed by the
                    language, the look of the actors, and by a direct bid for my involvement in
                    either playing, pausing, or closing the window, then I am being addressed
                    as a you within the structure of the discourse. But just as surely, the
                    apparently neutral display devices of a newspaper page do the same things, they
                    are just harder to spot. Why does it matter? In every instance of communication,
                    someone is being addressed by someone for some purpose and the agendas of this
                    constitutive work are generally obscured by the familiarity of the discourse
                    structures. The power relations disappear behind conventions.
                 We need to be attentive to such structuring when planning and building digital
                    tools and platforms. Intellectual middleware can help us be more attentive to
                    structuring across concept, data and interface. Importantly, middleware should
                    not just appear or be taken for granted, but needs to be the result of
                    intellectual, iterative and materially grounded processes incorporating
                    appropriate expertise and infrastructure.
            

                Conclusion
                In conclusion, we hope that by introducing the notion of middleware we can
                    address some of the processes, visible and less so, that are shaping argument
                    structures in digital humanities projects. Middleware has intellectual,
                    technical, practical, and experiential dimensions. Our hope is that strong
                    middleware work will result in better tools for sketching, thinking and
                    composing for the humanities as well as a higher degree of critical awareness in
                    relation to existing tools and platforms. As a community we are still in the
                    early phases of designing platforms for our work, and at stake is
                        how we may think as well as what we may think as
                    we struggle to design environments that contain tools for thinking in arguments
                    rather than displays of thought whose production processes disappear in the
                    final view. 
            
