Title:  Obama’s Sixth Annual Address: Image, Affordance, Flow
Volume:  010
Issue:  4
Date:  22 November 2016
Abstract:  
                
                 Recent State of the Union addresses have included a number of new visual
                    elements, including a running slide show and interactive social media cards.
                    This paper poses a method for collecting and analyzing these new visual elements
                    and incorporating the results of that study into the study of presidential
                    Rhetoric. This article will: (1) situate the enhanced State of the Union within
                    the study of presidential rhetoric, (2) combine aspects of close and distant
                    reading for critique of the address, (3) provide the results of the approach to
                    distant reading taken here, and (4) discuss the implications of the analysis of
                    this particular visual program as they afford future annual addresses different
                    opportunities, and constraints. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Viewership for the State of the Union was down near the end of the Obama
                    Presidency. In January 2015, only 31.7 million Americans, distributed across
                    thirteen networks, viewed the speech, down substantially from previous years
                        . There are many reasonable explanations for
                    the decrease in viewership. More television channels existed in 2015 than did in
                    1980, people had something else to watch. Times were relatively good, there was
                    no pressing national crisis calling for a major speech. President Obama had
                    entered the twilight period of his presidency, after the second midterm and with
                    the 2016 presidential election cycle already beginning, the prospects for major
                    policy developments were low. Given low interest, new technologies, and dull
                    times, the number remaining so high could be read as a success rather than a
                    failure. Mitigating factors aside, the idea that the State of the Union is
                    obsolete or that low viewership is indicative of a crisis of political will is
                    still is a magnet for clicks. There were news stories to be written. Proactively
                    adapting to the idea of a changing audience, the administration added elements
                    to the State of the Union - in 2011 a running visual program beside the image of
                    the president, and in 2015 a waterfall of slides appearing beneath the
                    president. In the days after the State of the Union the president went out of
                    his way to do interviews with non-traditional media figures or Youtube
                        stars rather than traditional journalists. Reaching out to
                    alternative media suggests that the administration was aware that attention was
                    shifting and that new channels for distribution call for new modes of
                    presentation. 
                From a traditional communication or mass communication viewpoint, the practice of
                    developing texts for possible audiences has been described with a number of
                    different vocabularies: from discovering the available means of persuasion, to
                    affective modulation, to the cannon of delivery. Making messages work, or at
                    least trying to make them work, is a central concern of communication research.
                    In the context of the State of the Union, this first meant the inclusion of a
                    new enhanced visual program, and more recently the
                    inclusion of a second visual program with different, interactive affordances.
                    These new dimensions of interaction seemingly provided a public, half a million
                    people, with access to a dimension of the experience of the speech that was
                    distinct from that of viewing on a traditional television screen. The State of
                    the Union is, after all, a planned media event. The timing, ordering,
                    composition, and affordance (for interactive elements) are elements that should
                    topics for analysis. It should not be surprising that there is a clear intention
                    behind the design of the composition. 
                This article proposes a novel strategy for reading the procession of images that
                    accompanied the State of the Union and the ways in which the procession of those
                    elements frames the user interface and the media event of the speech. In order
                    to read the images presented with the State of the Union, image stacks will be
                    constructed from those images that were placed below and beside the State of the
                    Union. These images will then be read using computer
                    software, producing traditional frequency counts and plots of information about
                    the images themselves. These plots, stacks, and sequences will be used as a part
                    of a strategy of distant reading for the interface of the State of the Union as
                    provided by the White House. This analysis makes two important contributions:
                    first it provides a method for characterizing the attributes of an user
                    interface as it changes throughout a user encounter, second, this reading
                    juxtaposes different optical and visual strategies for engaging viewers around a
                    public speech. In constructing this approach, this article will: (1) situate the
                    enhanced State of the Union within the study of presidential rhetoric, (2)
                    combine aspects of close and distant reading for critique of the address, (3)
                    provide the results of the approach to distant reading taken here, and (4)
                    discuss the implications of the analysis of this particular visual program as
                    they afford future annual addresses different opportunities, and constraints.
                
            

                States of the Union 
                The State of the Union is a curious institution, with changing historical norms
                    of delivery and reception over the life of the republic. The State of the Union
                    in the late twentieth and early twenty-first century was a televised media
                    event. Before the speech was delivered by the president in person, and when the
                    direct address of the public was not possible, the text of the address was a
                    major topic of discussion, calling for a prompt response in kind. The State of
                    the Union is intimately tied to the temporality of it’s circulation. The history
                    of the State of the Union Address is a fascinating topic that exceeds the scope
                    of this article. Rather than providing an incomplete history, this review will
                    emphasize some of the touchstones of the social functions of the address and how
                    some of those references were already unstable before the enhanced State of the
                    Union. 
                In the early days of the United States, speeches by the president were almost
                    always addressed to congress, rather than the public. In his seminal work on the
                    presidency, Jeffrey Tullis examines these documents through a reading (which
                    included both qualitative and quantitative elements) of the styles and subjects
                    addressed — nineteenth century presidents addressed the congress, twentieth
                    century presidents addressed the people .
                    Annual messages, the nineteenth century version of the State of the Union
                    address, were carefully constructed, but were ultimately a deliberative document
                    in the early years of the republic . The
                    president in this formulation is a partner in deliberation with congress, not an
                    enemy to be defeated or a sycophant to be placated. The waves of discussion
                    created by the address and the implications of it function as a second
                        constitution that provides energy and movement to a stagnant body
                    of constitutional relationships . Increased
                    access to communication and the direct address of the public are a mixed
                    blessing for any system of governance. On one hand, more democratic access to
                    technology might include more voices, more quickly in deliberation. On the other
                    hand, these unprofessional communicators would not abide by the stabilizing
                    norms of journalists and politicians, a major concern of in the development of
                    founding documents for the United States was the risk of demagoguery which would
                    be fed by looser norms . There is no
                    intrinsic element of communication systems that requires that they evolve in
                    ways that enhance democracy, if anything the risk flows toward the creation of
                    systems that are less democratic, less diverse, and more self-serving for
                    powerful actors than those that came before. Tullis argues that the challenges
                    of modern communication systems neither eliminate the intentions of the authors
                    of the Constitution and the Federalist papers nor simplistically call for a
                    return to those texts as reflecting some transcendental truth . 
                It is of interest to note that both Washington and Adams delivered their
                    addresses in person; the nineteenth century norm of the president delivering
                    written remarks began during the Jefferson administration, as ostensibly the
                    performance of the speaker might affect the trajectory of deliberation . Andrew Johnson opted for direct address of
                    the public, the political implications of which were at the heart of the matter
                    of his impeachment for improper public speech . An exception which informs the rule. The turn of the twentieth century
                    marked a transition point, with Teddy Roosevelt working to build the confidence
                    of the public and Robert Taft simply providing lists of legislative priorities
                        . Woodrow Wilson’s presidency marked a
                    dramatic change in the role of the president as making a popular argument for a
                    change in the allocation of power and constitutional meaning . From Wilson on, the president directly
                    addressed the public with a relatively similar sort of address predicated on a
                    list of policy priorities, which as time went on included additional epideictic
                    features such like the inclusion of inspirational guests of the president. 
                Kathleen Hall Jamieson and Karlyn Kohrs Campbell argue that, 
                        Through public meditation, assessment, and policy
                            recommendations, State of the Union addresses sustain the
                            presidency
                        
                    . The topics of such a speech are not those of a given moment, but
                    generally a rumination on values and issues of sustained interest. The State of
                    the Union interrupts the flow of Congressional attention. Even if Congress was
                    loathe to adopt the policy proposals made by the president, in their antipathy,
                    rejection, and refutation they acknowledge the symbolic role of the president as
                    the leader and the rhetorical force of the address. The State of the Union
                    speech serves as an occasion for the public to be reminded of the symbolic
                    function of the president. Vanessa Beasley argued that the symbolic position of
                    the president constrains the possibilities for the president as much as it
                    enables the president to frame issues of national identity, or as Beasley simply
                    puts it, 
                        presidential rhetoric is situated
                        
                    . It should be apparent that there are values that a president can not
                    express from the subject position of the president, and values that the
                    president must ostensibly espouse. Ritualistically the occasion of speaking
                    provides the sort of ongoing engagement with the idea of
                        peoplehood
                    . Television changed the ways in which
                    presidents were received by the public, which also changed with the television
                    of the time period. Keith Erikson argued that the visual politics of the
                    presidency in the twentieth century emphasized the careful modulation of the
                    aesthetic presentation of the president and the scene. The modulation of affect
                    by presidents is highly contextual, with observers likely differing on
                    interpretations – presidents must exercise care to avoid a heavy hand. It is not
                    simply that publics are duped by the illusion of the president, but that they
                    tend to prefer presidents who are good at appearing presidential, thus debunking
                    presidential performance as mere stage craft is counter productive . 
                In a 2010 essay, Beasley described the peculiar context of the George W. Bush
                    presidency where the model of the rhetorical presidency was supplanted by the
                    model of the unitary executive. The distinction between the rhetorical and the
                    unitary executive model does not hinge on the executive speaking less, but in a
                    shift in the ways that the executive speaks. Instead of going public to secure
                    permission to act, the unitary executive acts seemingly autonomously of the
                    other branches. The executive in this model informs the other branches about
                    what has been done, it does not seek approval. Beasley offers a research agenda
                    for the development of new case studies about unitary executives or to find
                    other texts where the president frames public opinion . Even if shifts in presidential communication may have
                    complicated the vision of the rhetorical presidency across speeches, the State
                    of the Union remains a regular, ritual speech. If the president goes public once
                    a year, that particular speech may be more important than before. These models
                    may also call for further elaboration for understanding the actions of a
                    seemingly rhetorical president (Obama) in a discursive context where antagonism
                    has replaced agonism. Even in the context of a less than cooperative public
                    sphere Obama is a rhetorical president, which would call for sustained attention
                    to the kinds of new audiences that the president would cultivate given the
                    paucity of traditional audiences to persuade. Another way to think of this,
                    Obama as a rhetorical president replaced Bush as a unitary executive, rebuilding
                    the norms of the rhetorical presidency takes work when they have been corroded,
                    and they may require entirely new modes of persuasion and communication. 
                This new position for a president interacting with a fragmented public as a
                    digital presidency is outlined by Jessica Kurr. Kurr’s position on the enhanced
                    State of the Union supposes that the address comes as an extension of prior
                    changes in the speech such as Roosevelt’s fireside chats . The upshot of the enhanced address is the possibility of a more
                    multiple reception and retransmission of the address, this new rhetorical
                    presidency is fashioned along multiple iterative events, rather than a single
                    legitimating moment. James Alexander McVey argues that the enhanced visual
                    program reenergizes the program of neoliberal reformism through renewed
                    attention with a novel mode of presentation. Of the visual strategies emphasized
                    by McVey is the differential use of serif and sans-serif fonts for representing
                    political futurity in the 2011 Enhanced State of the Union . At time same, McVey points out the
                    individual site of affect is a site of possibility and contestation. I would
                    suggest further that we should be careful not to assume that all novelty is tied
                    to neoliberalism, after all it seems likely that resistance to neoliberal
                    governance will likely be passionate, creative, and fresh. This is an important
                    turn in the analysis of the digital presidency - where Tullis had noted the
                    change from paper to in-person delivery, and Erikson emphasized the staging of
                    the television screen, Kurr and McVey reveal the conditions by which these new
                    modes of address might face critique. The approach taken to the 2015 Enhanced
                    State of the Union attempts to produce graphical depictions of a multiplicity of
                    factors tied to the presentation of the speech over time, from the inclusion of
                    sharable features to the depiction of individual slide images.
                An important approach to studying the addresses of presidents has been close
                    reading. Discursive critique has been relatively slowly taken up in the study of
                    presidential rhetoric. Beasley lists a number of reasons for the relatively
                    traditional sort of reading strategies employed in the study of presidential
                    rhetoric: post-structuralism is at odds with a study of invention, presidential
                    scholars study limited sorts of effects, and perhaps most of all that the
                    approach would be incompatible with a strong theory of presidential agency . If the actions of the president are an
                    effect of the circulation of discourse, there may be no rhetor left to study.
                    Instead of viewing the constrains of context as an obstacle to studying the
                    impact of the president, the ways that the president might work around those
                    constants, or in the case of popular presidents change public values and
                    preferences are of significant interest. Models that emphasize the president
                    speaking an address rather than the presidencies address speaking through body
                    of the executive both tend to reach similar insights and the more simplistic
                    models have the benefit of parsimony. The sort of study that one would make of
                    the State of the Union is not of the effects of the speech per se, but of the
                    construction of the speech itself. This approach to reading owes much to Michael
                    Leff and GP Mohrman’s seminal article on the Lincoln’s Cooper Union address . In reading the specific moves in the address, Leff and
                    Mohrman can reposition Lincoln as an orator as operating toward the end of
                    winning the nomination, rather than keeping a fragile state together. They can
                    read Lincoln the candidate as himself, rather than as a retroactive version of
                    Lincoln the president. This interpretation challenges the simplistic story of
                    Lincoln on the basis of the speech itself, no additional historical, economic,
                    or para-textual investigation needed. Gronbeck situates the extension of
                    presidential rhetoric in the age of secondary orality as an extension of the
                    persuasive activity of the president . This
                    penchant for the analysis of the use of secondary orality itself calls for a
                    closer attention to the ways in which those performances function. 
                A major critique of close reading has been that the method could become
                        self-justifying, rhetorical reading techniques applied
                    for their own sake, rather than for the sake of the text, provides cover to
                    other reasons for the selection or effectivity of texts, namely power . Warnick’s argument that close reading and critical
                    rhetoric are distinct paradigms is important in situating the approach of this
                    article. Close reading is not referred to in this section to advocate for a
                    return to the idea of the speech alone, but to situate the kinds of approaches
                    that have been used with presidential texts. The argument is also well taken
                    that without some external selection criteria the penchant for textual reading
                    strategies to become self-indulgent is quite real. It is to this end that this
                    article situates the analysis of the presidential interface in rhetoric rather
                    than as an object of curiosity alone. Distant reading has been subject to a
                    number of the same criticisms as too many projects have yet to connect with
                    ongoing scholarly debates or are willing to pretend to be a transparent window
                    onto reality, as if that reality was not already socially constructed . Charts and graphs provide an imprimatur of
                    mathematical authority even when the visualizations produced are nonsense.
                    Visual analysis can take a number of forms, including readings of: production,
                    composition, reproduction, and circulation .
                    Distant reading offers insights into the ways that a number of images in
                    sequence might be composed and reproduced in a particular context, the results
                    of distant reading can be situated for analysis in other theoretical
                    vocabularies. The analysis in this article will be largely compositional as it
                    reads for the signs of differently positioned arguments and codes image texts.
                    The traces of ideas about the reproduction of authority or emotion come from the
                    uses of those ideas in studies of public address and presidential studies. This
                    is similar to the study of memes where rhetorical potential is understood to
                    come through uptake and circulation . Eric Jenkins
                    work on visual rhetorical calls for a shift away from contextualizing the
                    individual iconic image toward an approach that studies the circulation of the
                    image. This study does not study the actual circulation of images, but is very
                    much in sympathy with that approach through the analysis of a multiplicity of
                    images that could find themselves in motion. 
                At the risk of being too detailed in this area, I want to be clear about the
                    theoretical entailment of the choice to develop the approach to the use of
                    computer image analysis in this article. Elizabeth Losh has argued that the
                    combination of new approaches for the analysis of cultural data through
                    computational approaches has returned rhetoric to a place of importance just as
                    it tries to catch up
                    . Losh is particularly interested in the
                    rhetorical interfaces of Manovich and Moretti - as is this article. Losh’s point
                    should be well taken by rhetorical critics that new computational tools offer
                    ways of understanding aesthetics and temporality that enrich, rather than
                    detract from rhetorical theory. This approach is in-line with the idea of
                    iconographic tracking proposed by Laurie Gries .
                    Instead of tracking the movement of a visual style across a variety of sites
                    (the Obama hope image for Gries) this study attempts to turn the practice of
                    data mining toward the compositional aspect of rhetorical critique. 
                Distant reading supposes that the use of computer vision and counting
                    technologies might provide a way of apprehending differences across a stack of
                    individual data points of a text that might otherwise be difficult to apprehend
                    with the eye alone. The results of this analysis can be used to reveal the
                    traces of the means of producing a stack of images or a speech as a whole, much
                    like the ways that close readers might slow down the experience of a speech or
                    thicken certain concepts. A key term in this method is stack, the stack is a
                    collection of images in some sort of sequence. Generally, the sequence of the
                    files in a stack maps onto the linear unfolding of a text, optimally these are
                    coded into the filenames of the units of the stack for optimal metadata
                    management. Distant reading takes seriously the idea that tiny variations,
                    especially if repeated over time, are evidence that can be utilized for
                    analysis. Lev Manovich’s method for distant reading comes from cinema studies
                    rather than speech, his unit of analysis is the individual shot . Analysis of the shot allows a micro visual grammar
                    to be studied in a way that was not possible on the level of the sequence. The
                    experience of cinema requires the persistence of vision. Images only last for a
                    fraction of a second on the retina, as images come faster perception of
                    individual units sublimates into the perception of movement. By breaking down
                    the film, taking it out of its persistent, programmatic, linear flow, Manovich’s
                    method offers something of a close reading of each shot or scene. This study
                    utilizes Manovich et. al.'s ImagePlot 2 plugin for ImageJ for analysis . 
                Counting is a difficult notion. Francesco Moretti contends that the rise of the
                    digital humanities is the expression of a healthy penchant for clear evidence in
                    literary studies . Any program of research requires
                    categories and codes. When computational techniques provide evidence that can
                    answer descriptive questions they offer the humanities and social sciences
                    powerful tools. Moretti is careful to argue that these tools are not neutral and
                    that they do not offer a transparent window into the content presented. Instead,
                    the tools of distant reading lose track of some important features of the
                    individual text while situating it among flows of texts . Metadata produced by these methods can
                    enrich the study of a particular text. Metadata about networks of texts
                    contributes to a healthy skepticism about the texts that are in the cannon and
                    the reasons why they were selected. The study of the humanist tradition is
                    important but the dimensions to which it might be self-justifying should be
                    subjected to rigorous criticism. For Moretti, it is the shift between micro and
                    macro levels that brings insight. The second aspect of the analysis involves
                    reproducing these acts of close reading through some sort of means (more or less
                    automated) and producing a new document to serve as the stand-in for analysis.
                    Plots, often with an x-axis of time or sequence, allow single variables to be
                    explored. When the data points are replaced iconically with that which
                    represented, the depth of analysis and difference might shift. The trend and the
                    thing can be apprehended at once. Structured montage can allow subsets to be
                    plastically produced of images for visual reading. With adequate resolution the
                    primary source and its categorical context can be apprehended in the same
                    glance. Or to be quite literal, a large, high-resolution monitor can produce
                    great detail. 
                Distant reading offers a chance to connect the changes of images to the text of
                    the president's speech and further to establish a baseline reading of the way
                    that the Administration’s preferred interface for viewing the State of the Union
                    appeared. Stipulated in this approach is the idea that public address is a form
                    of time-based art. Public addresses after their delivery are fixed to a medium.
                    Stored media lose their time-axis stability, editing, selective memory, and
                    mashups become the norm. Speeches become sound bites. This is nowhere more
                    apparent than in the edited State of the Union released by the Republicans after
                    the State of the Union . What the ersatz video
                    supposes is that one might agree with every issue raised by President Obama
                    aside from the changing climate. As a strategy the edited State of the Union
                    would call attention to that element of the speech, although it seems likely
                    that any viewer was already likely aware of climate being a major issue for the
                    contemporary Democratic party in the United States. The thing itself was
                    designed as a time-based experience that built toward a climax or message. 
                These alternative methods for reading are optical, not visual. This is a
                    distinction that matters as the sort of critical insight that rhetoricians
                    emphasize tends to come from the visual capacity to notice rather than the
                    optical properties of the text. The kind of information produced through this
                    distant reading software is not a reading of the sign system of the work, but a
                    reading of the ways that the computer would render light from a datafile.
                    Friedrich Kittler was quite intentional in distinguishing between the humanistic
                    study of the visual and the technical study of the optical . The indications taken by this method for analysis
                    are readings of light, not the interpretation of the text - this will happen
                    later in this article. In his introduction to Kittler’s Optical Media, John Durham Peters wrote, 
                         Optics is a subfield of physics, vision is a subfield
                            of physiology, psychology, and culture
                        
                    . For Peters and other readers of Kittler, this opens the space for the
                    study of logistical media and the technologies that use spectrum that is either
                    beyond the human. Although this analysis will not venture into the realm of that
                    which is beyond the human eye, the sort of time manipulation inherent in the
                    distant reading strategy and synthesis of an analytical object (the montage, the
                    plot) the compression of time makes the speech into point in time that is not
                    perceptible without technology. In this sense, this analysis is dependent on the
                    optical rather than the visual, but is ultimately a visual analysis. Moving
                    toward the optical for the study of composition can expand the range of possible
                    codes detected and experiences understood. Much as field notes create meaningful
                    meta-text for the synthesis of ethnographic insight, optical analytic montage
                    enables forms of noticing for rhetorical critics that can move beyond the single
                    image. 
            

                The Slide Show 
                The montage shows the totality of the slide program presented along the side of
                    the president during the state of the Union. The diptych of the video program
                    was broken nearly in half, with the image of the slide taking a considerable
                    amount of screen space on the right side of the image of the president. The
                    purpose of this slide presentation is ostensibly to provide information that
                    would support the president’s speech. Both images stacks are read in this
                    analysis as they pose novel attempts by the president to communicate with the
                    public. 
                
                    Montage of Slides
                    
                
                Between images the use of recurring themes can be identified. Discussions of the
                    body during mid-speech are marked as medical through their use of the x-ray
                    view. The normal image properties in the stack are fairly compositionally
                    simple. Images are similar within regions of the stack, easily marking similar
                    themes. Slides are typically organized from the top-left with text aligned left.
                    Reading these slides at a glance would keep the focus of the viewer near the
                    center of the screen. Occasional slides are aligned to the center, while the
                    slides in the Internet section are aligned to the right. A quick survey of
                    graphical styles reveals only a handful of line graphs. Line graphs are
                    typically used to show a linear relationship, the ideal orientation of the graph
                    moves in the opposite direction of the practice of reading the slide, from the
                    bottom left to the top right. Graphics presented in the slides use this
                    vernacular. Either a relationship is decreasing or increasing over time. Never
                    are relationships bimodal, stochastic, or noisy. 
                Designing images to work with basic indexical relationships is an important move
                    within the presidents argumentative system. Backing for the president’s argument
                    does not come from generalization, signs, or authority, but from the invocation
                    of linear cause-effect and effect-cause reasoning. This pattern of claim and
                    data continues through row nine of the montage at the conclusion of the
                    discussion of climate change. At this point the image styles change
                    substantially. After a series of images of the Obamas, the images turn toward
                    the vision of A Better Politics. At a glance it is apparent
                    that this section is both substantial (nearly a third of the image field if the
                    family images are included), and visually distinct. Text in these boxes is
                    aligned center and the total image text is relatively scant compared with other
                    frames. The degree to which these images, and this section of the speech varies
                    will become apparent as we read other attributes of the stack. 
                It may be difficult to notice a distance from the stack, but each individual
                    slide is marked in the lower left corner with a hashtag. Nominally, Twitter is
                    organized around shared attention. Hashtags are a form of communicative meta-
                    data that helps to make sense of the conversation. As a technology, hashtags
                    organize the communication of a temporal network in ways that are not possible
                    because of the lack of an affinity or geographic referent. Advertisers suggest
                    hashtags to organize attention for more efficient control of flow through
                    commercials . The provided for the State of the
                    Union, presented in order of first appearance, are: 
                
                    #LeadOnJobs (images 2-3, 10-11, 22, 25, 47, 50-52, 54)
                    #LeadOnEducation (image 4, 16-17, 42-43)
                    #GetCovered (image 5, 19, 24, 112)
                    #LeadOnEnergy (image 12, 15)
                    #ActOnClimate (image 13-14, 91-97)
                    #MadeInAmerica (image 20, 53, 58, 60)
                    #AmericaLeads (image 21, 27, 29, 56-57, 59, 61-63, 67-69, 78-83,
                        86-90)
                    #MiddleClassTaxCuts (image 28, 32, 71-74)
                    #SOTU (image 30-31)
                    #LeadOnLeave (image 33-34)
                    #EqualPay (image 35-36)
                    #RaiseTheWage (image 37-41, 70)
                    #FreeCommunityCollege (44-46)
                    #RebuildAmerica(53)
                    #NetNeutrality (64-66)
                    #BetterPolitics (111)
                
                Or, expressed as a timeline:
                
                    Hashtags by Slide
                    
                
                The final hashtag introduced until the final #BetterPolitics is #NetNeutrality,
                    which is roughly half way through the speech. The longest individual run of
                    slides with the same hashtag was the #AmericaLeads section on foreign policy
                    between images 78-90 with no hashtag used on slides 84-85. Early in the speech
                    the Hashtags rapidly shift, with similar arguments in different areas switching
                    hashtags on a point by point basis. As a multiscreen practice this use of
                    multiple and shifting hashtags would provide for different discussions that
                    might resonate with different audiences. 
                Toward the end of the speech the duration of each hashtag increases. This does
                    not mean that the arguments presented during these longer duration hashtag
                    episodes are more coherent. Consider #AmericaLeads, the arguments presented in
                    this hashtag region are a laundry list of foreign policy issues. The conflict
                    with ISIS/ISIL, the Ebola virus, the embargo of Cuba, the construction of
                    nuclear devices in Iran, and the problem of organized computer hacking are
                    organized by a single hashtag. #AmericaLeads also links images related to: the
                    federal deficit, social security, employer provided day care for children, trade
                    negotiations, innovation, three-dimensional printing, and new drugs. Instead of
                    serving to mark a focused argument, #AmericaLeads seems to be a miscellaneous
                    category, not an argument with any particular depth. The rapid succession of
                    hashtags related to issues or points unrelated to the longer duration tags other
                    than #AmericaLeads suggests that the speech has the quality of Taft, a list of
                    points and arguments presented in short bytes. Once introduced, these hashtags
                    recur, but could just as easily be left to serve as a scaffolding for debate and
                    discussion. Research on Twitter hashtag longevity suggests that lifespan of
                    these posts, likely lacking rich media, is quite short . Hashtags do little for lexical innovation or democratization of contact.
                    Perhaps more important, during media events, Lin, Keegan, Margolin, and Lazer
                    have found distinct trends of centralization and decreases in interpersonal
                    communication via the platform (2014). This suggests that the rapid deployment
                    of these hashtags was intended to seed possible future posting, not necessarily
                    to inform conversation during the speech. 
                #ActOnClimate on the other hand, does have a focused argument. For a number of
                    slides the president spoke on the same topic in detail, given the rapid change
                    in hashtags earlier in the speech the use of a sustained hashtag followed be no
                    hashtag is distinct. The ways in which this argument develops can be observed
                    through the reading of red in the image stack.
                
                    Slide Sequence Red
                    
                
                Instead of a montage we can plot the images from the slide deck based on their
                    image values. The image of the slide stack can be plotted in time against the
                    mean use of the color red. This measure analyzes the mean red value of each
                    image, not the peak redness of the frame or the standard deviation of redness
                    through a particular frame. Although standard deviation red could detect the use
                    of red points, the use of total red generally will also offset slides that tend
                    to be very red or very white. Mean measurements are superior for detecting the
                    overall impression of the color of an image. Unlike print, the primary colors
                    for analysis in this color space are red, green, and blue; not cyan, magenta,
                    yellow, and often black. 
                The images in the first two-thirds of the speech tend not to be particularly red.
                    Red is limited, and used as a warning color. The first major peak of the use of
                    red (that is not red mixed into white) is the background of an image describing
                    the story of a person without the affordable health care act. Juxtaposed by
                    these slides are the idea of a healthy, happy family and deep medical debt. Red
                    provides contrast, and in the cultural context of the United States a
                    signification of danger. 
                Mid-speech red peaks come through in a full screen image of the flag of the
                    United States, the text of the slide argues that in 2014, the United States
                    became the world leader in foreign investment. This image offers the peak
                    intensity of the #MadeInAmerica section of the speech. 
                #ActOnClimate marks a turning point from the blue interlude of #AmericaLeads. As
                    the climate argument moves from providing basic information to the impacts of
                    rising temperatures the images become dramatically more red. The warning
                    function returns. A red orange sunset points to the danger of heat. After this
                    peak, red falls off as the final stanza, nearly one quarter of the images in
                    this stack, hashtagless, run to the end. 
                
                    Slide Sequence Blue
                    
                
                Much of the image stack is quite blue. An early blue peak is the counter-point to
                    the visual representation of danger and warning for the uninsured. The
                    midsection of the speech is again, stable and not too intense. Images like the
                    red hot sun of possible alternative energy against a black space are the
                    opposite of blue. Much like the rise in red, images in the climate section of
                    the speech become more intensely blue. Transitioning into a less blue phase are
                    images of the President from the past, followed by a dark blue final phase.
                    Ending the speech with a distinct shift in visual style gestures toward this
                    being the real substance of the presentation, and the substance of that
                    presentation was less deliberative and policy focused as much as it was
                    epidictic. The epidictic speech on American values is not particularly
                    remarkable compared with other speeches by Barak Obama - the central theme of
                    the speech is that Americans nationally have enough in common that they might
                    form an effective polity. Obama praises efforts at expanding civil rights and
                    the safety and security of the nation, while decrying the tonality of politics.
                    Obama centered his better politics stanza on a conception
                    of public debate, 
                        A better politics is one where we debate without
                            demonizing each other; where we talk issues and values, and principles
                            and facts, rather than gotcha moments, or trivial
                            gaffes, or fake controversies that have nothing to do with people’s
                            daily lives
                        State of the Union, 2016
                    . The story of the United States in this final section is one of a unified
                    national family that has recovered from traumatic events to be stronger. There
                    seem to be very few sound bite worthy moments in this visually homogeneous
                    section of the speech aside from Obama’s impromptu I won them
                        both reply. What the reading of blue notes is the presentation of
                    a laundry list of policy priorities was accompanied by a stream of images and
                    evidence, while the substance of praise and blame and politics requires minimal
                    visual noise. 
                
                    Slide Sequence Entropy
                    
                
                Entropy is a measure of the tendency of the image toward disorder.
                    Entropy is more revealing than Kurtosis, as the measure of
                    peakedness in the image would require a secondary analysis of the thing that is
                    peaking. There is a clear break between two categories of slides in the stack:
                    those with photographic images and those with charts and graphs. This is not to
                    say that all images without photographs are low entropy, some artificially
                    created images have a high level of entropy. These lower entropy images tend to
                    be those making direct points with a cause and effect warrant and those used in
                    the final stanza of the speech on values. A cluster of higher entropy slides
                    come as the #ActOnClimate section of the speech turns toward #BetterPolitics.
                    The use of images in this concluding movement of the speech is sparse until the
                    final review of key points. This visual strategy makes sense for the material
                    provided. When arguing about the state of the earth, images are the sort of
                    evidence that might support the president. When speaking about discourse, the
                    slides are decidedly plain. It is not that Obama has damaged the occasion of the
                    State of the Union, but that the context of the speech seems to require the
                    president to speak to a wide variety of issues in a tightly packed, rapid
                    presentation of policy ideas ostensibly for deliberation. Entropy measurement
                    suggests that the longer expositions on a handful of topics are accompanied by
                    images that are more random, and likely more realistic and more affectively
                    engaging than those provided for the deliberative policy segments of the speech.
                    This insight may seem straight-forward, yet the way that the low entropy slides
                    end almost completely as the use of hashtags on the slides is curtailed speaks
                    to break in the movements of the speech. 
            

                The Waterfall 
                The initial impression of the waterfall stack makes an important point about the
                    composition of the average slide - it is far whiter than those in the slide
                    stack. There are templates at work. When compared with the images in the slides,
                    the waterfall is substantially different. 
                
                    Waterfall Montage
                    
                
                The variety of base images and formats for this portion of the presentation is
                    substantially smaller than those on the slide deck. Standardized image formats
                    are similar to those seen in a smartphone. These are rounded, white cards with
                    input boxes and symmetrical buttons. Occasionally, images are marked with a
                    colored corner. Although it is not captured by the montage, several of the
                    images near the end of the speech are gifs — the slides contain moving images.
                    Beyond the spectacle of moving images, twenty-five out of seventy-six cards ask
                    for user input. Mere input should not be confused with true interactivity or
                    immersion, interactivity is an affordance of a system, true immersion is the
                    result of real or simulated intersubjective contact .
                    These moments for input seemingly provide the ability for the audience at home
                    to provide evidence for claims made in the speech and to participate in the
                    ongoing project of pressing buttons or entering user information. For the
                    administration the production of new administrative knowledge through these
                    interactions is quite real. 
                Ian Bogost has described the potential for interaction as producing affective
                    changes as procedural rhetoric. Proceduralism describes the way that the user of
                    the interface is asked to proceed through a series of tasks that have affective
                    potentials in themselves . The rhetorical moves made
                    by the administration in their deployment of these basic cards come through quiz
                    questions (confirming and correcting user knowledge) and situating the user
                    through survey questions (connecting cause and effect relationships) for the
                    user of the interface. By reading the interface procedurally alongside the
                    primary presentation (the speech), this approach offers the possibility of
                    reading the affective differential of screen and interface without flattening
                    the interaction into a single image or taking a strong ontological stand on the
                    digital. Although quantitizing sensors provide for the production of digital
                    images, all too often digital domains of research do not escape the event
                    horizon of the claim to the new. New-ness has a political appeal as it offers a
                    hope of a new beginning, yet as Gitelman and Pingree note, the historical flow
                    between new forms is not neat, continuous, or clear — there are so many examples
                    of cases where the ostensibly new media are in fact, quite old . Forms, cultural practices, and power relations
                    persist between regimes of media technology. Rather than turning to discuss the
                    idea of the break, the approach to distant reading and rhetoric taken in this
                    essay supposes that the hinge of analysis is the affective and persuasive
                    potential of particular interface choices along the lines of Barbara Warnick
                    (2004). Alexander Galloway makes an important point for media studies to note
                    the impossibility of the interface . The impossible
                    interface contends that there is no transparent communication or pure
                    meta-language. Careful attention to the procedures that users complete and the
                    affective dimensions of the buttons they might press or the sequence of events
                    is critical. Lev Manovich was not wrong in The Language of
                        New Media, when he argued that hypertext was more of a distraction
                    than a form of meaningful communication . Hypertext
                    is an important function for lateral thinking and organizing information, not an
                    alternate universe. The narratological theories that centered hypertext offer
                    few conceptual resources for evaluating interaction patterns. Mapping the actual
                    use of experiences is the task of rhetoric online and interface studies for
                    rhetorical criticism, in the context of the experience of tasks presented to the
                    audience the procedural view is much more closely in tune with the sort of
                    explication of the experience of being in the audience that has been
                    historically suggested by the rhetorical critique of executive address. Bogost
                    frames this practice as, 
                        authoring arguments through processes
                        
                    . Context comes through consideration of the device and the occasion, an
                    attention to text requires an engagement with the order of screens, buttons, and
                    tabs. 
                On the meta-rhetorical level, the ongoing question of the waterfall of slides is
                    not one of the user's knowledge in completing the questions, but of the
                    condition that a user of these slides is asked to respond to the ideological
                    hail of the president, to engage in the ritual of answering the presidents call
                    and response. The next step after merely responding is to use the embedded share
                    buttons to distribute the card to ones friends. As a form of procedural
                    experience, this asks users to take the step of becoming engaged in political
                    conversation on their social networks. Even for those who may elect not to
                    become a political Facebooker, the subject position of the engaged, networked
                    citizen becomes quite real through this smooth, everyday, procedural rhetoric.
                    The references to the iPhone are quite apparent in the State of the Union -
                    these card designs are not new or arbitrary, but exceedingly familiar interface
                    patterns. Evidence for this similarity is abundant, a particularly noticeable
                    inclusion is the use of the Apple pinch to expand gesture on the lower left
                    corner of images in the stack . As a form of
                    remediation, the cards borrow heavily from a number of image vernaculars
                    associated with smart phones, from the use of suggested gestures to the use of
                    button iconography such as the two arrowed square retweet. 
                
                    Waterfall Interactive Features by Card
                    
                
                The recurrent theme is the idea that one might identify with an imaginary
                    community on the basis of their state of residence, described as a 
                        horizontal comradeship
                        
                    . Earlier in the speech these poll questions were formatted as a quiz
                    about policy positions, such as What is America’s fastest-growing
                        energy industry? In the mid-speech these questions are replaced
                    by drop down boxes asking for the user to situate their location. Of the five
                    calls for user contact information three of them appear after one-half of the
                    waterfall cards have been deployed, and the number of calls for users to be
                    situated or quizzed drops at that point. At one point in the mid-speech, there
                    is a region where every other card is a call for the user to take some action.
                    In addition to the laundry list organization of the speech, the para-social
                    dimension of the waterfall takes on a laundry list dimension as well. Each issue
                    requires a question, even if that question is not developed into any meaningful
                    line of argument. To facilitate this sort of contact, the return state of each
                    card produces a relative answer. For example, in answering the question,
                        It’s a big country. Where do you call home? Answers are
                    not given in total responses, Rural Heartland (15%), Main Street, USA (13%),
                    Suburban Town (37%), Major City (35%). What these categories mean is less than
                    transparent. Other questions provided a more simplistic card without
                    percentages. No interactive cards were deployed during the end of the speech. 
                It is important to note that some of the images near the conclusion are not
                    static, but are instead GIFs. GIF or graphics interchange format files
                    facilitate the placement of animations created through short file sequences.
                    These have become quite common as means for producing a short run of video that
                    does not require a cumbersome video player application on the client side or a
                    server side video utility. The relative moment of screen images is tracked at
                    the end of this section through a method for detecting changes in intensity mean
                    through the progress of the speech. 
                
                    Waterfall Tracking Red
                    
                
                Reading for red shows a great deal of similarity between images in the waterfall
                    stack. The outliers in this progression are not the images that are much more
                    red than others, but the images that are much less red. Or to put it another
                    way, since the majority of the detected red in the stack comes from the use of
                    white card images. Aside from the occasional blue image that includes a picture
                    of things in the world. Unlike the slides, there is no use of red, orange, or
                    yellow as a marker of warning or attention. Nothing at the bottom of the screen
                    would call attention away from the visage and voice of President Obama. 
                
                    Waterfall Tracking Blue
                    
                
                It is striking how similar the plots of red and blue are - the difference in the
                    base level of blue makes the appearance of the cluster of dark images that are
                    common between the waterfall and the slides stand out. The lack of color
                    variation is important as it is so different from the use of color in the slides
                    that accompanied the speech. When users would be engaged with the material that
                    was designed to be easily transmissible the dynamism of the image, as read
                    through visual use of red, is minimal. 
                
                    Waterfall Tracking Entropy
                    
                
                The entropy measure confirms the stable baseline of images created for
                    interaction via interface level controls. On closer examination, the image is a
                    recolored picture of a parking lot of antique cars used to make an argument
                    about the United States embargo of Cuba. The make of these cars is important -
                    the designs of these older cars have pronounced lines. The baseline entropy of
                    images in the waterfall is relatively low. Aesthetic norms in card based design
                    come across here, as the standard card formats appear to dominate the entropy
                    chart, with occasional variation for higher entropy real world images. 
                Entropy maps the randomness of the images. The similarity of the basic image in
                    the waterfall is established by this metric as well. If we take entropy to be a
                    potential measure of visual noise, the waterfall follows a similar affective
                    trajectory to the slide deck. More entropy through the end of the environmental
                    arguments, followed by a very low entropy period established at the conclusion
                    of the speech. 
                
                    Fig 11. Degree of Visual Change Detected Within Waterfall (frames are
                        extracted at roughly one per second from web recorded video of the page as
                        it adapted)
                    
                
                The cadence of images deployed in the waterfall slows toward the end, but as you
                    can see there is a wash of activity during the otherwise placid concluding run
                    of images. What is being detected here are the GIFs deployed near the end of the
                    speech. There are two GIFs in the conclusion of the speech, one of a waiving
                    American flag, and another of fireworks. Fireworks is the period of rapid
                    activity near frame number 2497. Fireworks and the waiving flag seem to be
                    intended to convey a feeling of a spirited conclusion. This is at odds with the
                    general use of GIFs for the purposes of providing sarcastic emotional modulation
                    in the listicle genre or to provide show sports highlights in slow motion.
                    Intensity peaks when slides that are visually distinct are animated on the
                    screen at the same time, these slides would tend to be those with pictures,
                    rather than charts or graphs. Slide 1249 marks the half-way point of the
                    presentation. This low level visual interest could serve the opposite function
                    of the relatively boring ending to the presentation of the informational images.
                    Something moving on the bottom of the screen could re-engage members of the
                    audience who had lost focus. By viewing the flow of the presentation as a
                    timeline, the ways in which change, cadence, and density affect the final
                    presentation can be understood more easily. It is interesting to see that the
                    president’s social media team chose to change the waterfall in bursts, rather
                    than in regular intervals. Much like visual variation and vocal delivery, the
                    intensities of engagement wax and wane as the speech ramps up and down. This
                    only varies at the very end of the presentation when the waterfall slides move
                    the most while the other elements of the presentation are substantially
                    down-tuned to make space for the speaker. 
            

                Conclusion 
                The State of the Union has a complex history. The position of the speech as an
                    epideictic occasion has become increasingly pronounced as the president might
                    craft an ideographic appeal beyond the late-journalistic narrative structure of
                    competition. The optical reading of the slides and waterfall shows a speech that
                    has a distinct laundry list element, much like the style detailed by Tullis as
                    present in the pre-visual era of presidential address. Large parts of the speech
                    are constituted by clusters, structured around a longer visual narrative that
                    increases in intensity in the second half of the policy portion of the speech,
                    followed by a much more compact epideictic conclusion. Early in the speech,
                    users were asked to click often, as the speech progressed they were asked to
                    click less. Interactive speech design in this context brings the user in with a
                    multiplicity of hooks and appeals, settling into a single coherent argument in
                    the longer run. 
                The online State of the Union is characterized by a flurry of activity. Text was
                    to be entered into boxes. Buttons were to be clicked. Posts to be shared.
                    Hashtags provided to seed the growth of crystalized conversations were modulated
                    on a slide-by-slide basis. Coherence is at a premium. Simple cause-effect
                    warrants are offered in arrays for different audiences. After the mid-point, the
                    user was to have tired of clicking, opting instead for sustained attention on
                    the president. Hashtags were left off slides and graphs gave way to photographic
                    images. The interface procedure for users asks that they engage in situating
                    activity, and then once engaged, that they take in the final act of the episode.
                    Organizationally this presentation depends on users being so consumed with
                    second screens, interest groups, and their relative positions that they needed
                    to engage in an extended listening and clicking session first, waiting for the
                    substance of the affective portion of the speech until they have become fully
                    affectively attuned to the cacophony of different voices speaking through the
                    slides and waterfall cards. It is not simply that the use of warning colors and
                    turns around those points occur earlier in the speech, but that these are
                    associated with the laundry list phase. The preference for graphics over the
                    photographic image in the first half to three quarters of the speech points at
                    the need to layout simple cause and effect warrant relationships that might
                    drive forward a host of densely packed policy arguments. Lower delta (rate of
                    change) images in the later portion of the speech are given time, they are
                    allowed to linger without the crass meta-narration of the suggested hashtag.
                    When these images are combined with the lower density and alternative
                    compositional style of the concluding data points and GIFs the affective design
                    of the speech comes to fruition — this feeling of achievement and pride is what
                    users were asked to sit, click, and Tweet through until they reached the ending
                    of the speech where they might experience an emotional quilting point. 
                Obama’s interactive visual rhetoric depends on the idea that users first engage
                    the affordances of the platform and then turn back toward the immersive context
                    of the speaker as a form of contact. Users are asked to click and engage the
                    waterfall for the first portion of the speech, not the conclusion. The visual
                    design of the waterfall is intended to be a form of blasé remediation. Americans
                    with cellular telephones are familiar with this design. The learning curve for
                    this interface is flat. Images in the informative slide deck stabilize the story
                    and then break apart that vernacular as the laundry list section of the speech
                    ends. As an update to the theory of the rhetorical presidency, interactive
                    graphics both constrain and enable the president. The existing mode of
                    organization in the form of the laundry list is accomplished as an almost
                    entirely separate unit from the epideictic speech that follows. Obama’s Sixth
                    Annual Address was marked by claims to new interactivity, and if this is to be
                    taken as a baseline, it seems that the new organizational scheme for the annual
                    address is a long list of individual points, clicks, and simple slides, followed
                    by an emotional speech that seeks to shape the emotional resonance of the public
                    sphere. If this way of attempting to serve as the president through the
                    performance of being the leader shapes affective and aesthetic norms in such a
                    way that it might lead to more effective deliberation it may mark a new way of
                    thinking about the deliberative potential of the presidency. Uniting close and
                    distant reading of the enhanced State of the Union offers an approach for the
                    study of public address delivered through new, social interfaces, examples for
                    the use of tools in rhetorical criticism, and a vocabulary for the discussion of
                    rhetorical theory and topics in the context of new areas for analysis. This
                    essay has demonstrated the potential for optical measurement and montage as
                    methods that could inform the study of Public Address. Surely future studies of
                    enhanced addresses will more closely synch speech elements with particular
                    visual moments, with those moments situated by distant analyses of the speech
                    program as a whole. 
                President Obama in this sense asked the public to complete a visual process for a
                    highly engaged response to the speech followed by sustained attention. This
                    visual program ran in parallel with a selection of simplified warranting
                    patterns. Both of these visual programs modulated affect through the careful
                    deployment of affordances and markings that would be processed in particular
                    ways at particular times in such a way that they allow users to defer engagement
                    until they reach the portion of the speech they are intended to engage. This
                    mode of rhetorical engagement has only recently been deployed in any public
                    address forum and it will surely be the topic of many essays in the coming
                    years. 
            
