Title:  Experiential Analogies: A Sonic Digital Ekphrasis as a Digital
                    Humanities Project
Volume:  010
Issue:  2
Date:  19 May 2016
Abstract:  
                Humanistic uses of digital technologies have opened up new ways to think about,
                    communicate, and discuss historical research. The common use of digital tools to
                    visually represent ancient cultures and sites, however, has also introduced new
                    issues. For example, critics have argued that digital visualisations, largely
                    synonymous with reconstruction in 3D models, often attempt to represent a
                    photorealistic-artificial vision of the past, and may often prove to be a way to
                    communicate history to a large(r) audience . Against
                    this backdrop, this article will discuss precisely how technology may help
                    immerse researchers into historically situated life, and radically advance
                    historical research. Adding to related criticisms of ocularcentric traditions of
                    knowledge production, we contribute to this stream of research by arguing that
                    contemporary visual representations of the past often concentrate on visual
                    representations and seemingly maintain antiquity as a sanitised
                    historio-cultural ideal 
                    . More specifically, this article seeks to
                    demonstrate the potential of digital humanities to move beyond mere
                    representations on screen and to mobilize other senses (specifically sound) as a
                    historically situated component for research. For this purpose, we focus on the
                    abstract principles and overall methodology for a recreation of the experience
                    of sounds in the Roman amphitheatre.
            
Full Body Text: 
Introduction

                
                    That all our knowledge begins with
                        experience there can be no doubt. For how is it possible that the faculty of
                        cognition should be awakened into exercise otherwise than by means of
                        objects which affect our senses, and partly of themselves produce
                        representations, partly rouse our powers of understanding into activity, to
                        compare, to connect, or to separate these, and so to convert the raw
                        material of our sensuous impressions into a knowledge of objects, which is
                        called experience.
                    
                
            
Epistemologies in the Humanities often draw upon Platonist frames of thought, the
                noumenal and the phenomenal, largely canonizing the former as essential in
                scientific outcomes, and disdaining the latter. Indeed, the noumenal (world known by
                intellect) is considered superior to the phenomenal realm, the material, physical
                world of immediate sensory perception . Experiencing
                phenomena as the initiating act towards examination, analysis and scholarly
                reflection is widely used in concrete scientific research, such as chemistry,
                mathematics, and physics. Experiencing as methodology has been particularly iterated
                by Emmanuel Kant, the early modern philosopher who is responsible for synthesizing
                both waves of rationalism and empiricism in modern epistemology. See . Kant, in an attempt to explain the relationship
                between reason, scientific explanation and human experience, argued that our
                experiences are structured by necessary features of our minds. In his view, the mind
                shapes and structures experience so that, on an abstract level, all human experience
                shares certain essential structural features. Beyond such essentialist assumptions
                of knowledge production, we here argue that experiential and sensory arrangements
                mediated by digital tools may be used to advance and diversify the study of
                humanities, specifically the variability of historically situated human life. 
Technology has opened up new ways to communicate and discuss historical research,
                often through conceptual recreation, with vision acting as the primary sense for
                engagement and reflection. A widely used method is visualizations.
                This, often intellectually refined methodology may provide the means to communicate
                history to a large(r) audience, in a situated space (cultural heritage exhibitions,
                museums, scholarly installations on display) or online (see Rome Reborn for
                example). The introduction of technology as both a lens and a methodology, however,
                has introduced new issues. Visualizations are 
                    often synonymous with a
                        photorealistic-artificial ideal about the past
                    
                . They 
                    often concentrate on visual
                        representations and seemingly maintain antiquity as a sanitised
                        historio-cultural ideal
                    
                
                 . While visualisations may facilitate an understanding
                of movement in (currently musealised) spaces or urban planning and architecture,
                they are, in their majority, deprived of other senses, beyond vision. 
Against this backdrop, we examine how technology may help researchers in their quest
                to understand historically situated life, beyond mere vision. Our scholarly
                endeavour addresses the possibilities for radically advancing historical research
                through experiential analogy that may involve sensory immersion. Adding
                to related criticisms of ocularcentric traditions of knowledge production, we seek
                to demonstrate the potential of digital humanities to move beyond soundless
                representations on screen and to mobilize other senses (specifically sound) as a
                historically situated component for research. For this purpose, we focus on the
                abstract principles and overall methodology for a recreation of the experience of
                sounds in the Roman amphitheatre as a case study. Our aim is to demonstrate how
                experiential analogy may convert the raw material of our sensuous impressions into
                knowledge production. 
That the study of senses has escaped our point of espial for centuries may, to an
                extent, be connected to deeper epistemological problems regarding the relative value
                of scientific and humanistic modes of knowledge creation . In this article, we aim to target this issue and explore how Digital Humanities
                could facilitate a study of the senses in context and promote a more immersive and
                multifarious comprehension of historically situated life. Our case study is Roman
                entertainment, because of the challenges it entails for research. Our primary and
                raw data have their own limitations. Most amphitheatres are currently musealised
                monuments, inclusive of the soundscapes that spring from their surrounding
                environment, thus, out of their original context. Second,
                ancient narratives are composed by an upper echelon of literate Roman citizens, so
                the voices of microhistory (slaves, women, entertainers) are absent in our account
                of the Roman empire, making it partial. Later receptions of antiquity (especially
                during the 18th century) have been vastly re-iterated as idealized, thus blurring
                our contemporary understanding further. Recent research has delved more into
                micro-historic societal concepts, and consequently concluded that previous
                interpretations suffer from historically restricted assumptions, the outcome of
                adopting hierarchically stratified categories of analysis. If ancient performance is
                instead seen as a popular means to project concepts of identity, a sensory discourse
                may aid scholars in capturing and articulating the complex societal dynamics in a
                Graeco-roman backdrop. 
The Roman amphitheatre as a material, architectural structure and a monument is
                present in the areas surrounding the Mediterranean sea, from North African countries
                to Asia Minor to continental Europe. The diversity of cultures composing the Roman
                empire seem to have adopted Roman spectacle as a form of popular entertainment. It
                has been argued that Rome was an oral and
                    aural society . Buildings,
                especially Roman amphitheatres, were designed to accommodate a live event, a
                spectacle that was inclusive of the sensory experience: it incorporated sound,
                smell, and movement. Latin and Greek texts describing this experience were
                originally read out loud to a largely illiterate population. To enhance the texts’
                vividness, authors often used the rhetorical devise of ekphrasis, an evocative style of narrative that aimed to stimulate
                the senses, often simultaneously - in a synaesthetic manner. Synaesthesia is known generally as the condition
                for those who experience one kind of sensory stimulus simultaneously as another,
                most commonly sounds with colours. A broader definition of synaesthesia has been the 
                    blending of all senses experienced by
                        all readers, synaesthetes or not
                    
                . By discussing the possibilities and problems of (a) digital recreation(s) of
                historically situated sound, this article aims to show how technology may help us
                not only redress the nexus of societal and cultural practices in relation to more
                immediate, pre-industrial forms of entertainment, but also provoke new questions
                about the popular rendering of antiquity within contemporaneity. Therefore, we
                hereby argue that historical accuracy, as a methodological criterion in the study of
                ancient performance, should be discarded in favour of experiential analogy. The
                noumenal then transforms from one archetypal ideal to a
                variation of experiences. 
Through experiential methodology, rich sensory detail may aid scholars to move beyond
                ideals of accuracy, and to give us further insight into the lifeworld of antiquity.
                In particular, we examine how digital sound engineering can be used to re-enact the
                ancient experience of Roman entertainment. To address this question we suggest the
                incorporation of sound studies within the field of historical studies, and
                specifically a combination of text mining and archaeoacoustics: the study of the
                sonic experience of archaeological sites via digital acoustic modelling . In so doing, we show that by using simple programmes
                for digital modelling of sounds scholars can readily layer audio onto the primarily
                visual components of conventional digital prototypes. However, we also show that
                soundscapes modelled around monuments are not enough: to understand Roman culture we
                must acknowledge sensory experience as ephemeral, therefore variable and
                historically situated.
To help scholars tackle this issue we thus articulate a methodological approach,
                termed synaesthetic prototyping. Inspired by post-processual thinking
                in archaeology, the proposed approach blends narrative with archaeoacoustic
                techniques to turn attention from sensory accuracy to experiential analogy. This
                allows scholarship to better account for the multiple interpretations possible of
                any sensory experience  and to treat sensory data, in
                this case, sound, as materially situated in both space and time . For example, repeated and frequent car horn sounds in
                the arctic town of Umeå, Sweden may be a sign of chaos, whereas in downtown Athens,
                Greece they indicate common traffic. By belabouring how to understand the ways in
                which senses interweave notions of place, society and culture through a deeper form
                of assessing monuments and reading primary narratives enabled by digital means, this
                article ultimately contributes to the sensory turn in archaeology and history
                research.
This article ultimately pushes toward a sonic digital ekphrasis
                . Similar to the rhetorical device of
                    ekphrasis, which may be used to describe any experience, digital
                technology can be a means through which to recreate, experience and study the sounds
                within a historically situated occasion. Sonic digital ekphrasis
                becomes a methodological device in itself, enabling us to reassess the importance
                that senses and sounds in particular held for Roman culture. It is our hope that
                this article provides additional intellectual justification for a turn to studying
                the senses digitally. We wish to clarify up front that this topic requires further
                exploration, but is important to keep in mind: as digital humanities require
                conceptual anchors and an openness to theories and methods borrowed from other
                disciplines, scholars in a post-disciplinary world need to be reminded of the 
                    importance of craft and the value of
                        tacit knowledge
                    
                , both as a tool and a methodology. 

                The Ephemeral Qualities of Sound #1: Archaeoacoustics
                Digital prototypes in the form of 3D visualisations have found prominent use
                    within humanities research 
                    
                    
                    . In traditional historical disciplines such as
                    archaeology, history and classics, scholars have, for example, used digital
                    technologies to map out and relate detailed geographic data
                    to primary sources in order to perceive larger societal patterns, and to
                    visualise places geographically and chronologically remote 
                    . The ample use of web-mapping
                    applications such as Google Earth have changed the ways in which scholars
                    perceive data; the application of contemporary web-based methods towards
                    visualisations and geospatial analysis challenges conventional concepts of space
                    (see  and . The vast majority of scholarly attempts to digitally reconstruct ancient
                    urban sites for entertainment or otherwise indeed rely on the visual
                    representation of (physical) materiality such as buildings, bridges or roads
                    through 3D and virtual reality models. These visualisations have provided much
                    historical insight into aspects of urban development  and have facilitated critical
                    discussions of the application of digital tools within the context of museology,
                    or the narratives of digital heritage (see ,
                        , and . 
                3D models then make evident how existing digital tools and related models carry
                    assumptions of knowledge as primarily visual, thus neglecting other sensory
                    detail and sustaining the ocularcentric tradition within humanities research
                        
                    , as well as an idealised image of
                    antiquity. Western intellectual traditions has indeed shown a marked preference
                    for vision as the figure of knowledge (see .
                    The excuse is often that intangible artefacts, such as senses, leave no traces
                    or evidence, so we cannot represent them in their entirety. The lack of evidence
                    is in fact present in any historical research, sensory or not. As pointed out by
                    several scholars across disciplines, sound is characterized by ephemerality. A
                    scholarly exploration of sensory experience may provide gateways to both the
                    mind and the body; it mediates cultural values between the individual and the
                    social world
                    
                    . Sounds and their meanings are considered as shaped
                    by the cultural, economic, and political contexts in which they are produced and
                    heard 
                    . Indeed, sound studies have been referred
                    to as 
                        the interdisciplinary ferment in
                            the human sciences that takes sound as its analytical point of departure
                            or arrival. By analyzing both sonic practices and the discourses and
                            institutions that describe them, it redescribes what sound does in the
                            human world, and what humans do in the sonic world.
                        
                     Sound as experience may then help us understand concepts of identity and
                    community. Haines-Eitzen, in her forthcoming, Geographies
                        of silence, discusses the affective potential of landscapes and
                    their ties to the senses and imagination. Her case studies, like most sound
                    studies available, investigate the acoustic signature of a place with regard to
                    religious imagination and the shaping of religious experience. She also argues
                    that (Sounds of the Angels forthcoming) sounds may construct, inform, and shape
                        identity; situate individuals in time and place, indicate seasons, and built
                        environments, binding a community through shared experience. 
                The cultural connotations of sound then may be understood to extend beyond
                    language and through sensory encounter. For example, the mind the gap message in the London underground brings to
                    mind a particular context - that of a European metropolis and its sites. That in
                    itself creates further connotations — technology, trade, traffic, and rush hour,
                    to name but some. All these concepts are separate parts of the material culture
                    of London and in a way, they come together in human consciousness in order to
                    denote the very identity of the city, a sonic reflection of its life within its
                    community. Similarly, in the Roman world, sound, community, and cultural
                    identity intersected and culminated in a particular type of building — the Roman
                    amphitheatre. 
                The two hundred and thirty Roman amphitheatres that have been found across the
                    area of the Roman empire  are indicative not
                    only of the prominent place of the spectacle within Roman life, but also the
                    weight of sensory experience therein: Roman amphitheatres are audio-visually
                    accomplished arenas whose architecture was designed with multisensory
                    experiences in mind. Against this backdrop, it is highly problematic that
                    digital representations of the past are largely devoid of human sensory
                    experiences beyond the oft-fetishized visual. How then can digital technologies
                    advance the study of the senses experience in antiquity? While any cityscape is
                    composed by a spectrum of sensory cues, we here focus on sound. Thanks to modern
                    digital equipment and software, sound can be more easily, reliably and
                    relatively inexpensively recreated and mobilised in comparison with other
                    sensory properties of the material world.
                Archaeology is, by its very nature, an interdisciplinary science, and as such has
                    been quick to adopt digital technologies (databases, electronic field surveys
                    and mapping) into its research methodologies . The
                    majority of practical archaeologists now routinely include the use of digital
                    methods in their work, and there is perhaps no longer any meaningful delineation
                    between digital and traditional archaeology. However,
                    digital visualization has become relatively common in the last decade, whereas
                    archaeoacoustics is still a young field of study. One of the reasons to apply
                    archaeoacoustics to studies of the Roman amphitheatre is to facilitate
                    recreation of how sound was experienced in this arena, paying detailed attention
                    to the shape and size of each building through measurements of their physical
                    properties . Archaeoacoustics also offers
                    a solid foundation for enquiries into the relevance of sound for ancient social
                    life, as there is already a basis of measurement (and standards) – a metrology –
                    for attending to the acoustic qualities of places and things. These studies have
                    been carried out in the last few decades in relation to prehistoric sites  and Greek and Roman monuments (see ). These studies show that digital
                    technology could be used to capture the acoustic qualities of a particular site.
                    They estimate and simulate qualities of sound in physical spaces such as
                    reverberation, or decay time, and so forth. However, they never move beyond
                    providing a soundscape, and towards a sensory reading of experience. These
                    studies are yet to be carried out for Roman amphitheatres. 
                Within the study of archaeoacoustics the evaluation of acoustic properties of
                    ancient sites is commonly achieved via digital sound modelling programs such as
                    ODEON and CATT-Acoustic™. The ODEON software is developed for simulating the
                    complex acoustics of buildings in a site. Given the geometry and surface
                    properties of a particular space, the acoustics can be predicted, illustrated
                    and listened to. To estimate the acoustic experience ODEON uses the image-source
                    method, virtually building a room combined with ray tracing, in order to map the
                    path of sound through pixels in an image plane and simulating the effects of its
                    encounters with virtual objects, for example the audience, or the very
                    material/surface of the building. Through such techniques ODEON and similar
                    software allows scholars to recreate sound experiences in both indoor and
                    outdoor areas with complicated geometry, such as Roman amphitheatres. Operating
                    in a similar way to ODEON, CATT-Acoustic™ is typically used for acoustics
                    research and education. Aside from software, another common practice has
                        been the estimation of sound within physical models such as concrete
                        reconstructions (see  on the
                        reconstruction of Stonehedge in Maruhill, Washington State, US). The process
                        often involves a theoretical prediction of acoustics as well as acoustical
                        field-testing and measurement. However refined and accomplished, the
                    use of archaeoacoustics software and hardware raises both technical and
                    scholarly challenges for researchers. 
                In addition to the issue of accurately recreating a particular sound in a given
                    soundscape, there are also related scholarly challenges to address within any
                    archaeoacoustic inquiry. The most significant scholarly challenge is that
                    archaeoacoustics involves recording and recreating the full array of sounds,
                    which has many permutations in any given scenario. This creates a methodological
                    problem. Archaeoacoustic studies cannot be carried out in controlled laboratory
                    situations like acoustics proper. Any study or recreation of sound should thus
                    be operated within the interpretative paradigm of social and humanistic
                    research. There are several parameters that affect how accurately we may
                    comprehend the Roman perception of sounds. The average aural ability within
                    preindustrial settings varied a lot from ours, since our contemporary sensory
                    perception is now affected by stereo and quadraphonic sound; whatever
                    measurements we make, the results may be deceptive ; yet they may, overall, facilitate the grasping of a more
                    conceptual construction of the multisensory experience of the Roman
                    amphitheatre, as long as one bears in mind these implications and
                    limitations.
                Technically speaking, in terms of accurately recreating the sound
                    within ancient sites, archaeoacoustics is a more complicated subject of study
                    than acoustics proper. To begin with, sound modelling techniques are often
                    designed with other purposes in mind. For example, in building acoustics, which
                    provides the basis of archaeoacoustic inquries, lower parts of the frequency
                    range are often ignored as they are not as disruptive for the contemporary human
                    brain that is used to quadraphonic sound. There are further technical challenges
                    that researchers of sound ought to take into consideration, such as the
                    immobility and fragility of standard acoustics equipment. Other issues
                    encountered in acoustically focused archaeological studies is that one must use
                    a variety of practices, noting atmospheric variables such as temperature,
                    pressure and wind conditions. Due to these challenges, it is often necessary to
                    involve acousticians with experience of working with a plethora of conditional
                    parameters. Overall, acoustic techniques appropriate for archaeological contexts
                    are a work in progress . 
                Due to these technical and scholarly challenges, historical accuracy is rather
                    utopian in both scholarship and digital representations. Because of the
                    fragmentary evidence and spatiality of Roman entertainment we can never expect
                    to recreate any (sensory) experience of the spectacle or any other social
                    situation in its entirety. It is, however, perhaps possible to establish some of
                    the cultural meanings that sensory experiences held for the Romans by using
                    digital technology to craft a conceptual experience of Roman entertainment which
                    is based on sensory data within the literature. 
            

                The Ephemeral Qualities of Sound #2: Text Mining and further puzzles
                
                    there was noise everywhere produced by the
                        equipment of death; here a sword was being sharpened, there someone was
                        heating metal plates, here rods where produces, there whips… the trumpets
                        were blaring with funereal sound… everywhere there was wounds, moans and
                        gore, you could only see danger. (ps.-Quint. Decl. 9.6)
                
                Narratives about the Roman games offer a rich case study for discussions of the
                    experiential potentials of multisensory prototypes of ancient sites but this is
                    challenging in and of itself. Primary sources concerning the sensory experience
                    of Roman entertainment vary chronologically and geographically, indicating the
                    importance of space and place for the constitution of experience. Although most
                    narratives are rich in sensory detail, some authors privilege particular senses
                    over others: 
                        Martial’s descriptions have a
                            tendency to be tactile, Seneca favours sounds and smells, whilst Juvenal
                            focuses on noise and sordid sensations
                        
                     cf . By contrast, Cicero favours
                    sight, as does Plautus (Cicero On the Orator 2.357;
                    Plautus The Two Bacchises 1023). Given the
                    abundance of sensory information in narrative, deeper examinations of the
                    sensory sphere in antiquity may offer key insights into the fine nuances of
                    historical social life. 
                More than any other artistic endeavour, performance before an audience thrives on
                    representing events within the entire sensory spectrum and, consequentially,
                    further affects how senses mingle and mix. This form of synaesthesia is also
                    present in many of the primary sources that detail the importance of
                    entertainment for Roman life .
                    Accordingly, there is a need for methodological approaches that can also make
                    use of this kind of synaesthetic quality of narratives to
                    provide more holistic understandings of the experiences of Roman life, by
                    reflecting its individual details. Synaesthesia is known generally as the
                        condition for those who experience one kind of sensory stimulus
                        simultaneously as another, most commonly sounds with colours. A broader
                        contemporary definition of synaesthesia, however, has been the 
                            blending of all senses
                                experienced by all readers, synaesthetes or not
                            
                        . Synaesthetic narratives appear in a variety of authors and
                    contexts. Ancient narratives of Roman spectacle are of particular interest to
                    this inquiry, as they often seem to blur all the senses (including vision),
                    evoking them in quick succession. For example, in the heart of these
                    multisensory events, there are typically questions of light and darkness,
                    elaborate backdrops as well as special effects, which seem to engage all the
                    senses almost simultaneously (Cic. Verr. 2.158 and
                    141 for decoration in the forum during the Roman games, SHA Car. 19). Caligula, for instance, held night-time performances that
                    lit up the whole city (Suet. Cal.18; Tac. Ann. 14.20-1; cf.
                    Suet. Dom. 4) and naturally, as in a preindustrial
                    society torches and fire would be used, thus involving the sound of fire and the
                    smell of smoke. The Roman games also began with a ritual sacrifice, which
                    involved the sound of fire, the vision blurred by smoke as well as the burning
                    of incense and the roasting of the sacrificial meat. A poem from 460 CE
                        describes games being raced by amateurs, rather than professionals. It gives
                        a sense of what it was like to sit down and watch the races as they
                        progressed. There are descriptions of sound, colours and movements in quick
                        succession. The whistling cheers of the hordes, the bright gleam of the
                        colours, white and blue, green and red on insignia. There is also a
                        description of the horses themselves: their sounds and movements as they
                        push, stamp, drag, struggle, rage, jump, fear and are feared (Sid. Ap.
                            Carm. 23.307-427). In Dion. Hal. Ant. Rom. 7.72.13 there are similar indications of
                        sound activity that is both source as well as context orientated: After these bands of dancers came a crowd of
                            lyre-players and many flute-players, and after them the people who
                            carried the censers in which perfumes and frankincense were burned along
                            the whole processional route. In the processional sacrifice of
                        the games, the audience experiences a variety of senses. The sound of fire
                        is both reflexive and functional (as well as the smell). Sounds may
                    then be described as separate entities in a text without necessarily being
                    referred to as sound. Take for example Suetonius’ description of Caligula’s
                    nighttime activities (Gaius 18), where the sound of
                    the fire of the torches would have to be reconstructed separately from
                    simultaneous songs or compositions for musical instruments (improvisational or
                    not), and then arranged together.
                In this way, narratives about Roman spectacle contain a variety of sounds yet
                    mingled with other senses. Aside from the sound of fire, there was also music,
                    mostly horns and trumpets, sometimes even a multitude of flutes (SHA Car. 19). We know of specific events and how these
                    emphasise different sounds for the sake of narrative; Cicero is specific about
                    the screams of victims: An effective training for
                        the ear in the endurance of pain and death (Cic. Tusc. 2.20.46). There is also information about the
                    slaying of 100 lions on the spot at Probus’ games, an event that generated loud
                    roars that sounded as loud as thunder
                    (SHA Brob. 19). The description of sounds also
                    involves the use of tools: metal whips, hot irons, and chains to drive both
                    animals and humans: there was noise everywhere
                        produced by the equipment of death; here a sword was being sharpened, there
                        someone was heating metal plates, here rods where produces, there whips… the
                        trumpets were blaring with funereal sound… everywhere there was wounds,
                        moans and gore, you could only see danger (ps.-Quint. Decl. 9.6). Narratives regarding the sensory
                    experience of the Roman spectacle intermingle smell, sound, movement, and vision
                    in quick succession; there is both multiplicity as well as concurrency of
                    sensory experiences. The reader (or audience) who came to experience the Roman
                    spectacle sensed as well as envisioned, therefore experience should be viewed as
                    a totality of sensory elements and should be reiterated as such. Recreating this
                    sensory paroxysm by digital means, from narrative ekphrasis to
                        digital ekphrasis, poses further challenges. As illustrated,
                    the isolation of soundscapes needs to take into consideration words that are
                    beyond mere descriptions of sound. The abundance and complexity of sensory
                    information in Greek and Latin texts is without a doubt; yet synaesthetic
                    prototyping has not yet been conceived of as an option for 3D models. To begin
                    with, the digital as lens is a relatively young tool, let alone methodology.
                    While 3D modelling is continuously evolving, technologies of sound as a live and
                    experiential enactment is a very recent field, currently restricted to sound and
                    the film industry (see Auro3D at http://www.galaxystudios.com/sound/) with no further (read academic)
                    publications yet considered. Beyond academia, popular culture, in the form of
                    the film and television industry, has tried to recreate the experience of the
                    arena involving both image and sound, but normally falls into the discipline of
                    reception studies with minimum attention placed on how technology may affect our
                    understanding of antiquity. These issues in connection with user experience with
                    one medium (image) over the other (sound) is perhaps the culprit. If we are to
                    reconstruct the sounds of the arena we may not be able to recreate every aspect
                    of sound in its entirety, but we may use specific, thematically selected
                    narratives to illustrate a point with reference to a specific sound effect. The
                    section below attempts a methodology for a practical application of these
                    issues.
            

                Synaesthetic Narratives and the Recreation of Sound
                This section presents a conceptual framework and methodology intended to help
                    scholars to address the complexity that inevitably characterises sensory
                    narrative about Roman entertainment. This synaesthetic
                        prototyping involves two distinct but interrelated cycles of
                    analysis. The first step is to undertake a thorough review of the Graeco-Roman
                    literature which references Roman entertainment. Special attention should be
                    paid to words that denote sensory elements, specifically those related to sound.
                    The second step draws on recent methodological research in the digital
                    humanities in order to creatively fill in gaps of knowledge and demonstrates
                    that sound can be metaphorically mapped onto digital
                    (visual) prototypes through the use of modern sound engineering schemes and
                    tables. This process allows sensory experiences of ancient sites to be further
                    explored through what can be described as imaginative fabrication. Synaesthetic
                    prototyping is based on the premise that there is an audience/reader accessing
                    the text, and that the narration of the experience has a sensory impact on them.
                    It allows scholars to make use of available technological tools in order that
                    through their digital recreation they may study sound in antiquity through a
                    sonic digital ekphrasis. 
                The Roman spectacle offers a rich case study for discussions of the experiential
                    potentials of synaesthetic narratives that detail the importance of
                    entertainment for Roman life .
                    Consequently, there is a need for methodological approaches and outputs (such as
                    multisensory 3D models) that can make use of this kind of
                        synaesthetic quality of narratives in order that they
                    might provide more holistic understandings of the experiences of Roman
                        life. Synaesthesia is known generally as the condition for those who
                        experience one kind of sensory stimulus simultaneously as another, most
                        commonly sounds with colours. A broader contemporary definition of
                        synaesthesia, however, has been the 
                            blending of all senses
                                experienced by all readers, synaesthetes or not
                            
                        . Unfortunately, the technology is currently not fit for the
                    purpose: sound can be modelled in a way that other sensory data cannot. So, for
                    the purpose of this section, synaesthetic prototyping will focus on sounds
                    described in Graeco-Roman literature, and attempt to arrange them according to
                    their impact on the audience. In order to recreate and explore the possibilities
                    of sensory experience in context, a deeper reading is required. The reader reads
                    in order to sense, but does not necessarily separate senses from one another
                        , and this creates difficulties for
                    scholars seeking to mine texts for sensory data. The sounds we retrieve from
                    texts may have been meant to be imagined, especially in the case of Roman
                    spectacle. Thus, the isolation of soundscapes needs to take into consideration
                    words that are beyond mere descriptions of sound. Recreating this sensory
                    paroxysm by digital means, taking us from narrative ekphrasis to
                        digital ekphrasis, is the primary challenge that the
                    methodology herein proposed seeks to address. Although it is impossible to
                    recreate every aspect of the amphitheatre’s soundscape, it is
                    possible to extract specific sound effects. Take for example the sounds of
                    hissing and applause described in a passage from Plutarch which refers to a
                    specific event in the Roman arena in 67 BCE: The people took this as a mark of dishonour to
                        themselves, and when Otho appeared in the theatre they whistled (hissed)
                            (syrigmos) at him insultingly, while
                        the equestrians greeted him with loud applause (krotos).The people renewed and increased their hisses, and
                        then the equestrians their applause τοῦτο πρὸς ἀτιμίας ὁ δῆμος ἔλαβε,
                            καὶ φανέντος ἐν θεάτρῳ τοῦ Ὄθωνος ἐφυβρίζων ἐσύριττεν, οἱ δ᾽ ἱππεῖς
                            ὑπέλαβον κρότῳ τὸν ἄνδρα λαμπρῶς, αὖθις δὲ ὁ δῆμος ἐπέτεινε τὸν
                            συριγμόν, εἶτα ἐκεῖνοι τὸν κρότον. ἐκ δὲ τούτου τραπόμενοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους
                            ἐχρῶντο λοιδορίαις, καὶ τὸ θέατρον ἀκοσμία κατεῖχεν (Plutarch Cicero 13.3)..
                
                How can we appreciate the experience of hissing and applause as situated in this
                    particular historical and cultural setting? A synaesthetic understanding of
                    narrative experience implies that we can examine this question by reading the
                    sensory expressions together. Stated differently, we can begin to map out the
                    social significance of hissing by relating it to other sensory material in the
                    passages where applause occurs. By investigating these relations further, we can
                    deepen our understanding of the function of hissing, but also start to reflect
                    on nuances and varied forms of use of the same sound. That is, we trace a
                    particular sound through its appearance in a greater sensory ensemble. Through
                    such sensory investigation within the texts’ rhetorical ekphrasis
                    we can begin to critically examine what hissing actually entailed rather than
                    what hissing may have sounded like (the audio signals). This in turn allows for
                    a situated (re)making of the experience of hearing hissing and applause within
                    3D models. In this instance, hissing entailed that the majority of the audience
                    disapproved of Otho’s appearance. Plutarch does not state which of the two
                    classes persevered in their manifestation of feelings, but it is likely that the
                    equestrians were wealthier (since they could afford a horse) and perhaps fewer
                    in number. In any case, in spite of given hierarchies within the Roman empire,
                    the reaction of the audience and the sound it reproduced, confirm our
                    understanding of spectacle as a place and an occasion were political actors and
                    ideologies were exposed and (often) openly criticized - a form of social media/
                    popular culture of the past. 
                In order to conceptually reproduce and construct these sounds we might consider
                    how sound engineers construct sound for contemporary film productions . Music archaeologist Lund (2012) has
                        suggested the use of the term sound archaeology rather than archaeoacoustics
                        or music archaeology  as music is often defined as
                        organised sound. When modelling the sounds from Plutarch’s passage we
                    need to take into consideration a commonly used sound-engineering scheme, the
                    modes of listening, which is a technique that aims to facilitate the conceptual
                    creation of sound by engineers. Since 1995 our ability to identify and recreate
                    sounds has been influenced by the awareness of multiple modes of listening.
                    Chion (1994) was the first to introduce a more comprehensive scheme for modes of
                        listening. It consists of causal, semantic
                        and reduced modes. As causal (everyday) mode of listening
                        refers to ecologically orientated evident denotations, there was indeed a
                        place for a mode that addresses socioculturally shaped and learned
                        (symbolic) codes - causal always refers to the source. Chion’s scheme of
                        listening modes is comprehensive, yet one of its obvious shortcomings was
                        its inability to consider the social and cultural connotations of sound and
                        the level of cognitive abstraction in their recreation. Tuuri,
                    Mustonen and Pirhonen  advanced Chion’s
                    mode of listening into a table that contained and explained eight categories of
                    framing: two Pre-conscious modes, Reflexive (causing reflexing responses) and
                    Connotative (evoking freely formed associations); three Source-oriented sounds,
                    Causal (identifying cause), Empathetic (state of mind or intentions) and
                    Functional (purpose of sound); two Context-oriented sounds, Semantic
                    (symbolic/conventional meanings) and Critical (importance for the situation);
                    and a reduced sound (describing properties of the sound). The order of modes
                    implicates their level of the audiences’ cognitive abstraction from low to high
                    and can thus help conceptualise a soundscape which may help convey the
                    experience of the ludi (Table 1).
                
                    Modes of listening for a soundscape. Source: Foka; based on 
                    
                        Sound type and explanation
                        Listening mode
                        Example for Implementation
                    
                    
                        Pre-conscious (background, not
                                intended)Fragmentary, estimated and reconstructed from
                                other sources.Background sound of fire and tools(?), audience
                                (talking, moving, and so on).
                        Reflexive
                        Originating from various locations
                    
                    
                        
                        Connotative
                        Positive and negative connotations
                    
                    
                        Source-oriented(organised, intended)Applause then
                                hissing.Plebs and equestrians had very different seating
                                arrangements, so this could refer to the source of sound, such as
                                cheers coming from one area and hissing from another.
                        Casual
                        EquestriansPeople 
                    
                    
                        
                        Empathetic
                        ApprovingDisapproving
                    
                    
                        
                        Functional
                        SupportOpposition
                    
                    
                        Context-oriented(every
                                    sound or music)Background sound of fire and
                                tools(?), audience (talking, moving, and so on).Applause then
                                Hissing.
                        Semantic
                        GreetInsult
                    
                    
                        
                        Critical
                        Political and Cultural connotations
                    
                    
                        
                        Reduced
                        Interchangeable
                    
                
                Plutarch delivers information about source- and context-oriented sounds.
                    Pre-conscious sounds, such as background noise created by a crowd, can be
                    estimated from architectural and other evidence for the amphitheatre. The
                    cultural connotations are denoted through the sounds of hissing and applause;
                    from the context we understand that one sound is disapproving, whereas the other
                    is approving. The sounds of hissing and applause are also reflexive and causal:
                    they trigger one another. Each sound originates from a particular area of the
                    amphitheatre, an acoustic reflection of social status which is based on the
                    seating positions of equestrians and people. But how can we better understand
                    these sounds of hissing and applause beyond their being mere signals or binary
                    emotions? How does extraction of these sounds from Plutarch’s text enable
                    reconstruction of ancient events in contemporary digital media? If our goal is
                    to translate the sounds from classical literature into a digital form, isolating
                    a sound and conceptualising its level of cognition in sequence can indeed only
                    be done with a provisional use in mind. This process offers only glimpses of the
                    experience of Roman spectacle in its spatial and cultural contexts, and only
                    hints at the importance these sounds may have held for the audience (and indeed
                    the performers). Consequently, even if we manage to recreate the sound
                    accurately, the contemporary reception or experience of that sound may not be
                    the same – this cultural specificity of sensory experience is one of the
                    challenges, but also one of the attractions, of sensory archaeologies . 
                When combined with contemporary understandings and models of the acoustic
                    properties of the Roman spectacle, narratives such as the Plutarch extract
                    discussed here can be used to facilitate our comprehension of a variety of
                    performative and communicative activities, both between audience and
                    performance, and among spectators. Once we delve more deeply into our sources
                    for their sensory data, as in the soundscape illustrated in Table 1, we see that
                    the audience certainly held a strong sensory position within the Roman
                    amphitheatre, and that was critical to the effects of entertainment (what
                    Hamilakis describes as 
                        affective
                        
                    . The crowd was involved in an intense physical and verbal participation
                    and interaction: hissing, approving, disapproving and clapping. Once we
                    reconstruct these sensory scenarios we are engaged in an iterative process of
                    reconfiguration and conversation; then reflection begins. This process of
                    exploring the various configurations and alternative possibilities is what we
                    term as synaesthetic prototyping. 
                Within the HUMlab project Digital Bread and Circuses
                    (see more https://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/Digital_bread_and_circuses funded
                    by the Baltic Group Foundation) and located at Umeå University, we The
                        HUMlab team of inquiry is composed by (in alphabetical order) Anna Foka,
                        Johan Grönskog, Roger Mähler, Anna Misharina, Fredrik Palm, Jim Robertsson,
                        and Johan von Boer with Roman Spectacle as case study for a number of
                        physical and experiential installations and a deep mapping prototype.
                    mapped the entailment of sound within a specific screen environment and tried to
                    match this with real sounds (weather, fire, hissing, applause, the sound of
                    weapons) that evokes the contemporary equivalent. Since there is the risk that
                    looking for the semiotics of sound could lead one into exclusively non-audio
                    territory we took into consideration that a signifier (sound) can be discarded
                    as an arbitrary pointer to the significant, with the latter being of principal
                    interest. For phase one of our synesthetic prototyping, we used six speakers to
                    arrange a soundscape in Display Studio (see figure
                        1, below). 
                
                    3D Visualisation of the Display Studio, HUMlab (credits: Mattis
                        Lindmark)
                    
                
                With all our sound settings (reverberation, impact, etc.) set to analogue (as
                    opposed to digital) we aimed for the sonic impression of a pre-industrial
                    setting. We then divided natural sounds (birds, rain, etc.) from artificial
                    (human-generated) sounds and we arranged them according to table 1 above, with the audience reaction as the
                    largest level of abstraction followed by Pre-conscious sounds, such as
                    background noise. We then placed sources (speakers in strategic position in our
                    sound-isolated Display Studio (see figure 2). In
                    phase two (2016) we intend to experiment with Auro 3D while sonic elements with
                    the highest level of abstraction such as the reactions of the audience (hissing,
                    talking, clapping, etc.) will respond with interaction design to the sonic
                    reactions of the physical audience of the installation. This
                        making recognises that, no matter the data, via the
                    route of experiential analogy, information will always be incomplete and gaps
                    therefore need to be filled imaginatively in order to explore modes of knowledge
                    further. We aim to experiment with contemporary audience reactions from cultures
                    currently found around the Mediterranean. We will use this method to examine
                    phenomenal patterns of communal approval (if any), thus renegotiating social and
                    ethnic diversity in the Roman Empire. 
                
                    Display Studio, HUMlab floor plan disposition of sound inputs (credits:
                        Anna Misharina), a 5:1 system of Dolby Surround. Further plans incorporate
                        Auro-3D with a 9:1 system of speakers (www.auro-3d.com).
                    
                
            

                Conclusions: Towards a Sonic Digital Ekphrasis
                In this article we have indicated some of the directions in which studies of
                    sound in the Roman amphitheatre could be taken, and in so doing, we hope to
                    address the need for new technological tools and theories to overcome the
                    problems with recreating ancient sounds. Archaeoacoustics facilitates an
                    understanding of sound and noise within a physical space, but has yet to be
                    applied to Roman sites. Digital modelling allows for the partial mapping of
                    Roman soundscapes. The study of soundscapes is a philosophical and conceptual
                    activity which goes beyond the physical reconstruction of the acoustic
                    properties of a space such as the Roman amphitheatre. Digital technology may
                    facilitate the reconstruction, experience and reassessment of the sounds within
                    a Roman amphitheatre, but the output is only as good as the data on which it is
                    based, as advanced as the technology used to capture and recreate it.
                    Graeco-Roman literature provides us with rich ekphrastic narratives and
                    contexts, and a synaesthetic approach enables a deep reading of those texts.
                    This deep reading of texts combined with digital modelling allows us to explore
                    various sensory configurations, each of them hypothetical due to the fragmentary
                    nature of the evidence and the cultural specificity of the experiences we seek
                    to recreate. Nevertheless, this is a worthy enterprise. Starting with the
                    assumption that during any live event there is an audience and a sensory (aural
                    for example) impact on the spectators, experiential analogy through synaesthetic
                    prototyping becomes a methodological device in itself. It aims to renegotiate
                    the importance sounds held for the Romans and break down our understanding of
                    the past as a mute, sanitized intellectual ideal. 
                The Roman spectacle was an experience that involved the entire sensory spectrum,
                    for both its audience and its performers. In order to fully understand it, one
                    has to engage in its multisensory vitality. Digital prototyping and
                    installations of sensory data have the potential to bring out the cultural and
                    historical significance of the senses through immersive experiencing. Beyond
                    theoretical speculations, such an account of the senses in antiquity could
                    enhance the experience of cultural heritage exhibitions It may be
                        particularly relevant to the recording and experience of oral traditions
                        such as epic poetry, or indigenous cultures (Australians, Sami,
                    etc)., or add to peripatetic explorations of archaeology on-site. For
                    example, the recreation of an opening sacrifice to the Roman games will
                    incorporate both the sound and the visual effect of fire. It could also further
                    inform more popular industrial applications of antiquity: film and games, for
                    instance. Roman history and culture will no longer appear mute, or biased by
                    older, sanitized and whitewashed receptions of antiquity. The adoption and
                    canonisation of the noumenal as superior, bespeaks of our very own
                    hierarchic stratification within conditions of knowledge production. Against the
                    ocularcentric tradition, we finally argue that the potentials of digital
                    prototyping of sensory artefacts should aim to bring out the cultural and
                    historical significance of the senses for researchers and students. , drawing on Latour, states how sight is central in
                    scientific research of the past. With digital technology we may be able to learn
                    to see and hear at the same time, or communicate the past to people who lack
                    vision. And alongside its noise, we can further challenge its (digital) ancient
                    neatness. Challenging idealised cultural stereotypes is certainly the first step
                    to making Humanities relevant to the actual study of humanity. With the
                    intermediation of technology, Digital Humanities projects offer a possible
                    venue. 
            

                Acknowledgments
                The authors would like to express their gratitude to the DHQ editors (especially
                    Duyen Nguyen) and the anonymous reviewers of this article, for their acute
                    professionalism and constructive criticism. We are also indebted to Kim Haines-
                    Eitzen (Cornell) and Amy Papalexandrou (Stockton) for sharing their forthcoming
                    articles and inspirational ideas, and Eleanor Betts (the Open University) for
                    reading and commenting thoroughly on previous versions of this article. Last,
                    but certainly not least, we wish to thank Anna Misharina, Johan Von Boer, Roger
                    Mähler, Jim Robertsson, and Mattis Lindmark (Humlab), as well as Mattias Eklund
                    (Toontrack) and Tom Van Achte (Galaxy studios) for discussing architecture,
                    special arrangements for immersive environments and sharing their thoughts and
                    valuable experience on sound technology in real time settings.
            
