Title:  From the Rock Wall to Wikipedia: Sites of
                    Digital Connection and Repair in the Community-Engaged Classroom
Volume:  020
Issue:  1
Date:  2026 March 27
Abstract:  
                
                In the Spring of 2023, we collaborated on the development of a project for ENGL
                    114: The Rhetorics of Data, that tasked students with exploring the relationship
                    between knowledge production and data through a collaborative Wikipedia project
                    with the Marian Cheek Jackson Center for Saving and Making History, a nonprofit
                    organization that preserves and celebrates the history of Chapel Hill and
                    Carrboro's Black communities. To amplify the Jackson Center's ongoing oral
                    history work digitally, the organization’s public history leaders came together
                    with a team at UNC-Chapel Hill to create a public digital humanities project for
                    undergraduates that would offer students the opportunity to gain needed digital
                    and data literacy skills by meaningfully contributing to the local community. In
                    this case study, we outline: (1) the formation of this collaborative, reciprocal
                    partnership that aids in the mission of the Jackson Center, (2) the power and
                    intrinsic inequities in Wikipedia, and (3) the critical data literacies students
                    develop through such a public humanities project. Ultimately, we argue that
                    Wikipedia can serve as a bridge between community partners and classrooms of
                    higher-ed institutions by centering community histories in accordance with the
                    mission of community organizations to achieve key pedagogical goals, including
                    the development of critical data literacy skills.
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                As we sat reviewing Wikipedia pages in the St. Joseph CME Church’s basement next
                    to the Marian Cheek Jackson Center, Mr. William Gattis, a lifelong resident of
                    the Tin Top neighborhood in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, gave us some tough but
                    fair feedback. He explained, this page is beautifully
                        written, but it glosses over the violence that we lived through. It is too
                        simple and plain. With this statement, Mr. Gattis pointed to much of
                    the problem with how Wikipedia and Wikidata often describe events in the past,
                    which are used to shape search engine results and AI-generated overviews. This
                    is a problem that we all were working together to address. He also demonstrated
                    that we had more work to do in our collaboration between the Marian Cheek
                    Jackson Center, students in Dr. Rivard’s course on the rhetoric of data at
                    University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill (UNC-CH), and the Digital Literacy and
                    Communications (DLC) lab. 
                Mr. Gattis was referencing our recently created Wikipedia page for the
                    Pottersfield neighborhood in Chapel Hill, NC. The goal of the page was to
                    describe the neighborhood that sits just north of UNC-Chapel Hill's campus and
                    constitutes part of the university’s history that many students and contemporary
                    residents in Chapel Hill know little about. The version of the page Mr. Gattis
                    commented on described the neighborhood’s history, beginning with its origins in
                    the nineteenth century as a labor settlement for enslaved persons working for
                    the University of North Carolina. It detailed the evolution of the neighborhood
                    throughout the Civil Rights Era as many of its residents played pivotal roles in
                    local and, in some instances, even national movements. The page included details
                    about recent efforts to preserve the community’s history with memorial plaques,
                    guided tours, and oral histories. It concluded with a description of how the
                    current community members were diligently working to preserve this history. 
                This meeting, held March 2025, consisted of faculty, undergraduate, and graduate
                    students from UNC-Chapel Hill, Jackson Center staff, and key members of the
                    Jackson Center's Community Review Board of which Mr. Gattis was a central
                    member. For the most part, the community members in attendance agreed that the
                    information on the Wikipedia page was factually correct. The people, places, and
                    dates were accurate. Where the page fell short was in contextualizing the
                    motivations and larger implications behind significant moments in the
                    neighborhood’s history — it did not attend to the difficult, inequitable, and
                    often violent structures of power that wrapped around each date on the neatly
                    articulated timeline. As Patricia Jackson (Community Review Board member and St.
                    Joseph CME’s secretary) stated, This Pottersfield [on the
                        Wikipedia page] is glamorous. The Pottersfield that we knew was thrown away
                        property that nobody else wanted, that nothing else could happen on and they
                        said, Ok, you could use this area.
                
                As she made her remarks, others in the room nodded along. Mr. Gattis added:
                        Actually it wasn’t so much you
                            could use, but this is where you are
                            relegated to, because we have established Chapel Hill, white Chapel
                            Hill, as being between Boundary Street and Merritt Mill Road. This is
                            our territory. Now, we are going to relegate you all to the Northside of
                            Pottersfield area, to Tin Top, to Pine Knolls, to South Lane and Windy
                            Hill area because this is the worst areas in the town and we aren’t
                            going to be there but we don’t mind you all being there.
                    As the conversation continued, it quickly became clear that the pages we
                    compiled needed significant revision to meet our original mission of the
                    project: forging a reciprocal and equitable partnership between students and
                    faculty at UNC, Jackson Center staff, and community members to amplify community
                    knowledge of local histories through the development of Wikipedia and Wikidata
                    pages representing important historical sites in the Chapel Hill area.
                    Wikipedia’s knowledge structures and sourcing guidelines make it difficult to
                    include the type of context and motivations outlined by Mr. Gattis and Mrs.
                    Jackson. These guidelines require notable topics,
                    neutral language, reliable secondary sources, and
                    prohibit original research . Together these
                    criteria often fail to acknowledge histories of marginalized communities deemed
                    not notable because underrepresented groups lack
                    the secondary sources Wikipedia considers legitimate . The result is that Wikipedia, despite its
                    democratic ideals, reproduces many of the same knowledge hierarchies and
                    historical erasures that have always privileged dominant groups while silencing
                    minority voices 
                    . 
                To disrupt these structural issues of inequity in Wikipedia, we developed a
                    multi-step workflow that centers community knowledge and builds digital
                    literacies for students and community members. The process consists of six
                    steps: 
                
                    Site selection by Jackson Center staff and community members 
                    Research and drafting by undergraduate students from a course on the
                        rhetoric of data (ENGL 114) in consultation with DLC staff to meet
                        Wikipedia’s secondary-source guidelines
                    Collaboration with Jackson Center staff to publish oral history excerpts
                        on their website — a workaround we invented since Wikipedia prohibits oral
                        history as a primary source but allows quotes from oral histories on web
                        pages 
                    Revision and refinement of content 
                    Publication of pages by ENGL 114 students along with an accompanying
                        portfolio to meet course requirements 
                    Ongoing page revision and long-term oversight by the DLC in collaboration
                        with community members. 
                
                This paper uses our collaborative workflow as a case study to show how community
                    expertise and university resources can work together to intervene in Wikipedia’s
                    increasingly powerful knowledge structures. In so doing, we demonstrate how
                    Wikipedia can serve as an important site for public digital humanities projects.
                    We begin by outlining our partnership, then discuss issues in Wikipedia and
                    Wikidata, and end with a more detailed description of our methods of
                    intervention.
                
                    
                
            

                Crafting a Collaborative, Reciprocal Partnership 
                This partnership began in early 2022 when a mutual colleague connected Dr.
                    Courtney Rivard (Director of the DLC lab and instructor of ENGL 114: Rhetoric of
                    Data) with Dr. Kathryn Wall (Co-Director of Public History at the Jackson
                    Center). Rivard was interested in creating a public digital humanities project
                    for her rhetoric course in the Department of English & Comparative
                    Literature, which also filled a core requirement in the university’s newly
                    created data science minor. She also wanted to include students in the DLC Lab
                    that she directed. The DLC serves as a hub for innovation in the humanities with
                    a focus on digital humanities, critical games studies, digital literacy, and
                    communications . Wall was hoping to connect with UNC’s
                    students to further the mission of the Jackson Center. The Jackson Center is
                    dedicated to honoring, renewing, and building community in historically Black
                    neighborhoods in the Northside of Chapel Hill, Carrboro, and southern Orange
                    County. The center’s aim is to engage the power of civil
                        rights history; the struggles and strengths of generations of long-term
                        residents; the insights of all who work, live, play, serve, and worship in
                        Northside neighborhoods; and partnership across multiple lines of difference
                        to make community-driven change
                    . Part of this mission to preserve local history
                    includes an oral history project, From the Rock Wall:
                        Living Histories of Black Chapel Hill/Carrboro. The Jackson Center
                    has been dedicated to telling these stories in a way that centers the voice,
                    perspective, and agency of community members and community histories. As
                    community member and former Carrboro-Chapel Hill NAACP president Eugene Farrar
                    notes, The only way our history can get told right is that
                        we have to tell it
                    .
                
                    From the Rock Wall contains so much important
                    history, though like most oral history projects, browsing its contents is a
                    challenge as faceted searching of the transcripts is not currently possible . To address this issue, the Jackson Center
                    established a Places page on their website to
                    highlight key oral histories attached to important sites around Chapel Hill, but
                    it lacked significant web traffic. Wall suggested that Rivard’s students could
                    help make these places and their linked oral histories available to a wider
                    audience. To support the development of this course project, Rivard and Wall
                    brought together a team that would ensure a reciprocal, sustainable, and
                    non-extractive partnership that meaningfully benefited and involved the
                    community as experts and collaborators. In particular, this meant acknowledging
                    the university’s long history of one-sided partnerships that benefit the
                    institution rather than the local community, as well as making sustained and
                    consistent steps to work alongside community members to build a relationship of
                    trust . The initial team formed in
                    2022 consisted of Anna Spencer (Co-Director of Public History at the Jackson
                    Center), Dr. Carly Schnitzler (former graduate student and DLC Digital
                    Humanities Director), Katherine Stein (graduate student and DLC Public
                    Humanities Co-Director), Dr. Alexandra Odom (former graduate student and DLC
                    Public Humanities Co-Director), and Rolando Rodriguez (Humanities Data
                    Librarian). As the collaboration grew, three additional team members joined the
                    project in 2024: Kyle Cunningham (graduate student and current DLC Digital
                    Humanities Director), Sage Clausen, and Sarah Davey (undergraduate student
                    interns). What began as a community-oriented course project designed to give
                    undergraduate students a more ethically informed understanding of the community
                    in which they lived soon evolved into a years-long collaboration between
                    university research lab, non-profit organization, and community members.
            

                Why Wikipedia?
                We selected Wikipedia as the platform that could best increase circulation of the
                    Jackson Center’s resources and build students’ digital and data literacy skills,
                    given its central position in knowledge circulation and the scarcity of Chapel
                    Hill’s Black history on the site. Not only is Wikipedia increasingly the first
                    site that many go to for basic research, but the semantic and linking structure
                    of Wikipedia gives it a privileged position in search engine results, often
                    appearing in knowledge boxes and AI summaries that searchers see first . As a result, Wikipedia serves as a high-traffic gateway to the broader Web ecosystem
                    through its content . Now, as AI
                    continues to mediate and consolidate digital knowledge circulation, Wikipedia
                    has an even more prominent role in search ecosystems, for two primary reasons:
                    1) Wikipedia is among the largest sources of training data for commercial LLMs
                    and 2) Wikipedia is a common source in AI summaries or overviews on popular LLMs
                    and search enginesFrom a 2025 study from Profound, a company that helps brands gain visibility in AI-generated
                            answers, Wikipedia accounts for 47.9% of ChatGPT’s top 10
                        sources and 5.7% of Google’s top 10 sources for AI Overviews .
                    
                    . A 2025 Pew study found that Google users who
                    encounter an AI overview or summary are almost half as likely to click on a
                    traditional search result link, compared to those who do not see an AI summary —
                    down from 15% to 8% . Wikipedia is central to
                    digital knowledge production and circulation, both as a consolidated source and
                    as an infrastructural node. Therefore, we reasoned that creating pages dedicated
                    to central locations in African American history in Chapel Hill would make these
                    histories more visible and hopefully drive more traffic to the Jackson Center's
                    website. 
                Wikipedia has been used successfully in classrooms for years to expand digital
                    literacies , conduct mixed-methods research (i.e.,
                    network analysis, interviews, participant reflections) 
                    , explore and make public university archival
                    materials , consider editorial authority and
                    collaborative knowledge creation 
                    , and expand knowledge in a digital commons to be
                    more diverse and inclusive 
                    . Outside of the classroom, community
                    organizations have hosted editathons to advance the visibility of particular
                    communities both in the articles appearing on Wikipedia and as editors on the
                        platform,See Silva and Scott’s Wikipedia editing project focused on
                        the digital literacies of Black girls, hosted after-school in a Pittsburgh
                        high school . thereby broadening the
                    scope of content and addressing key issues of equity . Developing such digital literacies aligned
                    with learning objectives for ENGL 114 and community enrichment activities for
                    the Jackson Center. 
                Despite these affordances, prior work on Wikipedia by some members of the
                        groupSee also Flagged for Deletion:
                            Wikipedia, the Federal Writers’ Project, and First-Year
                            Composition
                        . made us well aware of major problems
                    within and surrounding the platform that we would need to address. These
                    problems included: 1) editorial power dynamics and representation; 2) rigidity
                    around source notability and verifiability; and 3) missing data infrastructures
                    on Wikidata. 
                Despite its democratic ethos of providing free access to
                        knowledge in the world where anyone can
                        edit
                    , it is well documented that 80% of
                    Wikipedia’s content is created by white men from Europe and
                        North America and is in need of significant diversification . These inequities are reinforced by
                    factors like the time required for unpaid editing work, language barriers,
                    technical literacy requirements, and a community culture that can be unwelcoming
                    to newcomers, particularly those from underrepresented groups 
                    
                    . For example, in a study of gender inequity in
                    Wikipedia, Francesca Tripodi demonstrates that women are
                        reluctant to edit [Wikipedia] because the interface is not readily
                        accessible and the pipeline for participation is
                        effectively broken
                    . Jim Brown argues that participation in
                    Wikipedia and its overall ethos is impacted by rules,
                        regulations, and assumptions about identity and authority, which are
                    reinforced through software and data structures . 
                The central rules and regulations that impact participation and the knowledge
                    accrued in Wikipedia involve its concept of notability and the type of sources
                    that it deems reliable. Wikipedia describes notability as a
                    test used by editors to decide whether a given topic warrants its own article,
                    which is determined by having verifiable, objective
                        evidence that the subject has received significant attention from
                        independent sources to support a claim of notability. No subject is
                        automatically or inherently notable merely because it exists: the evidence
                        must show the topic has gained significant independent coverage or
                        recognition
                    .
                Such evidence is provided by sources that Wikipedia guidelines explain must be
                    written from a neutral point of view, attributed to a reliable published source,
                    and cannot include original research . In other
                    words, all evidence must consist of secondary sources. Importantly, oral
                    histories, like the ones collected by the Jackson Center, would not be
                    considered reliable sources. 
                Scholars of gender, race, and sexuality recognize the limitations these
                    guidelines present when Wikipedia editors seek to contribute to or create pages
                    on the platform about minority communities. Because underrepresented groups are
                    less likely to be present in the kind of secondary sources Wikipedia deems
                    acceptable, their histories are less likely to pass the notability test, thus
                    creating significant absences on Wikipedia 
                    . Moreover, the arbitration of this concept of
                    notability usually revolves around a narrow interpretation of Wikipedia policy
                    that has been formed over the years by users who have spent extensive time
                    editing Wikipedia and have moved up the ranks of administration status as one
                    can get more administrative privileges only through more substantive edits on
                    Wikipedia . Gauthier and Sawchuk explain the impact
                    of these decisions: 
                Wikipedia is a large-scale information infrastructure, a
                    classification system made of its own standards, categories, technologies, and
                    the phenomenological experience of its users. Indeed, classification allows a
                    segmentation of the world and is based on compromises ranging from epistemology
                    to data entry. In this sense, classification work is political. Aspects of the
                    work get deleted and made invisible, which means that voices are suppressed, and
                    it produces a mainstream, universal narrative on a topic. Wikipedia’s guidelines
                    have become hard to change and to interpret differently. The result is that the
                    classification of the world operated by its entries becomes rigid and maintains
                    an epistemology that delegitimizes some topics and points of view .
                Wikipedia’s centrality within digital knowledge circulation heightens the
                    significance of these inequities, a status that is largely driven by
                    Wikidata.
                Wikidata began in 2012 as the central storage for the structured data of all
                    Wikimedia projects including Wikipedia .
                    Wikidata constitutes a public repository of linked open data through the
                    creation of semantic web connected not just by hyperlinks and documents, but
                    also through structured data that links entities and relations . It can be read and edited by both humans
                    and machines and provides the data necessary for Wikipedia’s infoboxes and as
                    well as Google to optimize its search capabilities . Each item in Wikidata is given a unique
                    identifier and is composed of a label (the item’s common name), a description,
                    and any possible aliases. The description details the item’s key characteristics
                    through a statement that consists of a property and a value. Properties define
                    how one thing relates to another on Wikidata in the form of a semantic triple
                    (subject, predicate, object — or in Wikidata parlance, item, property, value).
                    For example, for a person, you can add a property to
                        specify where they were educated, by specifying a value for a school. For
                        buildings, you can assign geographic coordinates properties by specifying
                        longitude and latitude values
                    . Such linked semantic data aims to eventually represent everything in the universe in a
                        way computers can understand
                    .
                Because of its highly structured nature, Wikidata now constitutes one of the
                    largest free and open Big Data
                        knowledge bases in the world . This means that one can query it and
                        receive relevant and accurate answers, especially compared with traditional
                        search engines… [making] it fertile ground for learning and research
                        opportunities
                    . Using the query service
                    provided by the Wikidata platform, which provides a user-friendly way to run a
                    SPARQL (database) query, one can answer questions that are not possible on
                    traditional search engines such as Google, for example, where are the birthplaces of women physicists in history
                    . Of course, to answer such a question requires
                    there to be sufficient and accurate data drawn from Wikipedia pages and
                    corresponding Wikidata entries. At the time of this writing, there are more than
                    120 million data items in Wikidata with 34,000 users. Despite its significance
                    and rapid growth, there remain many gaps in data that often reproduce existing
                    inequities around race, gender, and class .
                The way that data is structured has far-reaching significance. Ford and Iliadis
                    argue, The ways that Wikidata classifies phenomena have a
                        ripple effect on how media, such as search engines and virtual assistants
                        retrieve and directly convey facts, answers, meanings, and knowledge
                    . These classification systems that
                    reduce complex information on Wikipedia into barebone semantic triples
                    effectively erase the narratives, detailed historical
                        backgrounds, academic references, news stories, and in-depth descriptions of
                        individuals’ lives…What remains is a database of interconnected facts that
                        can be queried, providing individuals with quick answers, concise knowledge,
                        and limited data specific to their inquiries
                    . 
                It is because of the immense power that Wikidata and Wikipedia now play in the
                    information infrastructure that shapes our world that they mark important
                    terrain for the field of digital humanities to explore, especially projects that
                    are pedagogical and community focused. Students and community members can, as
                    Melanie Kill writes, learn a great deal about effective
                        [and perhaps ineffective] collaboration in practical and real world terms,
                        and reflect on the diversity of contemporary knowledge-making methods and
                        practices, by participating in existing public digital humanities projects
                        like Wikipedia
                    . Moreover, Wikidata is now becoming a focal point in
                    many DH projects interested in data annotation, metadata
                        curation, modelling, and Named Entity Recognition (NER)
                    .
                To take advantage of the affordances of Wikipedia and address issues of absence
                    and equity within its structures, team members crafted an assignment for
                    Rivard’s Rhetoric of Data course (ENGL 114) that was supported by the DLC lab
                    after the class ended in which each Wikipedia page was presented for review to
                    the Jackson Center's Community Review Board; their feedback was then
                    incorporated into the pages, and the DLC lab continues to monitor the pages.
                    Future iterations of ENGL 114 have also followed this workflow and made use of
                    this support structure. The following sections explain this workflow in more
                    detail, noting problems and successes that emerged in the process, most
                    significantly how to attend to the problem that oral histories are not
                    considered reliable sources. 
            

                Assignment Structure
                First taught in Spring 2022, English 114: The Rhetoric of Data fulfilled
                    requirements in both the English department’s Writing, Editing, and Digital
                    Publishing concentration and UNC’s Data Science Minor. The course examined
                    rhetoric, digital media, information, and data while requiring students to
                    evaluate how data shapes power structures and impacts lived realities. In
                    creating the Wikipedia project, we aimed to fulfill these course goals, while
                    helping students learn about the important sites in Chapel Hill history by
                    supporting the work of the Jackson Center. The assignment consisted of putting
                    students into groups with defined roles in which they created Wikipedia and
                    Wikidata pages on a historical site of the Jackson Center’s choosing, and then
                    individually created a portfolio that showcased their work on the project, a
                    narrative reflection, and an example of running Wikidata queries related to
                    linked topics associated with their Wikipedia pages. Students began the semester
                    exploring key concepts in theories at the intersection of rhetorical studies and
                    data studies and then moved into the Wikipedia project, which consisted of a
                    six-week instructional plan that emphasized the community-based nature of the
                    project by drawing on the expertise of our different team members (see appendix
                    A). 
                This plan was designed to model what Schwan and Thomson refer to as a circular flow of knowledge between academia, other
                        organizations and communities
                    . As Trey Conatser reminds us,
                        students themselves should also be recognized as a community group in their
                        own right: While students themselves represent one
                                public in this network, they also act as a
                            conduit through which the archive and the academy at large can address
                            audiences in other professional organizations and contexts as well as
                            among the lay community
                        . Our goal was to show
                    students that collaborative work lies at the heart of public humanities, both
                    inside and outside of the university . Wikipedia
                    projects are uniquely suited to provide students with public opportunities that
                    reach outside the university. Not only, as Julie D. Nelson writes, does Wikipedia encourage students to engage in community-based
                        research and writing…as students produce knowledges and stories to share
                        with (and intervene in) the global Wikipedia community, but also
                        as students go into their [own] communities to find
                        local, valuable, and underrepresented knowledges
                    . By completing Wikipedia and Wikidata
                    projects, students become a part of this circular flow of knowledge, noting
                    powerful inequities that shape it and finding ways to intervene. The plan
                    emphasized the following three themes: 1) Digital Rhetoric and Wikipedia, 2)
                    Integrating Oral Histories within Wikipedia Guidelines of Notability and
                    Verifiability, and 3) Information Infrastructure and Wikidata. 
                
                    
                
            

                The Digital Rhetoric of Wikipedia and Barriers to Participation
                To bridge previous coursework on data rhetorics with the Wikipedia project,
                    students were first introduced to the rhetorical affordances and limitations of
                    hypertext, Search Engine Optimization (SEO), and (quite directly) the processes
                    involved in editing Wikipedia. Building off of a class session that focused on a
                    genre analysis of Wikipedia pages by Rivard, Schnitzler provided a guest lecture
                    to lead a series of activities that helped students identify hypertext as a
                    central feature of a Wikipedia article’s design and citational practices. She
                    carefully pointed out the differences between hyperlinks and secondary-source
                    footnotes on Wikipedia. Both are forms of citation, but there is a key
                    distinction in their primary purposes — hyperlinks connect, and footnotes
                    verify. As the style guide notes: Internal links bind the
                        project together into an interconnected whole… and external links bind
                        Wikipedia to the World Wide Web
                    . This means that when one is writing and editing
                    on Wikipedia, they are writing for (at least) two primary audiences, to which
                    hyperlinks matter a lot — namely, other Wikipedia readers and search engines. 
                After a discussion of the considerations to be made when writing for these two
                    audiences, students were tasked with making their first Wikipedia edits in small
                    groups. In keeping with suggestions offered by the Editing
                        Wikipedia: A Guide for Student Editors by Wiki Education, students
                    created new accounts and then made small edits to an existing Wikipedia page to
                    achieve autoconfirmation status. Before a new user can create a new Wikipedia
                    page they need to obtain autoconfirmed status,
                    which occurs after they have made ≥10 edits to existing pages within 4 days.
                    Wikipedia explains, the main reason for having
                        autoconfirmed status on Wikipedia is to prevent vandalism and other types of
                        disruptive changes to popular pages by allowing only users who have shown
                        they can make only good changes to change these pages
                    .The more edits that a Wikipedian makes
                        the more power they obtain within the Wiki ecosystem. One can achieve
                        extended confirmed status if they make 500 edits in 30 days, and from there
                        they can work their way to administrator status with even more edits and
                        successful election by other administrators . We selected the Orange County
                    Training School (OCTS) Wikipedia page as the focus of this activity to encourage
                    students to begin their autoconfirmation process by engaging with the only
                    existing Wikipedia page that also had a presence in the From the Rock Wall archive. This page is the first Google search
                    result when one searches Orange County Training
                        School and also provides the content for the Google-generated
                    quick-info sidebar (Figure 1). 
                
                    Front page Google results for Orange County Training
                            School.
                    
                    Front page Google results for Orange County
                            Training School.
                
                After discussing terms and other webpages to link, students edited the OCTS page
                    to include more hyperlinks and, in turn, increase the connections of the page
                    both within Wikipedia and its visibility on search engines and across the
                    internet. However, within minutes of this class ending, multiple students who
                    edited the Orange County Training School page had their accounts suspended by a
                    much more established editor for disrupting Wikipedia by
                    adding too many links at once. These students were experiencing the exact broken pipeline in participation that so often works
                    to reify existing power hierarchies . Suspending
                    the students’ accounts rather than just reverting the changes was a rather
                    aggressive decision from this Wikieditor that effectively prohibited students
                    from doing anything within Wikipedia until their accounts were restored. To
                    address this problem, Rivard joined the talk page for the Orange County Training
                    School to discuss this issue with the editor. Talk pages sit behind each
                    Wikipedia page as a space for editors to discuss changes. These talk pages
                    evidence how different editors interpret Wikipedia’s principles to come to a
                    consensus about what information is allowed to exist on the site. As such, it is
                    within these pages that one can see how power hierarchies and gatekeeping
                    operate. 
                Rivard explained that this was a class project and there was no malicious intent,
                    and questioned why the student’s accounts were suspended rather than just having
                    their changes reverted. The editor replied that the students did not add some of
                    the links correctly and took the multiple changes to one page as a sign of
                    attack, but agreed to reinstate the students’ accounts, along with only some of
                    the links they originally added. This perplexing exchange and punitive behavior
                    from the editor provided a powerful teaching moment. It evidenced how new
                    editors must not only accrue additional technical literacies,Technical
                        literacies such as account creation, site navigation, adherence to the
                        Wikipedia pillars and manual of style, and the use of Wikitext markup for
                        formatting are other forms of literacies that are separate from the
                        discourse community literacies we focus on here. Nevertheless, they too
                        contribute to editorial friction in the classroom. but must also take
                    the leap into a fresh discourse community of more experienced, powerful, and
                    opinionated editors. As Alexandra Lockett writes, editing
                        Wikipedia to improve content gaps sounds good, but editors are often too
                        unfamiliar with the Wikipedia community to fight for the knowledge they seek
                        to represent
                    .
                As these Wikipedia pages for important sites in Chapel Hill’s historically Black
                    neighborhoods were drafted and posted, other editors began to take notice,
                    revising, reformatting, chatting, and flagging issues, some of which remain on
                    the current iterations of the pages. These interactions were variously positive,
                    negative, and neutral for the students — one student gained an official mentor
                    on Wikipedia, while several others were asked to defend their editorial choices.
                    All of these interactions left lasting impressions on students. In response to
                    an end-of-assignment survey question asking, What barriers
                        do you see in the current structure of Wikipedia to creating articles that
                        equitably represent a diverse range of community contexts?, most
                    students (13 of 17) independently cited editors with higher levels of
                    administrative power as direct barriers. 
                These interactions and experiences offered students a valuable lesson in
                    understanding how power operates in Wikipedia and its larger impact on the
                    relationship between data infrastructure and knowledge production. For example,
                    in their final paper, one student made a connection between the role of
                    algorithms and Wikipedia editors. They write,
                In his The Social Power of
                        Algorithms, David Beer talks about the relationships between data,
                    power, and algorithms. He argues that algorithms play a profound role in shaping
                    the way information is distributed, giving them immense power in society.
                    Algorithms have the power to tell Places They can decide what matters and... what should be most visible
                    . Wiki editors have the same type of power,
                    which we experienced firsthand. By blocking our accounts and removing our edits,
                    the Wiki editor had the power to identify what information would be available to
                    the public and what information would not be.
                While this lesson in power made students feel disheartened at first, we leveraged
                    it as a learning opportunity, encouraging them to think about the audience and
                    genre conventions of their Wikipedia writing. Noting precisely this, one student
                    wrote, I realized that… the people who we were trying to
                        persuade were the Wikipedia editors; by following the pillars and guidelines
                        of Wikipedia we were trying to persuade these editors that these pages
                        deserved to stay up.
                
            

                Making Oral Histories Fit Wikipedia Guidelines of
                    Notability and Verifiability
                A central feature of this project for students was centering community knowledge
                    through the Jackson Center's oral history project. Oral histories are inclusive,
                    as Barbara W. Sommer and Mary Kay Quinlan write, bringing
                        in many voices, not just the more powerful or dominant that are
                        traditionally excluded in existing records
                    . Done well, oral histories help to interpret and define written records and make sense
                        out of the most obscure decisions and events, adding valuable
                    interpretive context to histories often not centered in traditional records . Individual stories, told by the people
                    who lived them, hold a unique power to illuminate not just personal histories,
                    but history writ large on a local, regional, and national scale. However, oral
                    histories fall outside of what Wikipedia accepts as reliable sources. Because
                    secondary sources in which no original research
                    including personal experience is allowed, it effectively prohibits oral history
                        . While these guidelines are
                    important for preventing misinformation, they also end up outsourcing its trust in information to those who have the power to
                        publish, thereby often rendering marginalized histories as
                    unreliable including those histories that have only been captured through
                    unpublished oral histories .
                At first glance, this would mean that the robust oral history project created by
                    the Jackson Center would be ineligible for inclusion as a reliable source in
                    Wikipedia. To attend to this significant contradiction, we came up with a
                    workaround, or what Wall came to refer to as a Trojan Horse
                    approach, to transform the Jackson Center oral histories into a
                        reliable Wikipedia source. While oral histories on
                    their own are not considered reliable by Wikipedia, a published work that
                    discusses and contextualizes the material, can render them reliable. Websites,
                    especially organizational websites, are frequently cited as sources on
                    Wikipedia. Therefore, if the Jackson Center published excerpts of key oral
                    histories on their website then they would be considered reliable sources. We
                    worked this Trojan Horse approach into the assignment
                    structure and post-course page revision processes, inviting students and DLC
                    members to contribute to an important intervention addressing inequity within
                    this knowledge system.
                After students had autoconfirmed Wikipedia accounts and understood the rhetorical
                    conventions of the genre, Wall, Odom, and Stein came for class visits to discuss
                    the complicated terrain of source reliability and what that meant for conducting
                    research for the Wikipedia page. Wall explained the significance of the Jackson
                    Center’s efforts and the centrality of oral history as a method in those
                    initiatives. Odom and Stein laid out Wikipedia’s policy around oral histories
                    and our Places approach for incorporating community
                    members’ knowledge through inclusion of excerpts of oral histories on the
                    Jackson Center’s website. They also helped students identify other secondary
                    sources that fit within the bounds of Wikipedia’s credibility guidelines to
                    provide adequate and diverse source support. Students were encouraged to use
                    local newspapers including those that specifically served the Black communities
                    in Chapel Hill and Carrboro, which were widely available through databases like
                    Digital NC, an online digitization project supported by the state library and
                    UNC-Chapel Hill.
                Following these sessions with Wall, Odom, and Stein, students were put into
                    groups based on their preferences for working on historical sites selected by
                    the Jackson Center: Hollywood Theater, Hargraves Community Center, Hackney
                    School, Pottersfield, St. Paul AME, and Watts Restaurant.In order to
                        provide structure for students and draw attention to labor equity in group
                        work. Students were required to complete a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
                        before beginning work (see Appendix B). In selecting these sites,
                    Wall first created a large list of sites the Jackson Center desired to be
                    featured in Wikipedia to draw greater attention to their oral history project
                    and the site’s historical significance. Rivard and the DLC staff then evaluated
                    which of these sites would work best for class work making sure there were
                    sufficient secondary sources and oral histories available. Students spent
                    several weeks conducting research for their respective pages, which included
                    referring to the databases identified by Odom and Stein as well as reviewing the
                    oral histories conducted by the Jackson Center. When students wanted to refer to
                    specific quotes from the oral histories, Wall would update a Places page on From the Rock
                        Wall’s website for that site to include the quote (Figure 2). The
                    students would then cite the Places page so that
                    the community’s history was centered in the Wikipedia page. Moreover, Wall plans
                    to refer to the Wikipedia pages on these Places
                    pages to encourage the circular flow of this knowledge.
                
                    From the Rock Wall Places page search
                        results, with visible oral history quote for Pottersfield.
                    
                    From the Rock Wall Places page search
                        results, with visible oral history quote for Pottersfield.
                

                By incorporating community residents’ voices into Wikipedia pages about
                    historically significant Black community sites, students used their knowledge of
                    the platform to amplify voices that might otherwise go unheard in spaces like
                    Wikipedia — particularly those of community members who are experts on their own
                    history. As of this writing, all of the class’s Wikipedia pages are still up,
                    all with references to From the Rock Wall’s oral
                    histories (Figure 3). Moreover, through the process of creating and editing
                    these Wikipedia pages, students gained a deeper appreciation for the proud
                    history of the Black community in Chapel Hill and a commitment to honoring and
                    preserving it. After the project concluded, many students emphasized that the
                    class’s connection to Wall and the Jackson Center in particular made the most
                    impact. When asked about the value of working with community partners to create
                    Wikipedia pages, one student said that I think this is
                        extremely important, as they [community partners] have the most knowledge
                        about their history, and the most accurate knowledge.
                
                    The References section from the Pottersfield Wikipedia page, one of the
                        student-originated Wikipedia pages.
                    
                    The References section from the Pottersfield Wikipedia page, one of the
                        student-originated Wikipedia pages.
                

                
                    Information Infrastructure and Wikidata
                    Together with creating the Wikipedia pages, students also created
                        accompanying Wikidata pages for each site. They were also responsible for
                        using Wikidata’s query tool to investigate a dimension of data related to
                        their chosen site for their individual portfolio that accompanied their
                        group’s published pages. The last part of our lesson plan focused on
                        understanding the power and limitations of the structures on Wikidata and
                        its query tool. Learning about how Wikidata works helps students gain
                        important data literacy skills such as data processing, digital provenance,
                        data ethics, and data completeness . Rivard
                        with the help of a class visit from Rodriguez focused on equipping students
                        with the literacies needed to contribute to Wikidata, while also
                        underscoring the powerful role of information infrastructures represented by
                        the structures of Wikidata, especially when structured data is created by a
                        community of users, not just experts. As Marisa Ripoll et. al. explains,
                        there are limitations to vast open-ended collaboration within Wikidata as
                        most editors make only a few edits and do not completely grasp the way the
                        data is designed to be machine readable (i.e., the data is structured,
                        standardized, uniquely identified, and published in formats such as RDF and
                        JSON designed for computer use) . The same
                        content gaps and biases demonstrated in Wikipedia around topics such as
                        gender, race, and sexuality are reproduced in Wikidata . Because LLMs and search engines constantly use
                        Wikidata, these biases and gaps are then passed along. By working to create
                        their own Wikidata pages, students became aware of how these biases are
                        generated from the shape of data structures. 
                    Contributing to Wikidata does not involve editorial review,Other users
                            can, however, change the information that another user puts in, which
                            presents other issues of both power and accuracy. so students
                        could add to Wikidata pages without fearing the kind of response that they
                        experienced on editing their first Wikipedia page. Students did, however,
                        struggle with property selection; they discovered that the seemingly
                        straightforward relational data structure of subject, predicate, object
                        (i.e., item, property, value) was far more interpretative than it first
                        appeared. Choosing the correct predicate to connect two objects revealed
                        some difficulty, as the vocabulary was not always straightforward and some
                        of the terms had similar definitions. Properties that indicated concrete
                        information of an item, such as its origin date or address, were grasped
                        with ease but more abstract properties were more difficult to understand.
                        Because these concepts were abstract and there was no editorial oversight,
                        there was a general lack of uniformity among the properties, which limited
                        the potential of its linked data. Even when the vocabulary used was
                        understood, students found that there was an absence of data (and relational
                        structures) concerning topics such as activists and cultural centers that
                        were key to connecting and describing the sites in the historically Black
                        neighborhoods served by the Jackson Center. 
                    For example, the group of students who created the Wikipedia page for Watts
                        Restaurant noted that the restaurant marked the site of an important sit-in
                        protest in 1963 during the Civil Rights Movement. After creating the
                        Wikipedia page dedicated to explaining this history, the students wanted to
                        create a property in Wikidata for involvement in the civil rights movement
                        such that they could run a query that would show them all the important
                        sites in the Civil Rights Movement in North Carolina. However, no such
                        property existed, so they would not be able to answer this query. Unlike
                        other problems in Wikipedia, this was not an issue of an absence of data,
                        but instead an absence of the data structure to account for such a crucially
                        important part of American histories. As one student explained in their
                        final paper, These gaps were not necessarily the result
                            of the data not existing but were rather the result of poor linking
                            connections. In turn, this causes an imbalance in power dynamics that
                            disadvantages marginalized groups of people. These gaps added
                        another valence through which students could think critically about why
                        certain data, such as items related to the histories of these communities
                        may be sparse compared to data related to others. 
                
                
                    DLC Revision and Community Feedback
                    By making use of an instructional design that introduced community experts
                        into the classroom, the community-based instructional design of the course
                        mirrored the community-based creation of the Wikipedia and Wikidata pages.
                        Our appeal to these different sites of knowledge made clear the fundamental
                        interdisciplinarity and interconnectedness intrinsic to the digital public
                        humanities. The community-based structure of the course drew students’
                        attention to the fraught and complicated ways in which power — often
                        exercised through definitions of legitimate data — is distributed between
                        the pedagogical space of the classroom, the institutional contexts of the
                        university, and the community-first perspectives of our partners at the
                        Jackson Center. Students were invited to intervene in this complicated
                        terrain as the assignment and the larger project that it fits within
                        positions Wikipedia as a rhetorical challenge
                        in which we must learn to push the boundaries of
                            acceptable Wikipedia style and content
                        . Because of the real-world stakes of
                        this project, students were committed to using the tools we learned in class
                        to address the uneven power relations in Wikipedia and Wikidata. One student
                        explained in their paper that they viewed the objective of our project as
                        making the Jackson Center initiatives more visible. By
                            including these pages on Wikipedia, the most comprehensive digital
                            database, we get to decide what matters and what is most visible…
                            through our efforts, hopefully we have ’counted’ these histories [from
                            the Jackson Center] into the modern digital humanities sphere so that
                            more people can learn about their stories. Such feelings show
                        how assignments that position Wikipedia as a rhetorical
                            challenge give students the opportunity to learn to push the boundaries of acceptable Wikipedia style and
                            content
                        . 
                    Though the course successfully met learning outcomes in digital and data
                        literacies and created valuable Wikipedia and Wikidata pages about Chapel
                        Hill’s Black history, our workflow prioritized sustainability beyond
                        individual semesters. We aimed to avoid the single course project model,
                        where community partners invest resources in a class only for the
                        collaboration to end when students leave, treating their work as a
                        conclusion rather than a foundation for ongoing engagement. Such single
                        course projects, even those with the best of intentions, contribute to
                        extractive and exploitative relationships between universities and
                        communities . To ensure the longevity of the
                        project, our steps included continued editing by DLC lab staff, presentation
                        of the pages to community members, further revisions after community
                        feedback, and adjustments for subsequent sections of ENGL 114.
                    This workflow that extended beyond the course was made possible by
                        positioning the project within an already existing institution (the DLC
                        Lab). Rivard, who founded the lab in 2018, created a public humanities
                        initiative within the lab to fund the graduate students working on the
                        project as well as leverage the resources, expertise, and infrastructure of
                        the DLC. Having an infrastructural home-base for this project not only
                        helped secure the funding necessary to retain project staff but also
                        guaranteed continuity for this project and for this collaboration long term,
                        demonstrating the lab’s commitment to the Jackson Center that extends far
                        beyond the limits of a single semester of work. 
                    While the pages created by ENGL 114 students represented good initial
                        Wikipedia pages that passed Wikipedia editors test of notability, more
                        editing was necessary to address issues raised by other Wiki editors and to
                        honor the complexities of the histories the pages discussed. DLC staff
                        edited each page with attention to the use of sources, paying particular
                        attention to their historical credibility. Much of the necessary editing
                        surrounded the use of sources, which partially was a result of students’
                        lack of training in historical research methods and Wikipedia’s rules of
                        verifiability. As we reviewed their final pages, we noted that the students
                        excelled at finding sources that helped them to understand the narrative
                        history of these sites. A common challenge, however, was their ability to
                        discern what was a credible secondary source. One page, for instance,
                        included a citation that was merely a hyperlink to a Word document with a
                        narrative about the history of the Hargraves Community Center, summarizing
                        an interview done with a former director of the Center in the 1980s from a
                        UNC archive . After further research, we found relevant
                        newspaper articles that confirmed the information presented in the cited
                        source. While the archival source was a great starting point, it was just
                        that — a starting point. Eventually, the original citations and references
                        were replaced with the stronger and more credible citations to the original
                        newspaper articles. 
                    Our class discussions modeled how these documents could lead to stronger
                        secondary sources, but students needed more practice to understand which
                        sources met Wikipedia’s requirements. We adjusted our lesson plans for later
                        sections accordingly. Moreover, because this was a first-year course, many
                        of our students had not yet had in-depth experience or training with
                        identifying the kind of credible historical sources necessary for this
                        particular platform. It was essential to have advanced graduate students
                        trained in archival methods to extend these undergraduate students’ work.
                        Wiki editors are vigilant about attending to the principles of
                        verifiability, thus, the work done by these graduate students allowed us to
                        ensure that all sources were vetted. 
                    After DLC staff further edited the pages, they presented the pages to the
                        Community Review Board (CRB) at the Jackson Center, and then held open
                        community meetings where anyone community members affiliated with the
                        Jackson Center could attend. Links to all of the pages as well as printed
                        copies were shared beforehand so that participants could review the work
                        that had been done. In these meetings, community members were asked to give
                        feedback on the pages and were also informed of the Wikipedia rules of
                        editing and page creation. Many CRB members had already been watching and
                        discussing the pages’ progress as updates were routinely shared by Wall
                        throughout the process. CRB member Pat Jackson relayed the community’s
                        excitement, commenting that one of the pages was talked
                            about at [a local restaurant] for two weeks.
                    
                    Importantly, community members provided critical feedback based on their
                        shared knowledge and lived experiences. For example, Mrs. Jackson noted an
                        error made on the Hackney School page in regard to its original location,
                        mentioning that it was something others had noticed as well . In these meetings, CRB members gave
                        additional information that was essential to accurately, ethically, and
                        comprehensively representing the history of these important community spaces
                        such as those in the introduction of this article. The Jackson Center staff
                        also used this historical detail provided by community members to edit their
                        oral history website pages related to relevant sites thereby creating a
                        source of deep, accurate community history that serves as a source of
                        information and direct quotation for future Wikipedia edits.The
                            Jackson Center’s website pages on these oral histories sites (referred
                            to as Places pages) also serve as stable
                            alternate sources of historical information about these historical sites
                            that are rich in community voices should Wikipedia editors reject oral
                            history quotations, even when they appear on reliable secondary sources
                            like the historian-curated and fully researched From the Rock Wall
                            website.
                    
                    Though these lived experiences of community members were essential to
                        understanding the history of these sites and made available on the Jackson’s
                        Center website, we worried that only using quotations of oral histories that
                        explained these experiences on their website would likely not pass
                        Wikipedia’s verifiability guideline . Based on previous experience editing pages
                        and significant scholarly resources, we knew that there would be increased
                        attention to our pages as they focused on addressing historical silences,
                        and Wiki editors were quick to delete sections that did not have adequate sources
                        . 
                    To ensure that our pages would not be deleted, we increased the size of the
                        DLC team by bringing in undergraduate research interns (Sarah Davey and Sage
                        Clausen), working alongside DLC graduate students with the goal of finding
                        additional sources that supported the knowledge of the community members.
                        For example, in one meeting, Mr. Gattis recalled a recent community event
                        where a family member of a Pottersfield resident told a story of her
                        childhood visits to the town. As she recalled these visits, she mentioned
                        that the neighborhood had no running water and that community members were
                        still using outhouses, a shocking difference from the town where she grew
                        up. From Mr. Gattis’s perspective, the story was told as if the Black
                        residents of Chapel Hill were merely backwards country
                        folk, but the reality was their community was intentionally excluded from
                        municipal development. Davey and Clausen conducted extensive historical
                        research to further flesh out Mr. Gattis’ knowledge about this history
                        including that this lack of development was a symbol of institutional
                        racism. Through this research, they acquired articles from Chapel Hill Weekly, Board of Alderman meeting
                        minutes, and a Master’s thesis by Charles Freeman told the story of how the
                        community repeatedly petitioned for installation of sewers and water lines,
                        but were ignored for over a decade . We were
                        then able to cite these sources alongside oral history excerpts of Mr.
                        Gattis from the Jackson Center’s website, thereby providing extensive and
                        abundant source support that overwhelmingly meets Wikipedia’s verifiability
                        guidelines. 
                
            

                Conclusion
                Ensuring that the histories we collaboratively created remain on Wikipedia
                    requires extensive research (and related time and resources) as it is often
                    difficult to find sources that support community members’ knowledge as much of
                    this history has not been cataloged and preserved because of structural
                    inequities in library and archive systems. Another instance at this same meeting
                    on the Pottersfield neighborhood Wikipedia page evidences a research difficulty
                    that we found too common. There was a strong consensus among all members present
                    that Black residents were originally relegated to Pottersfield because it was a
                    geographically undesirable area in the late nineteenth century mostly due to
                    routine flooding that occurred, often experiencing significant run-off from the
                    adjacent university. Topographical maps make it clear that Pottersfield was
                    established in a place that was undesirable agriculturally and sat at a lower
                    elevation . The area was (and still is)
                    easily flooded, and huge swaths of it have rocky soil that would make it
                    difficult for agricultural development. It is also placed further away from the
                    University and the city’s main streets. While various features of the community
                    and the collective memory of this narrative make this claim of undesirability
                    that led to the Black community being relegated to this location clear, few
                    sources from this time period even exist as the town’s most prominent newspapers
                    and many of the government organizations that keep extensive records and meeting
                    minutes about the town’s happenings were created much later . 
                In such cases, Wikipedia’s editorial guidelines make it nearly impossible to
                    recount history accurately because they require editors to ground claims in
                    secondary sources that not only exclude the lived experience of marginalized
                    communities but have historically served to actively further the interests of
                    dominant groups. The result is a recollection of historical events that is often
                    unable to adequately represent the experience of communities like the one in
                    Chapel Hill. Despite the efforts of Black Chapel Hill residents to honor and
                    preserve their own history through extensive oral history projects, walking
                    tours, and community events and resources, many of the records they have created
                    do not meet Wikipedia’s requirements for credible
                    sources . One can only imagine how this would
                    be even more challenging for communities who do not have formal organizations
                    like the Jackson Center that are committed to preserving local histories. 
                As Wikipedia continues to shape AI training data and search results, the stakes
                    of these editorial norms only grow higher. Our ongoing collaboration suggests
                    that sustained, reciprocal partnerships between universities and communities can
                    help intervene in these knowledge structures, but such interventions require
                    institutional support, dedicated resources, and a willingness to push against
                    Wikipedia’s boundaries. Most importantly, they require centering community
                    voices not just as sources to be cited, but as experts whose knowledge deserves
                    recognition within digital knowledge infrastructures. It is our hope that this
                    paper provides some practical tips about how to forge collaborative projects
                    that pool resources as well as how to push against the powerful boundaries of
                    Wikipedia to create more robust, accurate, and inclusive knowledge
                    structures.
            

                Appendix A: Wikipedia/Data Project Overview
                In this final project, we will explore the relationship between knowledge
                    production and data through a collaborative Wikipedia project with Marian Cheek Jackson Center. The
                    Jackson Center is dedicated to “to honor, renew, and build community in the
                    historic Northside, Pine Knolls, and Tin Top neighborhoods of Chapel Hill and
                    Carrboro, NC.” Part of their mission to preserve history includes an oral
                    history project, 
                    From the Rock Wall. This robust
                    project contains so much important history though to get access to it, one must
                    navigate deep into the organization’s website. To help make some parts of this
                    history more easily accessible through web searches, we will create Wikipedia
                    pages of selected important locations in the Northside neighborhoods. Because of
                    the linking structure, the frequent updates, and the great semantic markup,
                    Wikipedia almost always ranks high in search engines and is used as training
                    data for generative AI. Therefore, by creating these Wikipedia pages for the
                    Jackson Center, we will help to make their information more visible. Through
                    this effort, we will directly explore and analyze power structures within
                    Wikipedia through different types of data analytics.
                For this final project, you will work in groups of four people to create a
                    Wikipedia page with an accompanying Wikidata page on one important place in the
                    history of the Northside neighborhoods for the Jackson Center, and you will
                    present your Wikipedia and Wikidata pages together during our final exam period.
                    In addition to the group work, each person will individually turn in a portfolio
                    that describes their work, reflects on the process of creating these pages, and
                    conducts a Wikidata query based on the data generated from your project. 
                
                    Group and Site Selection 
                    We will select groups for your Wikipedia page in class, and you will create a
                        Memorandum of Understanding to identify specific roles and responsibilities
                        for each group member.
                    We will work in class to select historical sites based on group interest.
                        These sites were selected by the Jackson Center because of their importance
                        to local history. 
                
                
                    Requirements for Wikipedia pages
                    Each Wikipedia page must:
                    
                        Follow the guideline of the 5 pillars of Wikipedia, including their
                            genre rules concerning a neutral point of view, using reliable sources,
                            and avoiding copyright and plagiarism
                        Include at least 2 internal links from each person in the group (for
                            example, a group of 3 will have at least 6 links)
                        Include at least 4 sources from each person in the group (for example,
                            a group of 3 will have at least 12 sources). Note: these sources can
                            include external links.
                        Include at least one image
                        Include an Infobox
                        Include the following sections: Lead section, body section entitled
                            “History” with at least 3 subtitles, See Also, and References
                                Note: if a different title/subtitle organization is necessary
                                    for your Wikipedia page, you can get approval for the
                                    alternative structure
                            
                        
                        Be at least 500 words long, not including the references 
                    
                
                
                    Requirements for Wikidata pages
                    Each Wikidata page must:
                    
                        Include at least 2 Wikidata properties from each person in the group
                            such that there are 8 properties. Each property must follow the Wikidata
                            conventions for data creation. 
                        Include at least 1 reference for each property 
                    
                
                
                    Requirements for Final Presentation
                    You will present your group’s Wikipedia and Wikidata pages together with
                        important points regarding the relationship of power and data that came up
                        during the project. 
                    As a group, you will present your Wikipedia and Wikidata project to class
                        during your final exam period. Each group will have 12-15 minutes to
                        present. You will need to create slides for your presentation with
                        PowerPoint or another program to provide visuals alongside the spoken
                        portion of the presentation.
                    The final presentation should address the following:
                    
                        Work Distribution
                                Discuss the role of each person in the group, and the work
                                    they performed in the project.
                            
                        
                        Wikipedia page
                                Present your Wikipedia page
                                Discuss the production process:
                                What pillars within the Wikipedia guidelines did you find most
                                        helpful?
                                        What model article did you use to craft your
                                            page?
                                        What did you find most challenging about creating your
                                            Wikipedia page?
                                        What research did you find most helpful?
                                        What pages did you link to and why?
                                    
                                
                                Describe how your pages' linking structure will impact the
                                    Jackson Center’s mission of promoting the history of the
                                    Northside communities. 
                            
                        
                        Wikidata Analysis
                                Present your Wikidata page
                                Discuss the production process:
                                        How did you decide what properties to create? 
                                        What other Wikidata properties that were related to
                                            your Wikidata page did you look to for guidance in
                                            creating your properties?
                                        What links or connections were hoping to make by
                                            creating this property?
                                        What did you find most challenging about creating your
                                            Wikidata page?
                                    
                                
                                Present the Wikidata query visualization of each group member.
                                    Each person should explain:
                                        What did you query?
                                        What did you find in your query?
                                        Why did you choose to visualize this data in this
                                            way?
                                        Is there anything that you found surprising about this
                                            data (or the absence of it)?
                                        What else would need to be done to make this data more
                                            enriching and/or helpful?
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                        Critical Reflection
                                Discuss how your group saw the relationship between rhetoric,
                                    power, and data arise in the Wikipedia/Wikidata project?
                                        What did you all find most interesting about this
                                            project?
                                        What was the greatest challenge?
                                        What advice would you give to the Jackson Center for
                                            creating other Wikipedia and Wikidata pages relating to
                                            their mission?
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    Requirement for Wikipedia Project Portfolio
                    In addition to the group portion of this project, you will individually turn
                        in a Wikipedia project portfolio. 
                    The portfolio will consist of the following sections below. Please create
                        subheadings for each of the numbered sections. Answer each of the questions
                        in paragraph form (no bullet points).
                    
                        Work Sample
                                Pdfs or screenshots of your Wikipedia and Wikidata
                                    pages
                            
                        
                        Project Planning and Work Distribution
                                A description of the work you contributed to the project
                                    including the 5 links and 2 sources you provided to the
                                    Wikipedia page and 2 properties and citations that you provided
                                    for the Wikidata page and how you performed given the
                                    responsibilities set out in your group’s MOU
                                Questions to address in your description:
                                        How did your group divide the work for this
                                            project?
                                        What was your assigned role?
                                        How did you fulfill your role?
                                        What specifically did you contribute to the Wikipedia
                                            page?
                                        What specifically did you contribute to the Wikidata
                                            page?
                                        Were there any issues in labor distribution among your
                                            group mates? If so, explain.
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                        Wikipedia Analysis
                                A discussion of how your article corresponds to Wikipedia’s
                                    genre requirements
                                Questions to address in your description:
                                        What pillars within the Wikipedia guidelines did you
                                            find most helpful?
                                        What model article did you use to craft your
                                            page?
                                        What did you find most challenging about creating your
                                            Wikipedia page?
                                    
                                
                                A hyperlink analysis of your Wikipedia page with an
                                    accompanying data visualization
                                        To show the interconnectedness of your page, create a
                                            visualization (by hand or with a digital tool) that
                                            shows the pages your Wikipedia page links to. 
                                        For example, if I created the Orange County Training
                                            School (OCTS) Wikipedia page, I would create a list of
                                            all the Wikipedia pages OCTS linked to and all the
                                            external sites it linked to (external sites will be in
                                            the reference section). I would then create a
                                            visualization that shows the effect of these
                                            links.
                                    
                                
                                Describe what your visualization demonstrates and how this
                                    linking structure will impact the Jackson Center’s mission of
                                    promoting the history of the Northside communities. 
                            
                        
                        Wikidata Analysis
                                A discussion of how your data corresponds to Wikidata genre
                                        requirements
                                        Questions to address in your description:
                                                How did you decide what properties to create? 
                                                What other Wikidata properties that were
                                                  related to your Wikidata page did you look to for
                                                  guidance in creating your properties?
                                                What links or connections were hoping to make
                                                  by creating this property?
                                                What did you find most challenging about
                                                  creating your Wikidata page?
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                
                                A Wikidata query analysis in which you run one query relevant
                                    to your Wikidata page and discuss the results with an
                                    accompanying data visualization
                                        Just like we did in class, run one query that relates
                                            to your page, and create a corresponding visualization
                                            (by hand or with a digital tool).
                                        For example, if I created the OCTS page, I would run a
                                            query relating to the Rosenwald school Wikipedia page to
                                            find out where the Rosenwald schools were located. I
                                            would then create a map that showed these
                                            schools.
                                    
                                
                                Address the following questions in relation to your Wikidata
                                        query
                                        What did you query?
                                        What did you find in your query?
                                        Why did you choose to visualize this data in this
                                            way?
                                        Is there anything that you found surprising about this
                                            data (or the absence of it)?
                                        What else would need to be done to make this data more
                                            enriching and/or helpful?
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                        Critical Reflection
                                How did you see the relationship between rhetoric, power, and
                                    data arise in the Wikipedia/Wikidata project?
                                Cite and use at least 2 class readings in your discussion.
                                    When referencing a reader, make sure to use a direct quote and
                                    connect the quote to your argument.
                                The reflection portion of your paper should be 200-400
                                    words.
                            
                        
                    
                
            

                Appendix B: Memorandum of Understanding Assignment
                A Memorandum of Understanding is a voluntary agreement to assist in the
                    implementation plans of a collaborative project. It generally defines the
                    overall program goals and describes the collaborative nature and relationship
                    between the identified project and MOU-referenced participant. 
                An effective Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) prevents misunderstandings and
                    disputes by clarifying the expectations of the partners. The process of
                    developing an MOU is an instructive and potentially invaluable experience for
                    partners. 
                You will learn how responsive your partners will be — are your messages/emails
                    returned promptly? Do your partners give the partnership the attention and
                    seriousness it requires? You may also learn how your partners react when you
                    disagree on an issue (By: Nonprofit Risk Management Center).
                Create a copy of this MOU google doc and publish the link for the google doc in
                    your group’s google drive folder.
                
                    Name of Wikipedia project 
                    Name of people involved in the MOU 
                    Identification of time period of project
                    Communication modes/standards:
                            What are the desired modes of desired communication?
                            What will you do if standards and deadlines are not met?
                        
                    
                    Identification of roles and responsibilities each group member (see
                        below).
                
                
                    Wikipedia content editor
                    
                            Main responsibilities: 
                                    Organize and manage development of the Wikipedia page
                                        (Note: everyone in the group must contribute content.
                                        Content editor manages development).
                                    Divide labor of Wikipedia page writing evenly; 
                                    Create google doc as a space to draft the page; 
                                    Make necessary suggestions to your team’s contributors 
                                    Create the Wikipedia page once draft is finalized
                                    Review content on Wikipedia page and make sure it
                                        corresponds with genre conventions of Wikipedia and
                                        requirements of the assignment
                                
                            
                            Other responsibilities will be determined by each group
                        
                
                
                    Wikidata content editor
                    
                            Main responsibilities:
                                    Organize and manage development of the Wikidata page.
                                        (Note: everyone in the group must contribute content.
                                        Content editor manages development).
                                    Divide labor of Wikidata page writing evenly; 
                                    Create google doc with proposed Wikidata statements
                                    Make necessary suggestions to your team’s
                                        contributors
                                    Create Wikidata page
                                    Review content on Wikidata page and make sure it
                                        corresponds with genre conventions of Wikidata and
                                        requirements of the assignment; 
                                    Help group run data queries for their individual portfolio
                                        and group presentation
                                
                            
                            Other responsibilities will be determined by each group
                        
                
                
                    Presentation editor
                    
                            Main responsibilities: 
                                    Organize and manage development of the group’s final
                                        presentation. (Note: everyone in the group must contribute
                                        content. (Presentation editor manages development).
                                    Divide labor of presentation creation evenly; 
                                    Create and manage google slides to collaboratively create
                                        group final presentation
                                    Review content in presentation and make sure it
                                        corresponds with assignment and genre conventions of a
                                        presentation; 
                                    Make necessary suggestions to your team’s
                                        contributors
                                
                            
                            Other responsibilities will be determined by each group
                        
                
                
                    Research Coordinator/Project Manager 
                    
                            Main responsibilities: 
                                    Coordinate the different aspects of the project, 
                                    Serve as lead research manager - assign group members
                                        different sources to read and evaluate, organize sources
                                        collected by group, manage bibliography
                                    Lead communications with the team and assure deadline
                                        compliance, 
                                    Store necessary assets and other materials needed for the
                                        project, including sources and images
                                
                            
                            Other responsibilities will be determined by each group
                        
                
            

                Acknowledgements
                This project would not have been possible without the generous collaboration and
                    guidance of folks at the Marian Cheek Jackson Center for Community Engagement,
                    particularly Kathryn Wall and Anna Spencer, whose vision and commitment to
                    preserving community histories made this partnership possible. Our thanks extend
                    to the Jackson Center Community Review Board members, including William Gattis
                    and Patricia Jackson, whose invaluable feedback, lived experiences, and
                    willingness to share their knowledge shaped this work in fundamental ways. We
                    are also grateful to new UNC members of this collaborative who joined as we were
                    in the editing stages of the paper, including Sarah Ficke who taught another
                    version of ENGL 114 and Aspen Ballas who joined the DLC as a graduate student.
                
            
