Title:  User Experience (UX) Heuristics for the Digital
                    Humanities
Volume:  019
Issue:  4
Date:  21 November 2025
Abstract:  
                
                Although engaging with both academic and general audiences is a key objective of
                    the digital humanities, the extent to which this value influences the full
                    development of a project is less certain. User Experience (UX) has an especially
                    uneven status within DH practice, despite its critical role in producing the
                    best and most accessible versions of highly conceptual, scholarly, and
                    discipline-heavy projects. The disparity results from uncertainties about
                    terminology, methodology, and the transferability of industry practices to
                    humanities research. In response, this article advocates for a reinvention of UX
                    for DH, thus enabling it to serve effectively as a bridge for interdisciplinary
                    teams and help ensure audience comprehension and engagement. As one tangible
                    example of this reinvention, we propose ten user experience heuristics against
                    which digital projects, tools, and platforms can be developed, evaluated, and
                    refined. These flexible guidelines are both practical and theoretical in that
                    they address common impediments that users encounter in content-rich projects of
                    DH and collectively represent the cognitive shift that occurs when translating
                    humanistic inquiry into computational methods and environments. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Engaging with diverse audiences is a well-established practice in public-facing
                    fields that intersect with the digital humanities (DH). Designing or writing for
                    explicitly defined users has a lengthy record in rhetoric , technical/professional communication , and library and information science 
                    
                    . The principles of shared
                        authority and community participation
                    are increasingly emphasized in museum studies and public history as ethical
                    questions of ownership and co-creation are revisited 
                    
                    . Practical considerations have also driven the
                    solicitation of audience feedback as academic and cultural institutions strive
                    to meet the changing needs and expectations of modern visitors 
                    . Importantly, interacting with audiences is not
                    relegated to the final stages or review of a project or exhibit but is
                    encouraged throughout its lifecycle from ideation to completion 
                    . 
                While similar values and concerns have also surfaced within digital humanities
                    scholarship, there is a need for greater certainty or consistency regarding the
                    role of the audience in the conceptualization and development of DH projects and
                    tools . User Experience (UX) and related concepts of
                    usability and user-centered design (UCD) have an exceptionally uneven status
                    within DH literature and practice, though their methodologies can support better
                    human-computer engagement. The term UX was first coined by Don
                    Norman during his time at Apple Computer, Inc., in the 1990s, to capture the
                    holistic relationship people have with a tool, system, object, or even a place.
                    As an idea, its origins can be traced even earlier to human factors engineering,
                    dating to the 1950s and 60s 
                    . Further development emerged from human-computer
                    interaction (HCI) and usability research in the 1980s as scientists sought to
                    acclimate a broader audience to computing 
                    
                    
                    
                    . Today, user experience is often used
                    interchangeably with usability, but usability and its focus on how
                    easy or hard it is for someone to accomplish their goals with a system or
                    product is only a part of the overall user experience . In the same vein, user-centered design is defined by applying UX principles
                    to creating a product and considering audiences at each stage of development
                        .
                UX offers critical methodologies to the digital humanities for producing the best
                    and most accessible versions of highly conceptual, scholarly, and
                    discipline-heavy projects. By centering the human user within the digital
                    development process, UX forms a much-needed bridge between humanities scholars'
                    content and their STEM counterparts' technological expertise . Usability heuristics guide project creators in
                    crafting intuitive systems, tools, and interfaces, while various kinds of user
                    testing establish a communication channel by which projects can solicit and
                    integrate audience feedback on content, data, and design 
                    
                    . In summary, UX can help DH realize its core
                    value of democratizing knowledge 
                     by assisting practitioners in meeting the diverse
                    needs and expectations of 21st-century audiences. 
                Too often in DH, however, UX is mistakenly understood to focus primarily on the
                    usability of tools. It is relegated to a step in the design process rather than
                    a holistic methodology to be applied throughout the project timeline.
                    Concurrently, as UX research and practice overwhelmingly concentrate on
                    industry, technology, or social science norms and forums, DH practitioners must
                    adapt or even force these principles to apply to a humanities context. It is not
                    always obvious how UX can support the humanities’ distinctive approaches to
                    exploring and expressing narrative, creativity, abstract concepts, identity,
                    culture, and history . Much is lost in translation,
                    which renders UX more of a band-aid for projects than an effective strategy for
                    reaching audiences. 
                These misunderstandings and missed opportunities will only be resolved through
                    more robust interdisciplinary collaboration between DH and UX practitioners. To
                    make UX work as an effective bridge between technologists and humanists, its
                    metrics must be reimagined to achieve what a good user experience means for the
                    digital humanities specifically. Only through a stronger partnership can DH
                    achieve its overarching objectives of engaging both academic and public
                    audiences, ensuring accessibility, and making clear how knowledge is produced. 
                The following article presents one contribution to this broader reinvention in
                    the form of ten user experience heuristics or guidelines for creating
                    content-rich digital projects, resources, and tools that are accessible to both
                    scholarly and general audiences. These new heuristics prompt conversation and
                    assessment of how humanities information is structured and presented
                    holistically as well as within individual interactions and visualizations. They
                    emphasize the intentional cultivation of an inclusive and engaging environment
                    that helps a wide body of users effectively connect to humanities content within
                    a digital platform. Instead of rigid prescriptions, these flexible guidelines
                    promote cross-disciplinary discussion throughout a project’s lifecycle and
                    reflect the cognitive shift required to adapt humanistic inquiry to digital
                    environments while prioritizing user comprehension and engagement. 
            

                The Divide between UX and DH
                References to UX, usability, and UCD within the DH world only emerged
                    periodically in the early 2000s 
                    , with studies on the user behavior of digital
                    resources generally originating outside the humanities 
                    
                    . Exploration within the world of DH became more
                    common in the 2010s as practitioners sought to further define and defend their
                    field . These articles advocated for the better
                    integration of user research in academic tool development, following mounting
                    concerns that most humanities scholars were not utilizing the software and
                    resources designed for them 
                    . The significant contributing factor to this lack
                    of engagement was not a disinterest in technology or digital resources  but that digital humanists often produced the
                    tools without systematic input from the wider scholarly audience they hoped to
                    reach. As one survey discovered, most of the queried DH developers had solicited
                    feedback about the usefulness of their tool from their own colleagues, with less
                    than a third conducting formal usability studies and only 14% conducting surveys
                        . Even if a tool aligned with and had the
                    potential to enhance humanities research, poor interface design discouraged its
                    use. 
                In the past decade, a range of scholarship has addressed these concerns through a
                    detailed examination of the research practices of humanities scholars and how
                    these methods intersect with a digital environment. Although somewhat siloed in
                    terms of where they are published, case studies and systematic literature
                    reviews have scrutinized various technologies, including general user interfaces
                    and features 
                    
                    
                    , search interfaces 
                    
                    
                    , text analysis and visualization 
                    
                    
                    
                    , text annotation , and publishing platforms . Building upon earlier
                    investigations outside of DH 
                    , these studies seek to create general user
                    profiles highlighting common behaviors, problems, barriers, and needs of
                    humanities researchers to improve existing digital tools and guide future
                    development of this technology. 
                 Alongside this focus on humanities scholars and their use of digital tools, DH
                    scholarship has increasingly recognized the potential of these technologies and
                    whole projects for reaching general audiences outside an academic setting (see
                        
                    
                    ). At the same time, there is a recognition that
                    availability online does not necessarily mean that a digital humanities project
                    offers the requisite design or support for these audiences . Several studies have, therefore, extended their
                    user examination to public encounters with DH resources
                    and how to transform a casual browser into a critically engaged user. Calls have
                    arisen for increasing accessibility through more generous collection interfaces
                        
                    , expanding public involvement in curation and
                    annotation , and creating more intuitive and
                    appealing visualizations and pathways into humanities content 
                    .
                Whether focused on humanities scholars or public audiences, all of these studies
                    invoke usability testing, user-centered design, and/or, more recently, user
                    experience research as essential to engaging, increasing, and supporting users
                    of digital humanities tools, projects, and resources. They reinforce important
                    UX principles, such as the iterative nature of this work 
                     and the need for collaboration across disciplines
                    and practices 
                    
                    . Various UX strategies (see Table 1) are
                    referenced and applied, including gathering interviews, administering
                    surveys/polls, and analyzing site analytics, as well as conducting focus groups,
                    heuristic evaluations, cognitive walkthroughs, and formal task-based usability
                    testing. Beyond these publications, DH centers, curricula, and initiatives
                    across the academy now regularly incorporate UX design and research into their
                    programming (e.g., the University of Toronto’s Critical Digital Humanities
                    Initiative, UC San Diego’s Digital Humanities Research Group, UCLA’s
                    Introductory DH course on User Experience Design, Yale University’s DH Lab). 
                
                    Practical Strategies in UX Research
                    
                        Strategy 
                        Concise Definition 
                        Use 
                    
                    
                        5-Second Test 
                        Users view a design for five seconds and then recall what they
                            saw.  
                        Evaluating first impressions, clarity, and messaging
                            effectiveness. 
                    
                    
                        A/B Testing 
                        A process of either 1) showing testers two design concepts to see
                            which they prefer or 2) testing two concepts at the same time to see
                            which tests better. 
                        Resolving uncertainty about which design solution is better.  
                    
                    
                         Accessibility Audit  
                        A systematic review of a product to ensure it meets accessibility
                            standards (like Web Content Accessibility Guidelines).  
                        Identifying barriers for users with disabilities. 
                    
                    
                        Card Sorting 
                        A means to obtain feedback about how information is organized on a
                            project by writing (for example) site menu and sub-menu titles on cards
                            that can be rearranged by testers.  
                        Deciding on the terminology used by a product and how to organize site
                            features.  
                    
                    
                        Cloze Test 
                        A comprehension test where users fill in missing words from a
                            passage.  
                        Measuring how easily users can understand written content. 
                    
                    
                        Cognitive Walkthrough 
                        An evaluation wherein subject matter experts step through tasks as if
                            they were users.  
                        Identifying usability issues in task flows. 
                    
                    
                        Comprehension Survey 
                        A questionnaire that checks how well users understand information or
                            instructions.   
                        Validating clarity of content and communication. 
                    
                    
                        Content Strategy Analysis 
                        An assessment by stakeholders of how content is planned, created, and
                            managed.  
                        Aligning content with user needs and project goals. 
                    
                    
                        Focus Groups 
                        A group discussion to provide feedback on a project concept or
                            prototype. 
                        Gaining feedback on a concept or sequence of steps about which a
                            project team feels uncertain. 
                    
                    
                        Heuristic Evaluations 
                        A design audit using a list of criteria to focus the analysis, like
                            the list provided in this article.  
                        Assessing an existing design concept and identifying areas for revision.
                    
                    
                        Interviews 
                        Focuses on asking questions about users’ specific goals, requirements,
                            and desires for a product or system. 
                        Forming detailed, accurate profiles of project audiences and their
                            usage patterns.   
                    
                    
                        Interactive Workshops 
                        Collaborative sessions with stakeholders or users to co-create or
                            evaluate designs.  
                        Generating ideas and aligning perspectives. 
                    
                    
                        Journey Mapping 
                        A visualization of the user’s end-to-end experience across
                            touchpoints.  
                        Identifying pain points, opportunities, and emotional states. 
                    
                    
                        Readability Analysis 
                        Evaluation of how easily users can read, scan, and comprehend text
                            content.  
                        Ensuring written content matches the target audience’s reading
                            level.
                    
                    
                        Surveys 
                        Lists of questions that can be sent to many people at a time. Can be
                            used to obtain both qualitative and quantitative data.  
                        Gathering feedback from larger numbers of people than can be
                            interviewed or individually observed.  
                    
                    
                        Usability Testing 
                        A moderated or unmoderated series of tasks completed by an individual
                            to assess the ease with which critical tasks can be performed. 
                        Testing the ease of use for critical project features.  
                    
                
                The desire and imperative to incorporate UX into DH are evident, but these
                    publications also reveal noticeable frustrations, confusion, and missed
                    opportunities in its application. Partially fueling what Thoden et al.
                    succinctly identified as a gap between usability in theory
                        and usability in practice  are the actual or
                    perceived costs associated with conducting user research. Limits in time,
                    funding, and other resources seem too prohibitive to justify gathering user
                    feedback; even if user testing is possible, a lack of resources may prevent the
                    implementation of these findings (see 
                    
                    ). Notable exceptions aside (e.g. 
                    ), UX and usability research is often remedial and
                    enters late in DH project development rather than being an integral part at the
                    outset 
                    . Recruitment of testers has also proved
                    daunting, with many projects — even those seeking to reach public audiences —
                    defaulting to individuals within their subdiscipline, institution, or even
                    project team. Too rarely is broad representation sought, thus distinguishing the
                    efforts of  who gathered participants partially from
                    a public library. These concerns and practices are not unique to DH but are
                    commonly encountered by UX practitioners in industry as well . 
                More problematic is the lack of a shared vision of UX within DH. Clarity or
                    agreement is often lacking regarding the definition, relationship, and goal of
                    terminology such as usability and user experience. Thoden et al. also found no coherent understanding  within
                    DH for the usability guidelines shaping the development and evaluation of
                    projects (see also ). Without a thorough grounding in
                    UX scholarship and practice, methods for gathering user feedback are often
                    conflated or administered imprecisely and unevenly. Uncertainties emerge about
                    whether the user testing conducted is sufficiently thorough or systematic, and
                    whether the results have broader statistical significance or are helpful to an
                    individual project. Citing the heterogeneity of the humanities, many scholars
                    hesitate to propose a larger framework for DH evaluation and instead focus on
                    publishing patterns, lessons, recommendations, or key findings related to a
                    single audience, case study, or type of tool. As important as these findings
                    are, the absence of a common vocabulary and methodology for UX among the
                    disciplinary amalgam of DH scholars can unintentionally distort the community of
                    practice — especially for the uninitiated.
                In turn, UX professionals frequently struggle to agree on methodology within
                    their professional communities 
                    , let alone translate these methodologies beyond
                    the technical fields to DH communities. UX as a research area with its own
                    disciplinary pedagogy continues to evolve 
                    
                    
                    , but the role of social scientific methods in
                    informing UX research best practices is rarely mentioned explicitly outside of
                    applied social science forums like EPIC (Ethnographic Praxis in Industry
                    Community) or Practicing Anthropology. Peer-reviewed publications about UX
                    Design have increased, while UX Research, as a subject rather than an applied
                    methodology, remains comparatively less visible. The use of UX research methods
                    to improve digital projects in most fields is generally limited to briefly
                    mentioning usability testing in a project plan that does not otherwise address
                    user experience. Although UX methodologies and theory are the subject of ongoing
                    critique and refinement within HCI forums, such as the Association for Computing
                    Machinery journals, these resources are often outside the scope of materials
                    consulted by scholars in the digital humanities. Due to the technical nature of
                    most of these publications and their focus on UX as a loose collection of
                    methodologies rather than a subject of inquiry, they have not been widely cited
                    in humanities and social science journals. Accurate, updated information about
                    best practices in user experience does not continually circulate outside of HCI
                    forums, and other disciplines are therefore privy to a watered-down and dated
                    version of UX thinking. 
                Exacerbating these issues is a fundamental question about the overall suitability
                    of conventional UX methodologies for humanities research. UX methodologies were
                    formulated with tech industry framing in mind and a bias toward refining the
                    systems and tools through which content is delivered to audiences. This extends
                    beyond interaction design to industrial design, where the user experience
                    platform may be a physical object, such as a food processor, rather than a
                    digital user interface. Industry UX work also has the advantage of greater
                    financial resources , but only sometimes greater
                    expertise or sufficient time to comprehensively apply UX best practices. 
                The production cycle and ultimate goals of DH projects frequently run counter to
                    industry expectations. Rather than emphasizing consumer persuasion, DH projects
                    emphasize the humanistic goals of promoting comprehension, interpretation, and
                    critical engagement with often complex content and discipline-specific methods
                        
                     . This is not to
                    say there is no UX focus on content, as increasing attention has turned towards
                    concepts like UX writing, which considers how much
                    word choice shapes people’s experiences . However, UX
                    often focuses on the technical aspects of creating digital projects, discussing
                    how to create an effective site menu more than how to present large quantities
                    of data or content in a way that audiences can understand.
                Additionally, DH projects tend to move more slowly due to the need to fundraise
                    through grants and frequently utilize the creation cycle as a teaching tool and
                    experiential learning opportunity for students. Periods of delay are inevitable
                    due to student team members graduating or pauses between funding cycles, which
                    naturally result in a slower iteration cycle than is possible with a dedicated,
                    full-time professional staff . DH projects are also
                    subject to unique review standards for tenure and promotion; to count as
                    scholarship, they must reproduce the values and norms of individual academic
                    disciplines 
                     (also see the digital evaluation guidelines
                    established by ). These differences impact DH, and
                    it is necessary to clarify how much academic and industry UX concerns align and
                    to what extent academic priorities influence industry practices . 
                Without better guidance, translation, and cooperation, DH teams are often left to
                    interpret and adapt UX principles on a case-by-case basis, and many of the
                    archetypal features of DH projects fail to deliver on their full potential.
                    Archival materials may require a database or catalog with an effective search
                    engine to help people access them, but it is worth acknowledging the number of
                    sites whose searches are so inadequate that Google is the better alternative for
                    finding an answer or document. Many DH projects rely on visualizations like maps
                    or timelines to explain spatiotemporal concepts, yet these features are often
                    highly inaccessible. Professional designers sometimes create visually stunning
                    solutions that site visitors admire without gleaning useful information.
                    Narrative and storytelling features within DH projects can bring history,
                    literature, art, and abstract concepts to life. However, where many projects get
                    ambitious with multimedia and even virtual reality content, style can outweigh
                    substance. Many DH developers, therefore, face the same problem encountered by
                    the original tool builders discussed above: building something that is
                    beautifully dysfunctional and having to remake it at a significant cost in terms
                    of time and reputation. 
                The responsibility lies not solely with DH scholars; UX-savvy academics need to
                    engage with DH project teams and be willing to explain their contributions. Too
                    rarely do UX researchers and designers appear as project leads and integrated
                    team members. At best, UX may be outsourced to a designer who remains apart from
                    many project team discussions about the underlying content, data, and audience.
                    Design and content thus exist on separate islands without the mediating effect
                    of humanistic technologists whose priority is the user. 
            

                A Vision of User Experience for the Digital Humanities
                This divide can only be resolved through meaningful collaboration between
                    academic and professional communities and DH and UX-focused practitioners. Such
                    a partnership must go beyond full-scale adoption of industry UX practices or
                    simply transplanting computer science and design applications of user experience
                    to humanities projects, tools, and platforms. The digital humanities need their
                    own version of UX principles lest attempts to retrofit them into DH studies
                    remain uncomfortable and unhelpful. In essence, UX needs to be reimagined for
                    the digital humanities. 
                The unique amalgamation of components presented in DH projects justifies such a
                    curated approach. In addition to the concerns highlighted above, DH practice
                    pushes humanities scholars into an environment that deviates from the norms of
                    their disciplinary traditions 
                    . The lone researcher paradigm with which the
                    humanities are so comfortable is unsustainable for DH due to the scale of these
                    projects and their dependence on a range of expertise beyond a single
                    discipline. The solitary scholar model is equally incompatible with UX
                    practices, which flourish in a team environment. As such, humanities scholars
                    require more effective guidance and language to communicate a shared vision
                    within their interdisciplinary teams. 
                Additionally, DH embraces a transformational ethos, from innovating how knowledge
                    is generated and presented to confronting systems of authority and engaging new
                    and broad audiences far beyond the academy. These projects typically have a
                    large amount of data that needs to be organized, made searchable, visualized,
                    and contextualized in a way that makes sense to a variety of users. Many of the
                    DH studies examined earlier in this article make clear that they need and expect
                    technology to do more. Although they discuss usability in a narrow sense, it is evident that the whole user
                    experience is of concern, as is how content delivered through digital platforms
                    best reaches their audiences. In our experience with our own collaborative
                    project and the numerous DH projects we have encountered, consulted on, or
                    evaluated over the years, these factors collectively present significant
                    conceptual challenges for even seasoned user experience professionals. UX
                    professionals and technologists require clear metrics to ensure that complex
                    ideas and materials reach their intended audiences. 
                Such translation is less complicated than it might initially seem because user
                    experience thinking is kindred to the humanities in many ways . As humanists in spaces of technological
                    production, UX professionals in non-academic settings share similar goals: to
                    deliver meaningful content to audiences by focusing attentively on concepts such
                    as language, metaphor, and learning style. More than any specific technology, UX
                    is about building connections. The industry’s use of terms like human
                        factors and human-centered design to describe aspects of
                    UX praxis indicates a perspective that aligns exceptionally well with the
                    digital humanities. This human-centeredness also means that in the fast-paced
                    business world, UX researchers often find themselves the only members of project
                    teams who are invested in thinking about people beyond invoking users as
                    ambiguous conceptual categories . They are equally
                    willing to push for design ethics and inclusivity ,
                    including addressing how design practices can replicate or challenge colonial
                    power structures 
                    
                    . UX researchers also understand that it is not
                    technology that makes the field relevant; it is a societal need to combine all
                    kinds of design with a humanistic perspective.
                UX for DH must, therefore, emphasize processes that account for non-technologist
                    practitioners working in interdisciplinary teams (sometimes for the first time),
                    complex content as well as technology, and the needs, goals, and behaviors of
                    both academics and general audiences. UX for DH needs to think not just about
                    what we can do, but also why we
                    are doing it and who it is for — beyond merely
                    considering users as abstract categories such as marketing demographics 
                    . Although UX represents a kind of technological
                    expertise, it must retain its focus on solving human problems and help DH
                    collaborators remember why the humanities have embraced new technological
                    framings in the first place — to reach new audiences with their content. UX
                    researchers will also need to create better resources for a humanities context
                    in forums where humanities scholars can see them and help provide DH scholars
                    with clear direction on integrating UX from the beginning of a project through
                    its final stages. Ideally, every DH team should include a UX professional.
                    Still, where this is not possible due to financial reasons or other constraints,
                    UX professionals should at least do a better job of translating methodologies
                    into a language more accessible to experts in fields outside of computer science
                    and engineering. 
            

                User Experience Heuristics for the Digital Humanities
                As one contribution to this vision of UX for DH, we propose a new set of user
                    experience heuristics against which digital projects, tools, and platforms can
                    be developed, evaluated, and refined. The heuristic methodology, in general, is
                    an approach that relies on experience-based techniques, rules of thumb, educated
                    guesses, and practical insights to solve complex problems . Unlike strict mathematical or algorithmic
                    methods, heuristics prioritize efficiency, adaptability, and approximation when
                    exact solutions are difficult or impossible to determine. They also contribute
                    to human-centered learning by aligning strategies to natural cognitive processes
                    and encouraging experimentation and critical thinking over adherence to rigid
                    formulas . For DH, a heuristic methodology offers a
                    flexible, low-cost, and iterative guide that facilitates cross-disciplinary
                    problem-solving and decision-making throughout the entire lifecycle of a
                    project. 
                The heuristic methodology first gained prominence in mathematical problem-solving
                    with  George Pólya , before being widely applied in engineering, computer
                    science, and artificial intelligence  and analyzed in
                    psychology and cognitive science (e.g.  and ). Engineers and scientists continue to employ
                    heuristic methodologies in engineering design and risk management to develop
                    practical and efficient solutions when precise methods are infeasible. 
                In UX and even DH, the concept of heuristics has been frequently equated with
                    Jakob Nielsen’s 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface (UI) Design . Nielsen developed his list by statistically
                    analyzing how well previously published sets of usability heuristics explained
                    the 249 usability problems he identified across eleven actual projects . His final, refined synthesis has endured through
                    an evolving technological landscape as standard criteria against which a user
                    interface can be built, evaluated, and improved. Recommendations include keeping
                    users informed about a system’s status, ensuring that language and information
                    are presented in a manner familiar to the user, maintaining consistency while
                    allowing for flexibility, and providing help and additional documentation where
                    needed. Like the overarching methodology, these specific heuristics are not
                    strict rules or scientific laws, but broad and flexible principles based on
                    experience that help identify usability issues throughout a product’s
                    development. 
                Because Nielsen’s heuristics focus on what makes digital systems usable, they
                    provide guidance on only one, albeit important, aspect of what DH projects seek
                    to deliver. In other words, DH requires a set of heuristics that account for the
                        content conveyed through technology, rather than only
                    the technology itself. Similarly, these heuristics must be attuned to the unique
                    circumstances of DH projects outlined above, including helping field-centered
                    scholars better communicate on interdisciplinary teams. Such a goal requires
                    more than a band-aid for Nielsen’s heuristics ; it
                    involves reinventing a user experience heuristic methodology specifically for
                    DH. 
                The following ten heuristics meet this challenge by offering a holistic concept
                    of user experience for the digital humanities:
                
                    Respect the Medium
                    Invest in Thoughtful Information Architecture
                    Treat the Homepage as the Project’s Abstract
                    Consider the Role of Delight
                    Strive for Inclusivity
                    Avoid Feature Creep
                    Take Extra Care with Data Visualization
                    Eliminate Unexpected Page Behaviors
                    Build Accessible Projects
                    Emphasize Project Development Rather than Deficiencies 
                
                These heuristics are both practical and theoretical, as they address common
                    impediments that users encounter in the content-rich projects of DH and
                    collectively represent the cognitive shift that occurs when translating
                    humanistic inquiry into computational methods and environments. 
                Alongside deep review of scholarship, our validation and refinement process for
                    these heuristics employed three complementary tiers of empirical testing to
                    ensure their applicability across diverse DH contexts. The first tier focused on
                    comprehensive case-study analysis using our project SYRIOS (https://syrios.uh.edu), a multifaceted
                    digital humanities prototype focused on ancient coins from Syria that
                    encompasses catalog interfaces, interactive learning activities, narrative
                    presentations, and data visualizations. We conducted extensive user testing with
                    five distinct audience segments: middle school through university students, K-12
                    educators, hobbyists, subject matter experts and humanities scholars, and museum
                    professionals. Testing methods (see Table 1) included UX interviews and
                    usability testing sessions (2021-2022), focused evaluations of specific features
                    (2022–2024), card-sorting activities using Miro (https://miro.com/), and heuristic evaluations by graduate students in
                    public history and digital humanities, supplemented by expert reviews from
                    humanities advisors.
                The second tier of our process involved collaborative consulting with four
                    external DH projects to validate the transferability of findings across
                    different contexts. We conducted formal UX testing for 1) a national archival
                    project focused on biography and rich demographic data, 2) a specialized
                    scholarly database of cultural artifacts, 3) an advanced research tool and data
                    visualization project, and 4) an ethnographic research platform. Each engagement
                    involved comprehensive user testing protocols, stakeholder interviews, and
                    iterative design recommendations.
                The third tier integrated our heuristics into educational settings to test
                    usability and user experience with novice practitioners. Graduate students
                    within public history and digital humanities courses at the University of
                    Houston applied the heuristics to evaluate sixteen existing DH projects across
                    the spectrum, including mapping/spatial humanities, textual analysis, digital
                    archives and exhibitions, data visualization, data curation and annotation, and
                    digital games. In their review, the graduate students appreciated how this
                        comprehensive,
                    remarkably straightforward, and in-depth rubric expanded their vision of potential
                    audiences and guided them to think critically about the efficacy and design of
                    their own DH projects in an ideation stage. Undergraduate students in UX, DH,
                    and humanities courses, internships, and the UX Lab at the University of Houston
                    also utilized the heuristics to evaluate digital humanities platforms. Through
                    this guidance, they produced detailed, actionable feedback on a selection of DH
                    projects and described the heuristics as clear and
                        engaging and easily navigated.
                Our analysis integrated findings using a constant comparative method, identifying
                    patterns across project types, user populations, and testing contexts. Each
                    recommendation is securely grounded in historical and contemporary user
                    experience, information technology, and humanities principles and practices. We
                    also presented preliminary versions at the User Experience Professionals
                    Association (UXPA) International 2023 conference for industry validation and
                    suggestions for refinement. 
                As a methodology, these heuristics are intentionally comprehensive to accommodate
                    the spectrum of DH projects and their varied content, styles, preferences, and
                    platforms. They are not intended to be a definitive metric, a complete
                    diagnostic tool, or a fixed prescription. Instead, through overlapping, general
                    principles, they seek to guide interdisciplinary teams through self-evaluation
                    and collaboration at any stage of project development. These heuristics can
                    serve as an iterative checklist for identifying and assessing the severity of
                    recurring problems in DH projects. 
                Additionally, to make these heuristics as helpful as possible, we have clarified
                    confusing language and addressed gaps and ambiguities that traditionally render
                    such guidelines difficult for non-specialists to consult. For further
                    illustration of each heuristic, we have also selected case studies from our own
                    experience with SYRIOS as well as examples from observations and publications of
                    other DH projects. Although no project currently meets all ten heuristics,
                    including our own, each cited example still demonstrates how a single principle
                    can apply in a variety of contexts and for a range of audiences. Lastly, Table 2
                    provides practical advice and recommended UX strategies for DH teams seeking to
                    address each heuristic in their projects. 
                Rather than teaching DH practitioners to do UX, our goal is to help humanities
                    scholars working alongside technologists and UX researchers explain and
                    translate their research into new formats for broader audiences without
                    diminishing or lessening academic content or rigor. These heuristics provide one
                    clear, adaptable, and practical entry point to more effective collaboration and
                    conversations about user experience. 
                
                    1. Respect the Medium
                    How people consume and explore content depends on the medium used to present
                        it 
                        . Digital projects differ from linear journal
                        articles or monographs and must account for common differences in how people
                        read online versus print/PDF as well as the opportunities offered by a
                        non-linear format . New technologies have the
                        potential to reach users through multiple senses and experiences. Instead of
                        long paragraphs with the occasional image, digitized document, or pull quote
                        to provide substantive narrative and contextualization, digital projects can
                        invest in more welcoming and varied content presentation through a
                        multi-layered approach and new modes of building and presenting knowledge
                            
                        . Finding creative (and unobtrusive) ways to
                        cite sources or even taking advantage of hypertext can ease the onslaught of
                        text while preserving the depth of information.
                    Case Study: From the initial concept design, SYRIOS
                        prioritized concise, interactive narratives to contextualize ancient coins
                        rather than traditional long-form essays. UX testing recommended replacing
                            monotonous scrolling through text with a
                        central story divided into individual panels
                        and media blocks. The primary narrative is emphasized through color, font,
                        and background imagery, but users can also choose to read more deeply through curated layers and alternative
                        pathways of supporting content like descriptions, artifacts, maps, and
                        ancient texts. Users can flip coins to view the reverse side or change the
                        featured image for alternative perspectives. Clicking on reference numbers
                        opens a digital drawer of cited scholarship, allowing access without
                        disrupting the story flow. Hovering over scholarly terms triggers glossary
                        definitions, while hypertext links guide users to additional resources. UX
                        testing revealed that our target audience could quickly and intuitively find
                        information with this design. 
                    Example: Moving beyond basic digitization, Furnace and
                        Fugue (https://furnaceandfugue.org/) reinvents user engagement and
                        scholarly publication through a multimodal, interactive edition of Michael
                        Maier’s 17th-century alchemical emblem manuscript, Atalanta fugiens. Each of the 50 emblems opens to a comparative
                        view featuring a zoomable image of the original print alongside a
                        transcription with multiple language options — including normalized and
                        diplomatic English, Latin, and German. Most notably, users can hear the
                        fugue accompanying each emblem with customizable options for listening to
                        the singers. Users can also curate and share personalized selections of the
                        emblems, enabling further non-linear exploration . 
                
                
                    2. Invest in Thoughtful Information Architecture 
                    Digital humanities projects are often highly complex in terms of the
                        diversity and volume of content and data presented. Effectively organizing a
                        digital project on a structural level improves visitor engagement with that
                        material. While many DH projects rely upon standardized or inherited
                        information architecture, this may not be the ideal structure for a
                        particular concept, content type, or intended audience . A well-designed information architecture
                        begins with establishing consistent standards, taxonomies, and relationships
                        within and among datasets, as this determines how well a technical system
                        communicates, shares, compares, and enriches data . Choices made on the back end of a platform
                        (such as how data is described, organized, stored, and queried) also affect
                        how a user navigates a project and receives information on the front end. A
                        thoughtful information architecture allows project visitors to move from an
                        overview to main points to more depth as they choose rather than are forced
                        to explore content at the granular level before understanding the big
                        picture. Likewise, investing in a generous
                            interface that supports users' needs, desires, and expectations
                        strengthens their ability to find and interact with even the most
                        complicated material with minimal effort 
                        
                        . 
                    Case Study: Early versions of SYRIOS built in Omeka
                            (https://www.omeka.net/)
                        relied on Dublin Core metadata and a lightly adjusted schema to describe
                        ancient coins. When this content management system (CMS) proved too limiting
                        for our goals, the team transitioned to a custom CMS based on Strapi (https://strapi.io/) and structured
                        metadata that better reflected the coins' complexity as pieces of art, text,
                        mobile objects, and historical artifacts. Adopting Uniform Resource
                        Identifiers (URIs) and Linked Open Data enabled connections with other
                        projects for interoperability and contextual enrichment. Further user
                        testing helped translate these backend decisions into an intuitive and
                        exploratory frontend experience. The initial language used in our dropdown
                        menu options confused non-specialist users and revealed generational
                        differences in expectations. One participant noted, If
                            you're after older users, you can't make us hunt and click.
                        Through careful abstraction, the team captured multiple evidence dimensions
                        in a non-linear, web-like structure. Users now navigate the information more
                        fluidly and discover connections across stories, interactive features,
                        evidence categories, and terminology. 
                    Example: Photogrammar (https://photogrammar.org), an
                        extensive photography archive, demonstrates how effective information
                        architecture can transform complex cultural data into an accessible research
                        environment. The project’s redesign restructured metadata and navigation to
                        support exploration across multiple dimensions — location, time,
                        photographer, and theme — rather than limiting users to item-level search.
                        This layered structure allows visitors to move from broad overviews to
                        specific details through interactive maps and timelines, revealing context
                        before content. The interface surfaces these relationships through clear,
                        filterable categories, providing users with multiple entry points and
                        control over navigation .
                    Example: The Dutch Folktale Database (https://www.verhalenbank.nl/) redesigned an expert-oriented site to
                        serve both casual and scholarly audiences. The project team identified
                        primary user groups, analyzed their search queries, and then reworked
                        browsing around the collection’s metadata. Instead of providing a single
                        search box like Google, the advanced search interface immediately reveals
                        how the folktale data is structured via almost thirty different fields. The
                        search tool supports filtering across multiple categories meaningful to
                        non-experts (e.g., storyteller, subject, date, place) and offers suggestions
                        for searching by language, source type, and subgenre. Users can also choose
                        how they want results to be displayed: as a list, on a map, as a timeline,
                        or as a word cloud .
                
                
                    3. Treat the Homepage as the Project’s Abstract
                    A digital project encourages engagement by orienting audiences from their
                        first encounter. A welcoming homepage efficiently and elegantly conveys what
                        the project is about and explains why it was created without forcing users
                        to search for this information on a secondary page . Obstructing this delivery with superfluous design, intermediary screens,
                        or vague multimedia vignettes can frustrate visitors and hinder
                        understanding of a project’s goals and core message . Providing project synopses on secondary pages
                        also proves helpful if search engine results will likely direct people to
                        enter a project outside the homepage. 
                    Case Study: Initial UX testing of SYRIOS found the
                        landing page pretty,
                        welcoming, and friendly, but uninformative and
                            not very explanatory. Without sufficient
                        foregrounding of the core ideas of coins as historical evidence for ancient
                        Syria, testers struggled to identify the project’s purpose and main themes
                        and could not place it in its chronological and geographical context. The
                        redesigned landing page now provides a clear project statement and
                        description, a welcome video with a brief historical overview and project
                        orientation, and visual navigation leading to other sections of the exhibit. 
                    Example: The First Days Project (https://firstdays.saada.org/) foregrounds its archival mission and
                        structure with a simple and yet visually robust homepage. Following the
                        clear title (What’s your story?) and
                        description (The First Days Project shares 831 stories
                            of immigrants’ first days in the United States.), the homepage
                        immediately presents multiple avenues for users to enter the project,
                        including a standard search and browse, as well as rotating story
                        highlights, a clickable timeline visualization of archived stories, and the
                        options to browse by map, gallery, random story, recently added, or most
                        viewed. No scrolling is necessary to identify the sponsor of the project,
                        the South Asian American Digital Archive . 
                
                
                    4. Consider the Role of Delight
                    Digital platforms and technologies support more than the delivery of
                        scholarly content and can also facilitate unique opportunities for audiences
                        to engage actively and even play with source material . More than just being fun,
                        delighting people viscerally, behaviorally, and
                        reflectively captures their senses, immerses them via an easy-to-use and
                        reliable system, and connects them to their emotions, values, and identities
                            
                        . Strategically leveraging digital features to
                        encourage thoughtful participation and exploration helps audiences convert
                        knowledge into experience. This is the experiential
                        aspect of UX that is often neglected in favor of technical correctness. With
                        so much competition for people’s attention, they will not return to or
                        promote a project without an element of delight. By considering users more
                        holistically, digital projects can attract and retain audiences. 
                    Case Study: Rounds of UX testing on SYRIOS reinforced
                        the link between a visually pleasing project and user engagement. As one
                        tester remarked, The logo and the design and the colors
                            make me feel like it wants to provide a better experience. UX
                        testing also revealed the importance of recreating tactile encounters, such
                        as allowing users to handle, inspect, and sort through a digital pile of
                        ancient coins. Alongside comments on the fun of
                        this interface, testers requested goal-oriented prompts to guide their
                        exploration of the artifacts. 
                    Example: What is Missing? (https://www.whatismissing.org/), an ecological digital humanities
                        project by artist Maya Lin, fully embraces a sensory and affective
                        experience both to capture and challenge users about environmental loss,
                        conservation, and sustainability. A natural soundscape accompanies the
                        central Map of Memory, a dynamic globe that
                        facilitates self-directed exploration of multimedia and interactive
                            ecological histories and solutions (both real and
                        imagined). Users are encouraged to react with grief and hope by submitting
                        their own memories about the natural world, which are then integrated within
                        the site . 
                    Example: Virtual Angkor (https://www.virtualangkor.com/) draws upon 3D technology to
                        recreate the Cambodian metropolis around 1300 CE. The project offers three
                        digital experiences: 1) a simulation of life for different agents at the
                        temple complex over a single day, 2) an interactive aerial map of the
                        greater territory, and 3) a first-person virtual reality tour of the city.
                        Intentionally built for classroom use, the project’s reconstructions have
                        been carefully populated with soundscapes based upon actual field
                        recordings, 3D scans of museum artifacts digitally repatriated, and over
                        20,000 human and animal characters . 
                
                
                    5. Strive for Inclusivity 
                    How data and other content are digitized, cataloged, and communicated can
                        obstruct or welcome diverse audiences . Choices
                        in language can be especially powerful in shaping how information is
                        accessed and knowledge constructed . Freeing
                        projects of jargon that a non-expert cannot understand broadens the
                        potential user base 
                        . Where specialized language is unavoidable,
                        providing clear definitions invites audiences into the scholarship. As the
                        DH community expands, projects have also begun considering whether their
                        audiences or the communities they represent require or will benefit from
                        metadata and content in more than one language 
                         or through an intersectional presentation
                            . Being attuned to where additional
                        contextualization, representation, or alternative perspectives are needed
                        helps achieve a core DH value in democratizing knowledge without
                        perpetuating colonial and other harmful structures 
                        .
                    Case Study: Language use has been a critical focus of
                        SYRIOS in its goals to bridge academic and general audiences and connect
                        Western audiences with Middle Eastern cultural heritage. With the goal of
                        making ancient Syrian coins accessible to a broader audience, care has been
                        taken to explain and provide glossary definitions for unfamiliar words. A
                        card-sorting study with general audiences helped further identify
                        challenging terminology commonly used in numismatic research. As one tester
                        commented, The site doesn’t seem to be talking down to
                            users, and I really like that. One area of weakness that
                        continues to be addressed is the Western (and even American) bias in
                        language and reference points. One tester, a Syrian national, recommended
                        adding Semitic or Arabic place names where possible, instead of relying
                        solely on Greco-Roman nomenclature. 
                    Example: The Healers Project: Decolonizing Knowledge
                        Within Afro-Indigenous Traditions (https://healers.uoregon.edu/) is an ethnographic archive that
                        prioritizes the voices, experiences, and expertise of Indigenous and
                        Afro-descendent healers and knowledge keepers within the Caribbean and
                        Pacific Northwest. Richly informed by an intersection of disciplines, this
                        project has evolved from a focus on Caribbean women healers to encompass a
                        broader and more complex vision of the community. At each stage, project
                        leaders collaborated with interviewees to determine how they wanted to be
                        recorded and subsequently presented online . All
                        material is presented in both English and Spanish. 
                
                
                    6. Avoid Feature Creep
                    Digital technologies offer an astounding array of possible website and app
                        features, yet many of these components go unused due to being irrelevant or
                        inappropriate for a user 
                        
                        . DH teams can avoid feature creep by clearly
                        defining and prioritizing a project’s scope, regularly reviewing initiatives
                        with all stakeholders, and establishing strict processes for introducing new
                        additions. A mindful project incorporates features that support both core
                        objectives and the needs of its audience(s), particularly in helping people
                        find information and engage with content in a compelling way . Features are best selected when backed by an
                        actual use case for the project rather than for the sake of applying a new
                        or flashy technology . 
                    Case Study: Ambitious undergraduate UX and social
                        science students working on SYRIOS suggested an AI-powered chatbot as a
                        potential new feature for the project. They are not alone, as many websites
                        are jumping to incorporate bots without a meaningful reason to do so.
                        However, SYRIOS does not have a use case for a chatbot. We have collected no
                        evidence from user testing that any of our persona categories would prefer
                        conversing with a bot over self-directed exploration of the project. It
                        might be fun for students to create the bot, but it is likely to be more
                        annoying than helpful for most of our project’s visitors. 
                    Example: The William Blake Archive (https://blakearchive.org/), a
                        digital humanities project first launched in 1996, has intentionally
                        addressed the challenge of feature creep or the wish to
                            make existing tools perform more and more functions, just because they
                            can
                        . Proposed changes to features or tools are
                        carefully evaluated in relation to the project’s core mission, resource
                        limitations, and the risk of unnecessary redundancy.
                        Rather than constrain the project, this approach has enabled a thoughtful
                        development of the archive, such as enhancing the compare feature to
                        accommodate newly added media. 
                
                
                    7. Take Extra Care with Data Visualization
                    The ubiquity of digital tools and programs creates the illusion that data
                        visualizations (e.g., maps and timelines) are easy to produce; however,
                        selecting the right content expression requires time and careful
                        consideration. This process begins with a firm understanding of the data
                        itself (e.g., its variables and what or whom it represents), the objective
                        for the visualization (e.g., synthesize complex data, communicate a
                        narrative or argument, promote free exploration or research queries, pose a
                        challenge or task), and the needs of intended audiences (see 
                        
                        ). Whether static, dynamic, or interactive
                            , strong data visualizations prioritize
                        clarity and legibility of information over flash and novelty. Controls are
                        intuitive, legends and keys are easily interpreted, and instructions — if
                        needed — are easy to find and clearly worded. Finally, DH projects can help
                        remind a data-saturated society about the humanity behind the numbers by
                        being transparent about decisions made during the building process,
                        acknowledging limits or lacunas in the underlying data, and providing
                        context for quality interpretation . 
                    Case Study: UX testing for SYRIOS and other coin-based
                        projects revealed that mapping interfaces present significant challenges for
                        both general and scholarly audiences. Regardless of the platform used (e.g.,
                        Tableau, ArcGIS), testers expressed frustration with navigation, data
                        filtering, a lack of contextual information, and overall comprehension and
                        interpretation. Revisiting the project’s core objectives for mapping coins —
                        visualizing curated data sets of excavated coins to highlight how and why
                        these objects moved through the ancient world — underscored the need for a
                        custom-built interface. Still in development, such an interface will give
                        users more control over background topographical and political layers,
                        chronological filters, and the types and filters of coin data displayed.
                        Explanatory content will accompany each mapped perspective to support user
                        interpretation. 
                    Example: Atlante Calvino: letteratura e visualizzazione
                            (https://atlantecalvino.unige.ch) foregrounds data visualization
                        to explore and critically analyze the narrative works of 20th-century
                        Italian author Italo Calvino. Users engage with a wide variety of dynamic
                        visualizations by following three itineraries based on
                        Calvino’s major themes of doubt, space, and form. The project prioritizes
                        the interpretation of its specialist audience by offering detailed
                        explanations and keys for each complex visualization (What is it?, How does it work?,
                        and Reading Tips), along with a comprehensive
                        user guide, video introduction, and Compass
                        (three visualizations (i.e., timeline, flow diagram, and network
                        visualization) contextualizing Calvino’s full literary career). It also
                        emphasizes transparency by documenting the decisions and definitions
                        involved in constructing the data and providing downloadable datasets . 
                
                
                    8. Eliminate Unexpected Page Behaviors 
                    People want a sense of agency when they are online. Websites or apps that
                        suddenly make sounds, launch videos and other pop-up windows, go to an
                        external site, or automatically download PDFs generate feelings of
                        annoyance, lack of control, and general anxiety . Providing opportunities for users to decide (e.g., tapping a button to
                        trigger an action) and clarifying what that decision will do (e.g.,
                        downloading a file or moving to an external page) cultivates a more
                        transparent experience. Rather than relying on default developer solutions
                        and website behaviors, teams can also collectively brainstorm meaningful and
                        secure ways of delivering content that will not be impeded by pop-up
                        blockers . 
                    Case Study: UX testing for SYRIOS and other coin-based
                        projects revealed multiple instances where unexpected page behaviors
                        frustrated testers. In one instance, about a quarter of testers
                        unintentionally ended up on an external page while trying to find a specific
                        section. Ongoing efforts to prevent this include adding clear icons that
                        indicate when a link will direct users to an external site. In another
                        example, a pop-up of a coin image while a page was loading prompted an older
                        tester to say, Oh no, did I do that, or did you do
                            that? UX testing recommended replacing the confusing image with
                        an hourglass to indicate the page is loading. 
                    Example: The educational site and mobile app Clio (https://theclio.com/) relies upon
                        crowdsourcing to preserve a broad definition of local historical and
                        cultural sites within the United States. One of the features offered is
                        guided walking tours, both virtual and physical, which includes the option
                        for generating a printable map. Before the PDF downloads, a pop-up window
                        allows users to customize their tour according to whether they are driving
                        or walking, which direction the tour should follow, and how much information
                        and images they would like the guide to include. This added level of
                        customization keeps the user in control. 
                
                
                    9. Build Accessible Projects 
                    Accessibility concerns the needs of neurodiverse people and those who require
                        physical accommodations . Providing equal access
                        to content entails being vigilant in addressing unnecessary barriers (e.g.,
                        lack of video captions or transcripts, poor color choice, or inadequate
                        contrast) and in considering the functionality of assistive technology
                        (e.g., screen readers) and alternative navigation methods (e.g.,
                        keyboard-only navigation) . Accessibility also
                        extends to neurodiversity and the varied sensory and attentional needs of
                        audiences . Taking accessibility seriously from
                        the earliest design stages can avoid the challenges of retrofitting a
                        project later . 
                    Case Study: One challenge faced by SYRIOS was the use of
                        colors on our timeline to indicate geographical regions. Although the
                        project’s overall visual branding had passed accessibility checks, the use
                        of color as the sole means of helping users distinguish information was
                        risky and required additional checks. Because SYRIOS is designed in the
                        prototyping software Figma (https://www.figma.com/), we checked each of our colors using its
                        color contrast checker and discovered that our color palette failed all
                        contrast tests and required a new design. Similarly, the instructional
                        videos on the site did not display closed-caption text. YouTube provides
                        automatic, albeit imperfect, captions, but requires a subscription for users
                        to avoid advertising interruptions. We thus chose Vimeo as our host, which
                        currently requires captions to be already embedded in the video or a paid
                        subscription to generate them. 
                    Example: Digit(al) Shakespeares, a short film for
                        #transformDH, advocates for greater accessibility for the Deaf community
                        within the online Shakespearean canon (Digit(al) Shakespeares (Tyrone
                        Giordano and Jill Marie Bradbury) 
                        . Presented in American Sign Language (ASL)
                        with English subtitles and no audio, the film highlights how new
                        technologies can support the sharing, preservation, and study of staged
                        translations by Deaf and hearing audiences alike (e.g., ASL Shakespeare
                            (http://aslshakespeare.org/)). At the same time, digital archives
                        of spoken-word performances must improve their captioning practices and
                        prioritize accessibility in their design process.
                
                
                    10. Emphasize Project Development Rather Than Deficiencies 
                    Until they are archived, DH projects are living and evolving products with
                        multiple milestones, varied outcomes, and different phases of completion
                            . Making a dedicated page about project
                        timelines and long-term goals can invite audiences into the process and help
                        them understand the decision-making behind how content is digitized and
                        presented. However, many projects overemphasize what is still under
                        development, not yet working, or will be created in the future, instead
                        of focusing visitor attention on the features that have already been
                        developed, tested, and published . Instead of
                        apologizing for what a project is not, teams can confidently highlight what
                        visitors can do now while inviting audiences to join the project’s community
                        by subscribing to updates. 
                    Case Study: As SYRIOS is still in its prototyping phase,
                        the team has had to balance experimentation and ongoing development with
                        delivering a polished product to the public. In one iteration of the
                        project, we even placed a feedback button on several pages to solicit user
                        comments on deliberately incomplete features, such as the timeline. However,
                        earlier UX testing had already demonstrated that the interactive map
                        required extensive development, so it was removed from the top navigation to
                        not distract from the project’s other sections. 
                    Example: A significant puzzle for Sharing Stories from
                        1977 (https://sharingstories1977.uh.edu/) has been that the biographies
                        of delegates to the National Women’s Conference are published gradually as
                        students and historians complete them. Because this is time-consuming
                        collaborative work, the available datasets are overshadowed by those still
                        in progress, and the site risks having pages that emphasize what is not yet
                        available. Among many solutions, the project team decided on a map that
                        visualizes current data and allows the Researching the NWC page to light up new
                        U.S. states each time one is completed. Between that and a newsletter with
                        updates, Sharing Stories from 1977 has been able to move away from an
                            under-construction-centered approach
                        to managing data rollout. 
                    
                        Practical Advice and Recommended UX Strategies
                        
                            Heuristic
                            Practical Advice for Addressing a Heuristic
                            Relevant UX Strategies (see Table 1)
                        
                        
                            1. Respect the Medium
                            Eliminate long paragraphs, breaking them into smaller ones.
                                Prioritize copywriting to be as succinct as possible without losing
                                content or important context. Consider multimodal presentation of
                                material. Audit the project to identify places where citations might
                                take users out of the project, and revise so that citation
                                information can be found without interfering with their
                                journey.
                            Content Strategy Analysis, User Interviews, Journey Mapping
                        
                        
                            2. Invest in Thoughtful Information Architecture
                            Think carefully about how data is arranged/categorized and any
                                intended uses of it within the backend and frontend. Map out project
                                structure using flow charts to make sure it is well organized. Test
                                any frontend search or navigation thoroughly, and do not launch a
                                search feature until it is fully functional.
                            Card Sorting 
                        
                        
                            3. Treat the Homepage as the Project's Abstract
                            Identify key aspects of project information and media to deliver
                                to users immediately and establish expectations. Ask external
                                reviewers who have never seen your project to explain what it is
                                about based only on your homepage. Have a second pool of testers
                                enter from a secondary page and do the same. 
                            5-Second test, Usability
                                Testing
                        
                        
                            4. Consider the Role of Delight
                            To check for delight, observe people engaging with your project,
                                either during usability testing or independently. Then, talk to your
                                user experience designers about skeuomorphic design (i.e., when user
                                interfaces mimic familiar, real-world objects and experiences) and
                                other engagement approaches.
                            Usability Testing, Interactive Workshops, A/B Testing
                        
                        
                            5. Strive for Inclusivity
                            Assess the need for your project to be translated into other
                                languages based on its subject matter and audiences. Review your
                                project for language that exceeds an 8th-grade reading level;
                                consider testing your project with 12–14-year-olds. Also review for
                                language that might not otherwise be accessible to all and build
                                solutions into your system for things like regional or historic
                                spelling variations, colloquialisms, and wordiness. Usability
                                testing can help projects avoid language bias, as perspectives
                                outside the project team are critical to identifying confusing
                                terminology.
                            Cloze Test, Comprehension Survey, Readability Analysis
                        
                        
                            6. Avoid Feature Creep
                            Audit project features to check whether they contribute to the
                                project's goals and have a clear audience or distract from features
                                that do meet these goals. Ask whether the feature is something users
                                need and want rather than something the project team thinks they
                                should want. 
                            Surveys, Card Sorting, User Interviews
                        
                        
                            7. Take Extra Care with Data Visualization
                            Before selecting a tool, sketch out key concepts for your
                                visualization (on paper is fine). Solicit extensive user feedback on
                                both content and technology. Do users understand how to read and
                                interpret the data visualization? Can users find information readily
                                using this visualization? Does it suffer from lag (i.e., taking too
                                long to load)? Are its controls intuitive? Can the data
                                visualization be used without reading directions first? If it
                                requires directions, is this information easy to find and
                                understand? Pay attention to the location and clarity of legends and
                                keys. Make sure to test with people who represent your future
                                audience and not project team members.
                            Usability Testing 
                        
                        
                            8. Eliminate Unexpected Page Behaviors
                            Eliminate pop-up windows. Make sure the use of PDFs is
                                communicated to visitors, as they will either download a file or
                                open it in a new browser tab. Make link language clear. When
                                testing, take note of places where users ask, What did I
                                    do?
                            
                            Cognitive Walkthrough, Usability Testing 
                        
                        
                            9. Build Accessible Projects
                            Review accessibility guidelines and use online accessibility
                                checkers. Perform an accessibility audit of your project with the
                                help of someone experienced in accessible technology and/or involve
                                testers who use accommodations. If your project is run from a
                                university campus, involve students with cognitive or physical
                                differences in testing.  
                            Accessibility Audit, Usability Testing, Focus Groups
                        
                        
                            10. Emphasize Project Development Rather Than Deficiencies
                            Remove language about features that are unavailable, under construction,
                                coming soon, or not yet working the way
                                they will in their final form. Hold back features until they are
                                fully usable (and tested). Consider making a project timeline page to communicate your process and
                                plans to promote transparency about your project’s evolution. 
                            Focus Groups 
                        
                    
                
            

                Conclusion
                User experience (UX) represents a form of expertise akin to technical and subject
                    matter specialization. Its integration within the digital humanities is long
                    overdue, ensuring that the projects, tools, and resources we build meaningfully
                    reach our audiences. UX provides the research and methodologies to assess how
                    users encounter our work at each stage and whether their engagement aligns with
                    our goals and expectations. UX helps to refocus and refine our questions,
                    underscoring the centrality of functionality and audience reception alongside
                    academic rigor and technical sophistication. In fact, by prioritizing the user,
                    UX practices provide an excellent bridge between the humanities content and the
                    technical solution for that content. UX helps humanists articulate effective
                    design for their content and assists technologists in building practical and
                    delightful systems, platforms, and interfaces. 
                Additionally, in a climate where budgets for DH projects may be limited,
                    integrating UX best practices early on in development can help teams avoid
                    wasting time and resources. Talking with intended users, testing labels and
                    navigation through detailed sketches, and checking overall clarity lets projects
                    confirm needs before the software and data team members begin major construction
                    of project databases, interfaces, and pipelines. With a clear and verified plan,
                    technologists build only once instead of spinning up parallel versions or
                    massively reworking features after launch. In short, a little user research up
                    front prevents expensive rebuilds and keeps resources focused on the scholarship
                    rather than avoidable engineering churn.
                While ideally a UX practitioner will be a part of every DH team, reimaging and
                    clarifying UX methodologies for a DH context is a step in the right direction.
                    The ten heuristics proposed in this article serve as an efficient contribution
                    to this larger vision. They function as an iterative checklist to facilitate
                    self-evaluation and collaboration on a project, regardless of members’
                    backgrounds, expertise, or financial resources. Their very generality means that
                    they can be scaled and adapted depending on a project’s goals and budget, which
                    allows teams to prioritize accessibility, user comprehension, and engagement
                    over flashy and expensive technology. DH teams need not feel pressure to address
                    all the heuristics at once, but rather to revisit them throughout a project
                    lifecycle as a reminder of audiences’ needs and expectations in a digital
                    environment. 
                Further discussion is still needed on these heuristics as well as on other
                    methodologies and practices in UX research. Although we have shared our proposed
                    heuristics with other teams developing DH projects, we invite more review of
                    their application and efficacy with digital tools, projects, and resources
                    throughout the community. Continued conversation is also beneficial for UX
                    research. User experience professionals frequently must work at a rapid pace and
                    with a focus on business objectives. Participation in DH projects allows UX
                    professionals to slow down and apply foundational principles of the field
                    towards the goal of enhancing understanding and knowledge. As learning
                    opportunities for their creators as well, DH projects enable UX professionals to
                    experiment with new research methods and tools in a manner that benefits the
                    entire team. Ultimately, deeper engagement on the integration of UX and DH will
                    elevate our work and help us produce substantive projects that cater to diverse
                    audiences, general and scholarly alike. 
            
