Title:  Intermediality and Cultural Assessment:
               Digital Flows in the Global Age, A Review of 
Volume:  009
Issue:  3
Date:  3 December 2015
Abstract:  
            A review of Digital Humanities and the Study of Intermediality
                  in Comparative Cultural Studies, edited by Steven Tötösy de Zepetnek.
               Purdue Scholarly Publishing Services, 2013, 375 pp.
         
Full Body Text: 
First, it must be acknowledged that Digital Humanities and the
                  Study of Intermediality in Comparative Cultural Studies is a rather
               comprehensive volume containing numerous and relevant contributions on the still
               emergent field of intermedial studies, considering its 375 pages, 28 articles, plus
               an introduction. Additionally, the book offers a Bibliography
                  for Work in Intermediality and Digital Humanities, which is fully
               complete, and useful, and an Index (371-375). The
               articles assembled, as noted in the introduction, were previously published in the
               online quarterly CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture
                  http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb.
In the introduction, Steven Tötösy de Zepetnek, the editor, presents the volume by
               asserting how intermediality reshapes the encounters of different scholarship fields
               – namely literature, philosophy, art, sociology, and pedagogy – amidst the larger
               umbrella of digital humanities. By documenting some of these fruitful encounters, the
               volume allows for a fresh look into the field’s 21st-century agenda, namely by
               addressing the role of new media in fostering new cultural practices and social
               endeavors. This book aims to bridge the gap, at least to some extent, between
               mediated societies and the rest of the world, inasmuch as it tackles the different
               kinds of inequalities that make for our globalized world. Although the volume
               presents itself as a comprehensive guide towards intermedial studies, its
               organization reflects this aim poorly. Articles are simply displayed in sequence,
               without potentially helpful referents to any broader sections or thematic areas.
               Furthermore, the presented sequence does not support a proper delimitation of the
               articles for fields of study. Therefore, for the sake of legibility, I have chosen to
               group the contributions according to main focus and type of approach adopted. 

            Literature and philosophy
            These articles depart from different genres, or address literature/discourse in
               their wholeness. Some are mainly theoretical, whether tracing the pathway that led
               from hermeneutics to media culture studies (Siegfried J. Schmidt), engaging in the
               application of the concepts of mediality and intermediality to the field of
               literature (Werner Wolf) or, encompassing different possible articulations between
               discourse and intermediality (Jens Schröter). On the other hand, other contributions
               focus on more specific phenomena, such as renowned literary authors like cummings and
               Mayakovsky (Svetlana Nikitina), or the comics genre (Antonio J. Gil González; Brian
               Mitchell Peters). Both poetry and comics are understood as manifestations of
               intermediality, and their present relevance and future developments depend on that
               assumption. In the field of philosophy, in Intermediality and
                  Aesthetic Theory in Shklovsky's and Adorno's Thought,” Oleg Gelikman picks
               up the contribution of the two philosophers to aesthetic theory, and, at the same
               time, argues that that same theory has become an endeavor of today, within which
               intermedial works must be taken into consideration.
         

            Translation
            In terms of translation studies, intermediality and mediation account for a revision
               of traditional concepts on the grounds of world literature and the cross-disciplinary
               dynamics it originates. The book’s argument entails viewing translation as a platform
               for interaction of narratives, texts, images and symbols (Erin Schlumpf).
               Furthermore, the necessary revision is restated when comparing human vs. machine
               translation, since the results corroborate different intermedial processes with
               distinctive communicate outcomes (Harry J. Huang). In this way, one becomes resilient
               towards the traditional contrast between a good and bad translation, considering that
               in the domain of intermedial practice, what is yet to be faced (described and
               analyzed) are the different communicative layers, frequently overlapping, within
               translation.
         

            Pedagogy
            Intermedial pedagogy gets its way by pursuing one of two
               choices: by challenging traditional pedagogical methodology, which implies, for
               instance, that a widespread range of digital tools be used in direct response to our
               multicultural world (Kris Rutten and Ronald Soetaert), or by introducing intermedial
               genres as objects of study. One such genre is the graphic novel, which can help make
               students aware that cultural literacy nowadays is mainly a question of being able to
               identify intermediality (Geert Vandermeersche and Ronald Soetaert). In her article,
                  Digital Humanities in Developed and Emerging Markets,
               Verena Laschinger summarizes one side of the question, simply by emphasizing the
               central role of digital humanities in creating a mass of critical thinking in
               emerging markets like Turkey. 
         

            Arts
            Regarding the arts, the articles, once again, differ in their fields of inquiry:
               film, drama, music, architecture and sculpture are contemplated. Film studies can
               benefit from looking at literature as a means for retextualization drawing on the
               combination of different media (Ipshita Chanda). In fact, the different layers of
               reality and fictionality arisen by retextualizaton allow for new intermedial
               interactions between film and literature. Here Shakespeare can be called on, as, for
               instance different depictions of Macbeth by three Asian film directors can offer
               insight into the intercultural dimension of intermediality, on the basis of dominant
               signifiers, such as political power and struggle for the land (I-Chun Wang). From
               Shakespeare to French rap, intermediality is consistently used to address
               multicultural awareness, which is entrenched in different historical narratives
               (Isabelle Marc Martínez). To a certain extent, the use of historical arguments within
               multicultural approaches can become a way of engaging in a common narrative.
            Focusing on the power of architecture projects to change urban space, the book
               acknowledges that public space is prone to community interventions, namely street
               theatres and photomontages that mostly aim to revisit the city as polis (Virgilio
               Tortosa Garrigós). The work of Eduardo Serra is also revisited on the basis of a new
               kind of interaction between the context of production and that of the reception of
               the artwork. Thus the media can, at the same time, facilitate sensorial experiences
               and meaning assessments (Rocío von Jungenfeld).
         

            Digital projects
            There are several digital projects presented and reviewed throughout the book.
               Asunción López-Varela Azcárate and Serge Bouchardon discuss Loss
                  of Grasp, a digital project by the same Serge Bouchardon and Vincent
               Volckaert. The authors of the article are able to show how far we have come from a
               Cartesian understanding of private isolated experience, apart from any kind of
               external influence, to its communal understanding, according to which the subject, by
               mirroring himself/herself on the surrounding objects, is ready to be
                  experienced. The mirroring effect can lead us to the ontological
               distinction between electronic image and electronic being. Nevertheless, what is yet
               to be sorted out is the ambiguous condition of electronic realis caught up between
               human scale and electronic possibilities (Michał Ostrowicki). Still in the domain of
               electronic possibilities, video games can be seen as new media to build worlds, in the sense that they endorse the
               construction of meaning and exercise of creativity (Jeroen Bourgonjon). As a matter
               of fact, dealing with works/projects which involve different media — image, text,
               audio — implies a process of revising boundaries across material structures and
               agency categories (Maya Zalbidea Paniagua). Paul Benzon offers a fresh look into
               e-mail experience by proposing that advance-fee fraud is a kind of epistolary digital
               narrative that tries to deceive the addressee by engagement in a fictional world of
               related events. This intermedial connection between fraud and literature accounts for
               the unsettling instability of digital mediation itself. Steven Tötösy de Zepetnek,
               the volume’s editor, presents a comparative survey on daily intake of media with
               advanced undergraduate students enrolled in media and communication studies at
               Northeastern University and with advanced undergraduate and graduate students at the
               University of Halle-Wittenberg. The results showed opposition to cultural
               participation in media intake, with the two groups displaying similar media cultural
               participation and practices.
         

            Practices of intermediality
            Along with digital projects, some of the book’s articles rely on different
               possibilities of intermedial practice. Within this field of inquiry, different
               processes of dialogue, hybridization, and cultural translation are explored, yet never
               fail to recognize that communication itself entails obstacles, barriers, and
               intransigencies (Cristina Peñamarín). Advertising in cable cartoon programming can
               show that a significant number of advertisements rely on racial, ethnic, and gender
               values that can best be subsumed in the favoring of white boys relative to girls, and
               to minority children in general (Debra L. Merskin). Visual culture’s impact can also
               be analyzed in terms of national configuration. The rise of a burgeoning visual
               culture, in private and public spaces, can set forth an anti-colonial movement (Kedar
               Vishwanathan). Moreover, media can still be used as strategy and instrument for
               public diplomacy. In this context, one is able to identify a history of destruction
               of monuments played out in the landscape of media by the U.S. government (Reinhold
               Viehoff). On the other hand, Rebecca J. Romsdahl discusses the effect of the internet
               and the World Wide Web on political public participation, and proposes that
               e-participation in policy-making could revitalize the dynamics between citizens and
               government by increasing citizen participation significantly. 
            In the whole, this is a useful volume for those interested in conceptualizing the
               aesthetics of our global world, one in which different mediums, media and
               mediatization converge in the reinvention of communication probes. In terms of
               Digital Humanities, this eclecticism paves the way for interdisciplinary debate over
               concepts, methodologies, and outcomes, expanding the limits of the digital and, at
               the same time, reframing the contribution of different materialities within it.
               Intermediality is the new face of postmodern culture, a direct reflex of the mobility
               and transition that characterizes our encounters within and across cultures.
               Additionally, by revising the boundaries between cultural studies and digital
               humanities, the book can easily be read in dialogue with other recent contributions,
               such as Interdisciplining Digital Humanities: Boundary Work in an Emerging Field
               .
         
