Title:  Creating a regional DH community – A Case Study of the
                    RedHD
Volume:  009
Issue:  3
Date:  1 December 2015
Abstract:  
                Although Digital Humanities (DH) has become more established in recent years one
                    of the main issues that remains is the true internationalization of DH as an
                    academic discipline. Up to this point the DH community has been mainly focused
                    on scholars from a handful of English speaking countries and there is little or
                    no participation from other regions of the world. This paper discusses the
                    experience of setting up a DH community in Mexico. The aim is to describe the
                    multi-faceted approach used for DH community building as well as discussing
                    different strategies employed, difficulties encountered, produced results as
                    well as areas for future growth. We propose that this may serve as a model for
                    similar initiatives in other countries. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                In recent years there has been a noticeable growth in the establishment of new DH
                    associations both regional and national. 2011 saw the establishment of the Red
                    de Humanidades Digitales (RedHD), Humanidades Digitales Hispánicas (HDH) and the
                    Associazione per l’Informatica Umanistica e la Cultura Digitale This is
                        the date of official creation although as a network it has a much longer
                        history. See D. Fiormonte Informatica Umanistica… Quinze ans après, 20 March
                        2014, http://infolet.it/2014/03/20/informatica-umanistica-quinze-ans-apres/
                    ; 2012 of the Digital Humanities Deustchland, and 2013 the Associação das
                    Humanidades Digitais (AHDig), Asociación de Humanidades Digitales en Argentina
                    (HDA) and Ruach Digitalit – Digital Humanities Israel . These organizations should contribute to an increasingly complex global DH
                    landscape. However, the DH international community and in particular the
                    Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO), established in 2002 and
                    arguably the largest professional society of Digital Humanities and/or the
                    initiatives its sponsors, has been criticized in recent years ,  for a narrow
                    representation of worldwide DH: ... from the point of view of the scientific results, research projects,
                        and institutional presence, Informatica Umanistica, like most of the
                            other DH practiced in the world, practically doesn’t
                        exist
                    . 
                There are, of course, numerous and complex issues at stake here and they must be
                    addressed on many different levels. However, one small step which may contribute
                    towards knowing and recognizing other DH in the world is to
                    better understand how DH communities are formed and what their particular
                    characteristics and trajectories are. In this way we can address the issue of
                    how to improve their visibility, participation, and recognition in the field of
                    Digital Humanities as a whole. In this paper we will discuss the experience of
                    setting up a DH community in Mexico. The aim is to describe the multi-faceted
                    approach used for DH community-building as well as to discuss different
                    strategies employed, difficulties encountered, and results produced as well as
                    areas for future growth. This article has a necessarily descriptive aspect but
                    still we propose that this may serve as a learning example or model for similar
                    initiatives in other countries. 
            

                Background
                In April 2010 a research project was funded by the Universidad Nacional Autónoma
                    de México (UNAM) with the principal aim of studying the current situation of
                    digital resources for the humanities. The methodology for this research project
                    included the organization of a series of workshops. It was during these that the
                    idea to form a DH network was proposed by the participants. This article will
                    not report on the results of the research project that have been reported
                    elsewhere , but rather on the work done from the
                    workshops onwards to form and establish the Red de Humanidades Digitales
                    (RedHD), the resulting DH organization that was established. 
                
                    Workshops
                    The principal researcher on the project had previous contact with Digital
                        Humanities due to postgraduate studies in the UK. There are a number of
                        self-reflective articles on the role, organization and future of Digital
                        Humanities which is typical of an emerging field and they attempt not only
                        to define but also to understand the role, impact and challenges of
                        developing digital projects as part of research and teaching in the
                        Humanities . With this in mind from the onset
                        it was considered that DH literature would provide a suitable framework for
                        developing the research project. 
                    Four workshops were organized between September 2010 and June 2011 under the
                        name Digital Humanities. The aims of the first two workshops were: to
                        share experiences in the development of digitization and digital resource
                        creation in the Humanities; identify the main difficulties and limitations
                        for DH; discuss and identify the necessary skills for human resources, and
                        to define concrete actions to strengthen and improve digital projects in the
                        Humanities. The last two workshops were specifically aimed at consolidating
                        the RedHD. 
                    One of the first challenges was selecting the participants for the workshops.
                        The aims of the workshop required that the participants have some experience
                        working with digital projects in the Humanities. They were not just
                        informative but also participative. As part of the research project a
                        database of digital projects within the UNAM web space — www.unam.mx — had previously been
                        compiled. This was done by selecting the web pages of all the
                        Humanities-related schools and institutes and navigating through the
                        different links finding and registering digital resources created by
                        university members. This database was used to contact the creators of these
                        resources and invite them to the workshops when possible. Additionally, they
                        were strongly encouraged to invite colleagues with similar backgrounds,
                        creating a snowball effect. Although originally the workshop was only UNAM
                        members, colleagues from other universities became interested in
                        participating and they were included. 
                    In order to be as inclusive as possible the definition of a digital project
                        in the Humanities field was broad. The participants had worked on projects
                        such as XIX century manuscripts markup, digital images (research in pre
                        Hispanic mural paintings, visualizations archeological sites), sound files
                        (linguistics research in indigenous languages), computational linguistics
                        (text mining, corpus of Mexican Spanish), computational creativity (story
                        building) as well as digital journals, collections and libraries. Table 1
                        shows number of participants by field for each workshop. 
                    
                        *Note: For this particular workshop one of the participants invited
                            his MA in Library Studies students to work on the RedHD’s website as a
                            final project for a course on designing information systems, hence the
                            pronounced increase in number of assistants.
                        
                            
                                Subject
                            
                        
                        
                            
                            Workshop 1
                            Workshop 2
                            Workshop 3
                            Workshop 4
                        
                        
                            
                                Anthropology
                            
                            1
                            0
                            0
                            0
                        
                        
                            
                                Architecture
                            
                            0
                            1
                            1
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                                Art History and Aesthetics
                            
                            3
                            3
                            3
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                                Bibliography, Book and Library Studies
                            
                            2
                            3
                            7*
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                                Cultural Studies
                            
                            0
                            0
                            0
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                                Engineering Linguistics
                            
                            1
                            0
                            2
                            0
                        
                        
                            
                                Graphic Design
                            
                            0
                            0
                            1
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                                History
                            
                            1
                            1
                            0
                            3
                        
                        
                            
                                Philology and Literature
                            
                            3
                            3
                            2
                            4
                        
                        
                            
                                Philosophy
                            
                            4
                            1
                            2
                            3
                        
                        
                            
                                Total # of participants
                            
                            15
                            12
                            18
                            16
                        
                        
                    
                    For the most part the involvement of participants was fairly constant
                        throughout the workshops and we managed to consolidate a core group.
                        Excessive workload or previous commitments were the most common reasons for
                        not participating. 
                    As previously mentioned, Digital Humanities concepts were used to framework
                        the research. The first workshop began with an introduction to DH explaining
                        its history, main concepts, communication channels, publications and
                        discussions. We defined DH as an area of
                            research and teaching at the intersection of computing and the
                            disciplines of the humanities, which was taken from the Digital
                        Humanities Wikipedia entry. The principal researcher did, however,
                        previously attempt to find a more concise definition, but this proved
                        problematic. A member of an established DH centre responded to the following
                        when asked for a definition of DH: a very
                            familiar question! and there is no answer, I'm afraid...I'm currently
                            seeing through press our next edited volume (...) in which we round up
                            all the crucial papers and blog posts in the area and bundle it all into
                            one teaching text that goes there is no one definition!
                            see! Melissa Terras, personal correspondence,
                            13/03/2011
                    
                     In the first workshop only one participant had heard of DH. This was due to
                        a sabbatical in the United States. However, by the fourth workshop two more
                        participants, PhD students in Spanish Literature from the University of
                        Western Ontario in Canada, were familiar with DH. It is worth adding that
                        they had heard of the efforts to establish the RedHD through the
                        participation of several workshop members in March 2011 of Day of
                            DH and this was how contact was established. 
                    The introduction to DH was followed by a group discussion which focused on
                        the experiences that participants had when developing a digital project. In
                        order to provide a framework for the conversation, we identified seven key
                        topics from the DH literature. These key topics were then addressed in the
                        form of questions that participants were invited to respond to orally, and
                        this in turn was discussed within the group. Key topics are listed below and
                        the specific questions are provided in Appendix
                            1. 
                    
                        Organization context including institutional recognition and support 
                        Planning and development
                        Intellectual property and copyright 
                        Human resources and training
                        Dissemination and use 
                        Completion and sustainability 
                        Digital humanist career 
                    
                    The results of these two initial workshops have been reported in much more
                        detail elsewhere , but in summary a common
                        characteristic was that participants felt that there was little
                        infrastructural and institutional support for the development of their
                        digital projects and no policies or guidelines in place. Some enjoyed this
                        marginality as it allowed them to work more independently, while others
                        remarked on the difficulties of investing time in a project that was not
                        recognized as proper research. Everyone felt that there
                        was little recognition of the value of their work from colleagues and
                        evaluation committees. Contrary to what was expected, participants had few
                        difficulties obtaining funding (albeit small amounts) but in general had
                        more trouble finding and retaining students or research assistants with the
                        appropriate combination of digital skills and a Humanities background to
                        help with the work. Projects were generally a personal initiative, were not
                        properly documented due to lack of time, and there was concern about what
                        would happen to them once the funding run out. As put by one participant,
                            When does a project become
                            the university’s service and somebody else’s responsibility? The
                        long-term future of most of these resources was not assured as hosting and
                        maintenance was precarious for almost all projects. 
                    As our discussion focused on general issues related to working on a DH
                        project, we did not find significant differences amongst disciplinary
                        backgrounds. We found that we had similar problems despite the different
                        topics of the digital projects. Although most participants had not
                        previously heard of DH, there was considerable interest in hearing about
                        this field and how it could help them out with their own digital projects.
                        In particular, participants reported a sense of marginality in their
                        workplace and they felt that they benefited from talking to other people
                            like me. In this sense the knowledge that there was a larger
                        community of scholars with similar interests and challenges was revealing.
                        At this particular point, participants were interested in how as a local
                        group we could collaborate together towards the
                            professionalization of the type of work we were
                        doing as well as address our common challenges together. We did not however,
                        reflect on the nature of Digital Humanities or go into too much depth about
                        its definition. Rather, it served as a useful umbrella term that helped
                        group us together. Possibly the most notable result was that although
                        originally only two workshops were planned, at the end of the second one the
                        group decided to continue to meet in order to address pending issues. It was
                        concluded that the best way forward was to create a DH association that
                        would allow us to deal with them collectively, rather than individually.
                        This was the focus of the next two workshops. 
                
                
                    Building a community
                    One of the first challenges was moving from a workshop atmosphere to
                        establishing a more formal but still dynamic network of DH practitioners. As
                        mentioned previously the workshops had already attracted the attention of
                        participants from outside the UNAM, so it was clear that the network would
                        be geographically dispersed. No funding was available so we did not want to
                        incur travel costs. It was necessary and practical to think from the start
                        of a virtual community with few or no face-to-face meetings. One of the main
                        concerns during the third and fourth workshop was that although we noted a
                        lot of enthusiasm, we feared that personal workloads, geographical
                        dispersion, and different disciplinary backgrounds would lead to a weakening
                        of our initiative. A virtual community is defined as a situation where
                            people carry on public
                            discussions long enough, with sufficient human feeling, to
                            form webs of personal relationships
                        . We therefore wanted to ensure good
                        communication channels to talk, organize and work with relevant people on
                        particular topics. 
                    It was agreed that it was important for us to focus on concrete actions and
                        outcomes rather than just on good intentions or overambitious plans. We
                        therefore developed a concrete agenda that would serve to focus our
                        attention. Initial plans were reported at DH 2012  but the following expands and updates the work done. Referring back to
                        Rheingold’s definition, our main priorities were to: establish our
                        communication channels, define participants, and state our topics. 
                
                
                    Establishing communication channels
                    It was decided that digital technologies could easily be employed for our
                        communication channels, especially with the high degree of computer use by
                        all the participants. The success of the Humanist Discussion group and its
                        key role in the establishment of the Anglo-American DH community led us to
                        decide to establish a listserv as our primary communication channel, despite
                        the fact that there are currently more modern approaches in particular with
                        social networking sites. The listserv was a proven method and in addition it
                        did not require participants to have to belong to a particular social
                        networking site. All participants had access to email thus creating a low
                        barrier entry. We currently have over one hundred and sixty registered
                        participants. Presently participants are asked for their name, institution
                        and country but this was not always the case. We are currently working
                        towards completing the missing information. In general terms there are
                        people from Archaeology, Art History, Computing, Conservation Studies,
                        Culture Studies, Pedagogy, Graphic Design, History, Library Studies,
                        Linguistic Engineering, Philology, and Philosophy. Around a third of the
                        subscribers are from outside Mexico from the following countries: Argentina,
                        Chile, Colombia, Perú, Uruguay, USA, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal,
                        Spain, Switzerland, UK and Signapore. The second step was to set up a
                        webpage. We were fortunate to be able to have one web programmer from the
                        research project to help. The webpage was considered a space for hosting the
                        projects and tools that we wished to develop and not just as an informative
                        page. Both the establishment of the listserv and the webpage required us to
                        make a series of decisions about our aspirations as a group, albeit in a
                        roundabout way, as we made decisions about hosting and domain names. As a
                        starting point we realized that although the workshops had been held at the
                        UNAM already, there were participants from other Mexican universities and
                        from non-academic organizations. We also knew that at least at that time,
                        there was no other Latin American organization. In terms of language,
                        although we were aware of DH type work being done in Spain  there was still no formal association in place. We
                        therefore agreed that the aims of the RedHD are: to promote and strengthen work on humanities and
                            computing, with special emphasis on research and teaching in Spanish
                            speaking countries as well as the Latin American region in general. The
                            RedHD supports better communication between digital humanists in the
                            region, the formation of human resources, preparation of documentation
                            and good practices, the promotion of DH projects, dissemination of DH
                            related events as well as promoting the recognition of the field.
                             Additionally we seek to promote regional projects and initiatives on an
                            international level. 
                    In terms of domain names we did not want to associate the DH community to any
                        institution in particular. Additionally, we were thinking not only on a
                        national scale but also on a regional Latin American one. We took the
                        decision to get a .mx and .net domain (www.humanidadesdigitales.mx
                        and www.humanidadesdigitales.net) and pay for external hosting. These
                        costs were absorbed by some of the members of the group, as they are
                        relatively low. However, although costs have gone down considerably this may
                        not necessarily be the case for other countries, and this should be taken
                        into consideration. 
                
                
                    Relevant people
                    It was agreed that we continued to want to be as inclusive as possible. We
                        decided that certain academic structures available to us (such as seminars)
                        were restrictive in terms of who could participate (for example, had to
                        formally belong to a university). The workshops had caught the interest of a
                        diverse range of people from researchers with PhDs to young programmers not
                        interested in traditional academic careers or people not formally employed
                        or enrolled in the university. We also had some from government and private
                        companies. We decided to maintain an open and dynamic structure and anybody
                        who joined the listserv would automatically become a member of the
                        community. This allowed us to grow rapidly without too many restrictions. In
                        recent months however, we have had to alter this slightly and this will be
                        discussed further on. 
                
                
                    Working around topics
                    From the work done at the workshops we concluded that the following topics
                        would be the focus of our attention:
                    
                        Information: about digital humanists, digital resources and projects
                            and relevant publications
                        Formation of human resources: strategies, guidelines, documentations
                            and other activities that promote the formation of human resources
                            required for the development of DH.
                        Project evaluation: necessary actions to generate standards, policies
                            and indicators in order to promote the validity of DH projects and
                            lobbying for the recognition of DH as a valid academic field. (
                    
                    The following section will describe how each one of these topics was
                        addressed as well as the results and the difficulties we have encountered.
                        It is important to note that these topics however do overlap and the
                        boundaries of the different initiatives are not always clear cut but rather
                        complement and connect to each other.
                
            

                Information
                One of the workshop results indicated that there was little documentation
                    available about DH in Spanish. Additionally there was modest and dispersed
                    information about the work that had been done in Mexico and other Latin American
                    countries. This situation has changed considerably in the past four years and
                    there is a fast growing corpus of DH literature in Spanish See for example
                        the Zotero group of Humanidades Digitales created by Antonio Rojas Castro in
                        August 2013 which currently has almost one hundred members and over four
                        hundred entries. See https://www.zotero.org/groups/humanidades_digitales..
                    However at that time, one of our first objectives was to document and provide
                    documentation related to DH in Spanish and about the work that we had already
                    done. We also wished to maintain a database of DH projects. The discontinuation
                    of similar projects from other countries such as AHDS, Intute and similar DH
                    resource discovery systems was discouragingSee for example, AHRC – Arts
                        and Humanities Research Council, Announcement 14th May 2007. Published AHDS webpage 13th June 2007. Available Internet Archive: http://web.archive.org/web/20071012045201/ahds.ac.uk/news/futureAHDS.htm
                        and NINCH (National Initiative for a Networked Cultural Heritage).
                        "International Database of Digital Humanities Projects." Project report:
                            http://www.ninch.org/programs/data/.. However, it also
                    presented us with the opportunity to focus on different approaches to long-term
                    sustainability. We are currently looking at grass root development and working
                    in partnership with libraries. We are also in talks with other ongoing projects,
                    such as DH Commons, in order to share information. We have found, however, that
                    up to now, despite the maintenance issues, the databases have been useful in
                    giving an initial important sense of production and of critical mass to move
                    forwards as a community. 
            

                Formation of human resources
                This was another area that we identified as a key issue. Almost all the projects
                    experienced difficulties finding and retaining human resources — in particular
                    research assistants and programmers — that had the right combination of both
                    technical skills and subject knowledge to develop the projects. The lead
                    researchers themselves were also in need of specific training that simply was
                    not available. Most work was done through trial and error and self-training.
                    This is similar to what has been reported in other parts of the world but the
                    growing number of DH courses and DH degrees at the postgraduate level seeks to
                    address this. Therefore, teaching and training were one of our focus points. 
                Initially we offered a few basic courses such as Digital
                        resources in the Humanities and Introduction to
                        TEI within the framework of continuing education and human resource
                    development. These courses, however, were usually done on an ad hoc basis and
                    did not have the overall impact that we were looking for. We were more
                    interested in getting DH into the official curriculum in order to formalize and
                    establish in a more definite manner the presence of DH teaching. 
                At the UNAM we worked on a syllabus proposal for a DH
                        diplomado A diplomado is a highly specialized academic
                        course that must cover a minimum of 120 hours. No academic degree is awarded
                        but they are recognised as certification courses of specialized topics.
                    . In order to develop this we consulted syllabi from other
                        countries. We used Lisa Spiro’s Digital Humanities Education, Zotero
                        Group. Available at: https://www.zotero.org/groups/digital_humanities_education. The
                        list has a strong preponderance of courses in the USA. Although the
                    topics we proposed to cover were similar, we sought to emphasize the use of a
                    more diverse set of DH project examples. We hoped that this
                        diplomado could become the basis for a future MA course. We
                    originally assumed that setting up an MA in Digital Humanities would be simple
                    as we believed it to be an attractive topic, especially considering the
                    popularity in other parts of the world, but we have encountered numerous
                    obstacles. From anecdotal evidence we feel that this is the same experience of
                    early DH adopters in Anglo-American countries. A recent New Zealand report on
                    passing a DH curricula through a national board notes that the final form reflects not only the
                            state of the art in the discipline in question, but
                        the state of the art as parsed through academic staff,
                        informed (and uninformed) reviewers, institutional context (and necessity),
                        national educational policies, and the shifting sands of methodological and
                        critical best practice
                    . New DH courses are, therefore, shaped and
                    influenced by a variety of different actors and interests. Political and
                    cultural issues are definitely at stake. 
                More recently we worked on another academic course known as Especialización, which is available to undergraduate students and
                    looks to inform students in a particular area (for example, paleography or art
                    appraisal) on the subject of Textual Culture and Documentary Heritage, and again
                    we proposed Humanidades Digitales as one of the
                    courses. Both the diplomado and the
                        especialización included an important practical component and
                    both focused on doing a DH project as an end result. The
                        especialización was accepted but it was necessary to change the
                    name to Digital projects in the Humanities. On this
                    occasion we faced objections to the term Digital Humanities. The term was
                    unfamiliar to most of the people on the commission and because there were no
                        precedents As explained by  the use of the
                        term Humanidades Digitales was consolidated with the creation of Humanidades
                        Digitales Hispánicas (HDH) in 2012, shortly after the work we are
                        reporting., except for the RedHD, we had difficulties justifying its
                    use. Although we made references to the work done in other countries we were
                    unable to convince the program committee to take the risk of proposing something
                    so new. Proposals go through a complex bureaucratic process and it is quite
                    likely that the commission did not want to put the whole Especialización in jeopardy by proposing an unknown subject.
                    Additionally, at the time we ourselves as RedHD had not fully discussed what we
                    meant by DH except as a broad definition and possibly we were not sufficiently
                    prepared. As stated by , digital humanists must be
                    ready to explain what we do and why
                        we matter and why we should be supported and why DH makes sense.
                    This will be discussed in more detail further along. 
                As well as training and formal courses we also noted an absence of information
                    about DH in Spanish, although as mentioned previously this has changed notably
                    over the past four years. One of our first actions was a special issue of the
                        Revista Digital Universitaria (RDU) in July 2011
                        Humanidades Digitales, Revista Digital
                        Universitaria (RDU), 2011 Vol. 12, No.7, a successful online
                    peer-reviewed general interest journal published by the UNAM on the subject of
                    Digital Humanities. In September of that same year we set up a blog of the
                        RedHD Blog de la RedHD. Available at: 
                            http://humanidadesdigitales.net/blog/ and we have been
                    publishing fairly regularly every two weeks. The blog now has over 100 entries
                    from 27 collaborators both from Mexico and international covering topics from
                    open access, open culture, collective intelligence, preservation, philosophy and
                    technology, digital objects among others all in relation to DH. Almost all
                    entries are original Spanish creations, although we have included a few
                    translations. We have not as yet initiated a planned translation program, but
                    rather the ones we have are a result of interest by some of our bloggers. We are
                    currently in talks with other blogs about setting up reciprocating translations.
                    The blog has been key in gaining attention and distributing information. In
                    April 2013 we also began to publish a monthly newsletter (Boletín RedHD) which includes a few news items plus information
                    about one of the blog entries of that moment. We currently have almost two
                    hundred subscribers and the number is still growing. Unfortunately the system
                    only requires email address so we do not have further information about the
                    subscribers. 
                In the near future we are planning on more formal and extensive publications,
                    namely a book and a journal. Recently a number of DH readers have been published
                        (; ; ) and to our knowledge there is only one recently
                    published book on Digital Humanities in Spanish  and
                    we see a need to provide more general DH books. There are currently several DH
                    journals (for example, Digital Scholarship in the
                        Humanities and Digital Humanities
                        Quarterly) that are published in English. In Spanish some journals
                    have published DH articles (for example Caracteres
                    and El Profesional de la Información) but as of yet
                    there is not to our knowledge a dedicated DH journal. 
                Another strategy for the human resource formation has been the organization of DH
                    events, namely a biannual conference. Academic events provide visibility of DH
                    as well as promote the formation of human resources and foster collaboration
                    between the community members. As the community grows we feel that these events
                    are key to identifying and bringing together fellow digital humanists. In May
                    2012 we organized the 1er Encuentro de HD (Digital Humanties Conference) in
                    Mexico City, co-hosted by CONACULTA, the ministry of art and culture, and again
                    in 2014 additionally held in conjunction with GO:DH (Global Outlook: Digital
                    Humanities), a special interest group of the ADHO (Association of Digital
                    Humanities Organizations). In both cases the events have been free as we have
                    wanted to be as inclusive as possible, and due to administration problems
                    regarding funds that will be described later. The venue was provided by
                    Conaculta and catering and other amenities were kept simple. The work for the
                    conference has been done mainly by members of the RedHD and student volunteers.
                    In 2012 we had 31 presenters and almost all were from organizations within
                    Mexico. For 2014 there were over 70 presentations and although there was a
                    predominance of speakers from the hosting country, which is to be expected,
                    almost half of the authors were from other countries namely Argentina, Canada,
                    Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom and
                    the United States. The program was divided into talks on: Libraries and
                    archives, Social networking, Teaching, Theory, Applications, Language and
                    corpora, Cultural studies, Technology and philosophy, Visualizations, Reading
                    and materiality as well as Demos and PostersThe final program is available
                        at: 
                            http://www.humanidadesdigitales.net/files/Programa.pdf.
                    What makes these events particularly interesting is that we it helps us to
                    discover the numerous DH projects that exist in the country and others areas of
                    Latin America as well as connecting with the creators. 
            

                Project evaluation
                The third and final issue that we decided to focus on was project evaluation. As
                    mentioned previously among workshop attendees we found that lack of recognition
                    of their work was a constant grievance. DH scholars felt that evaluation
                    committees and peers tended to dismiss digital resources as inferior to
                        real publications (i.e., on paper). Criteria for
                    evaluation both at the UNAM and at national level do not take into consideration
                    digital resources and until only recently have incorporated digital
                    publications, especially in the Humanities. 
                Most DH projects are not presented in traditional research output formats such as
                    articles or books, but take on various formats such as development of metadata,
                    textual markup, tools, websites and others , so
                    many evaluation committees are at a loss with how to deal with these materials.
                    At the same time, people developing a DH project do not necessarily know what
                    elements should be included. Although much work has been done to convince our
                    colleagues that digital research is worthy, a pending problem is that they do
                    not necessarily have the knowledge or tools to evaluate DH work . 
                We wanted therefore to develop and provide basic guidelines and best practices
                    for DH resources. In addition we wanted to provide an online checklist that
                    allowed users to evaluate a particular resource using an interface that displays
                    the results of the evaluation, indicating areas of weakness and strength. The
                    aim of this tool would be threefold: step-by-step evaluation tool for
                    committees, a resource for developers, and an informal compliance of a minimum
                    standard.
                We formed an ad hoc committee from the original workshop attendees to work on a
                    proposal and revised related guidelines (both national and international) and
                    created initial best practice guidelines. We then extracted key elements in the
                    form of questions and presented them as an online checklist. The final product
                    is in Spanish and adjusted to our own particular requirements. The checklist is
                    divided into five sections with questions related to: Project Team,
                    Documentation, Usability, Design and Access; Evaluation and Peer Review;
                    Copyright and Visibility and Dissemination. The checklist is also available in
                        English Checklist for Digital Humanities Projects - http://humanidadesdigitales.net/evaluacion/eng/. 
            

                Discussion and conclusions
                In the previous section we discussed the work we have done around the topics that
                    we set out to solve. In this process several general issues arose. As mentioned
                    previously, the workshops used the term Digital Humanities. However, during the
                    workshops we discussed whether this was an appropriate term. We looked at the
                    terms used in English over time (at that point Humanities Computing was still
                    used by some) and different options in Spanish, specifically Informática
                        para las Humanidades, which had been used in Spain and is similar to
                    the long standing term Informatica Umanistica used by the Italians.
                    In the end we decided to settle for Humanidades Digitales due to
                    its emphasis on digital rather than
                        informatics and because of its similarity to the
                    English term. This discussion was led mainly by the participants who had had
                    contact with the international DH community. Outside the workshops however, this
                    term has created some controversy and even opposition. Although Digital
                    Humanities has gained growing popularity in academic sectors around the world
                        , it is still true that many digital
                    humanists continue to have the need to explain and sometimes defend the type of
                    work they are doing  as there is by no means a
                    universal acceptance or recognition of the value of DH , . In Mexico where, as previously mentioned,
                    Digital Humanities is fairly unknown, it seems that the RedHD probably
                    underestimated the need to introduce and discuss in a more structured manner the
                    impact of Digital Humanities. We are now more aware that lobbying will be a
                    fundamental part of our future work.
                Furthermore, as we seek to consolidate our DH community we also have to continue
                    identifying and clarifying the particular needs and challenges we face that are
                    different from other DH communities around the world. It is not just a question
                    of importing but of establishing our own agenda. In order to do so, however, we
                    have had to work on defining ourselves. At the beginning we had settled on being
                    very open in order to be as inclusive as possible, but in recent months we have
                    started to consider in a more detailed manner what the RedHD is, what it does,
                    who belongs and what our relationship is to other emerging and established DH
                    communities 
                In this way we have begun to address some regional as well as linguistic issues
                    which we would like to work on in the near future. To this effect we
                    participated in the organization of el Día de Humanidades Digitales (DíaHD)/ Dia
                    das humanidades digitais modeled on the well known project Day of DH. The event
                    has been held twice, in June 2013 and then again in October 2014, and it sought
                    to identify and bring together the work of Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking
                    digital humanists. The idea behind creating a separate event to the Day of DH
                    was to see if we could identify particular characteristics that differed from
                    the main event, in particular because Day of DH is characterized by a
                    predominant participation of digital humanists from the USA, Canada, and the
                    United Kingdom. From the 2013 edition, 97 blogs were analyzed in order to
                    document and transcribe how there is an emerging discourse, in the Foucauldian
                    sense, as Portuguese and Spanish speaking communities undergo a process of
                    semantic change in order to accommodate the language and terminology used in the
                    Digital Humanities. The results are reported elsewhere  and focus on the discourse as a space of disciplinary construction in the way
                    we name, describe and explain as well as giving an overview of some initial
                    characteristics we detected. Another result of this exercise is the the creation
                    of MapaHD (DH Map) an exploration
                        of the features and intersections among those who self-identify as HD
                        practitioners and their characteristics beyond language affiliation
                    which not only evidences the existence of this DH community but also some of its
                    characteristics .
                One aspect that we did not take into consideration during the workshops and that
                    has been important in the creation of the RedHD has been our connection to the
                    international DH community. Our work has coincided with a particularly
                    self-critical period for DH as a field and increasing international
                    participation has become a key priority. As mentioned previously there are also
                    a number of other regional and/or linguistic initiatives have that been created
                    over the past few years. It is important that as a community we define how we
                    want to fit in with other DH communities around the world. As the global DH
                    community is expanding, many aspects about the organization are being
                    renegotiated and this is an important moment to participate in the discussion. 
                From our own experience at the RedHD the use of English as the predominant
                    language in DH international events is an obstacle for further participation.
                    Although this is a common problem in academia in general, in DH we have found
                    this to be particular troublesome due to the makeup of participants. Although
                    further research would still be necessary it is quite common in the Sciences
                    that PhD holders will generally have a good working knowledge of English as it
                    is usually indispensable to their field. In the Humanities however, this is less
                    common as many work on particular subjects where English is not necessarily the
                        lingua franca. Moreover, for DH projects there is usually the
                    participation of graphic designers, programmers and a wide variety of people
                    that do not necessarily have a traditional PhD academic track where English is
                    more common. How do we incorporate these new types of participants? This issue
                    is complicated but must be addressed. For the time being we have participated in
                    a number of translation initiatives. For example: the translation of the Call
                    for Papers for the international Digital Humanities conference and the I whisper translation campaign for DH2014 .
                Funding has been a particular ordeal for us. Originally we set ourselves up as a
                    loosely formed network as this allowed us great flexibility in setting up our
                    community. However, this less rigid structure does not allow us to exist
                        officially and this leads to difficulties in obtaining
                    funding. We have decided to form a legally constituted association. However,
                    forming an association in Mexico is both complicated and expensive. Currently it
                    costs about $1000 dollars in bureaucratic and legal fees just to set up the
                    association, and the process takes several months. Apparently this is a similar
                    situation in other Latin American countries. We do not know if this is the case
                    for the USA or European countries, but anecdotal evidence seems to suggest that
                    this is not an obstacle. Through a donation scheme we have managed to collect
                    the necessary amount and we are currently setting up the association. However,
                    bureaucracy and expensive legal and notary fees are a problem for this kind of
                    initiative. We are aware, again through anecdotal evidence, of other
                    difficulties such as international transfers and payments for some countries
                    (for example, Cuba) that greatly hamper participation. 
                An association however, allows us to participate in government funding, offer
                    bursaries for our members, receive payments for courses, workshops or other
                    academic events, issue receipts, do consulting work and other activities which
                    we could not do before. 
                Membership fees are modest and exemptions and alternative options are in place in
                    order to remain as inclusive as possible. 
                The work done during the workshops, in particular identifying critical issues
                    through the DH framework exercise, has been key to the success of the project.
                    In retrospect, developing specific tasks and areas to be addressed helped the
                    formation of the RedHD and as a community gave us a sense of direction and
                    purpose. In the DH spirit of building and making things , the RedHD has achieved quite a lot in a short period
                    of time. Digital Humanities proved to be a useful term that grouped us together
                    and helped us resolve our commons goals in a very pragmatic sense. These past
                    four years' work has been achieved with little funding and a great deal of
                    enthusiasm. However, this is not sustainable over a longer period and if we are
                    to grow any more we definitely require a more institutionalized scheme. We would
                    in the future be interested in the establishment of DH centres or other types of
                    institutional recognition for further strengthening our community both in
                    research and in teaching. We are well aware that part of our work will now
                    involve a great degree of lobbying and promotion. However, we do think that this
                    should change gradually over the next few years as DH becomes better known
                    within academic circles and in particular university authorities in the country
                    and the region. Part of this work is to establish DH within the curricula both
                    at undergraduate and graduate level. 
                We have entered now though, together with other people in DH, a period where
                    there is a need for reflection on how we understand the term Digital Humanities,
                    who we are as a community, our objectives, and the way we relate to other DH
                    communities both regional and international. Defining Digital Humanities and our
                    role as a community is an ongoing and continuing process. It is important at
                    this stage, as we are trying to more formally institutionalize and implement our
                    projects to better phrase what we are doing and what we want to achieve.
                    Additionally, collaboration and communication with other DH communities around
                    the world is fundamental and we must find ways of addressing this. We will be
                    working towards that and other issues described here in the near future. 
            

                Acknowledgments
                The author would like to thank the reviewers of this article for their extremely
                    helpful comments.
            

                Appendix 1
                
                    
                    
                    Organization context including institutional recognition and support 
                            a. Does the project have dedicated office space assigned? 
                            b. Is the project financed? Who finances it? For how long?
                            c. Does the project have the necessary computing infrastructure?
                                Where did it come from? What will happen to it once the project is
                                finished?
                            d. If the project is online, where is it hosted? What are the
                                hosting terms? For how long?
                        
                    Planning and development
                            a. What was the main motivation for undertaking this
                                project?
                            b. How was the project planned? Was there a planning phase?
                            c. Was user testing undertaken?
                            d. How were the interfaces designed? Are they in more than one
                                language?
                            e. Is documentation available about the project and its
                                development?
                            f. Is the project finished or will it be finished? How was this
                                decided?
                        
                    Intellectual property and copyright 
                        
                            
                                 Material for the project
                            a. Were the appropriate legal permissions for the materials used
                                in for the project secured? How was this done?
                            b. How were copyright issues addressed in general?
                            
                                The digital project
                            
                            c. How was copyright established for the final digital
                                project?
                            d. Were any additional licensing implemented, such as CC or Open
                                source?
                        
                    Human resources and training 
                        
                            a. How easy or difficult was it to find people to work on the
                                project? 
                            b. Did they have the appropriate skills? Was further training
                                necessary? How was this achieved?
                            c. Has it been easy to keep the necessary team together? What type
                                of hiring issues have you had?
                        
                    Dissemination and use 
                        
                            a. Has the project been presented at a conference, workshop or
                                other type of event? Have there been any publications?
                            b. Does the final product contain metadata that can increase its
                                visibility for search engines?
                            c. Do you have information about how the project is being used, by
                                whom and for what?
                            d. Do you have usage statistics, such as Google Analytics?
                        
                    Completion and sustainability ; ; 
                        
                            a. What are the long term plans for the project?
                            b. How will it be updated?
                            c. Have preservation issues been addressed?
                            d. If you were no longer involved in the project, what would
                                happen to it? Is there shared responsibility? 
                        
                    Digital humanist career 
                            a. As an academic have you received recognition for your digital
                                work?
                            b. Has your digital work been considered for evaluation purposes
                                (for example SNI or PRIDE Research incentive programs in
                                    Mexico at national and university level: SNI (Sistema Nacional de Investigadores)
                                    belonging to the Conacyt (Consejo Nacional
                                        para la Ciencia y Tecnología) and Pride (Programa de Primas de Desempeño Académico de
                                        Tiempo Completo) belong to the UNAM.)?
                            c. What other types of recognition have you received? (for
                                example, invitations to meetings, conferences, presentations,
                                    interviews) This list of questions has been published
                                    previously in Galina, 2012 but it was considered relevant to
                                    include a version in English for this article.
                        
                
            
