Title:  Generous Interfaces for Digital Cultural Collections
Volume:  009
Issue:  1
Date:  21 May 2015
Abstract:  
            Decades of digitisation have made a wealth of digital cultural material available
               online. Yet search — the dominant interface to these collections — is incapable of
               representing this abundance. Search is ungenerous: it withholds information, and
               demands a query. This paper argues for a more generous alternative: rich, browsable
               interfaces that reveal the scale and complexity of digital heritage collections.
               Drawing on related work and precedents from information retrieval and visualisation,
               as well as critical humanistic approaches to the interface, this paper documents and
               analyses practical experiments in generous interfaces developed in collaboration with
               Australian cultural institutions.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
             Imagine yourself outside an art gallery in a far-off city, with a collection you
               don’t know well. You enter the building to find a small, drab lobby with an attendant
               at a desk. The attendant asks you to enter your query on a small slip of paper. Not
               knowing the collection, and not seeking anything in particular, you write down
               something arbitrary, and pass it over. The attendant disappears for a moment before
               returning with a line of artworks sitting on trolleys. These are paraded, ten at a
               time, through the lobby. You can submit another query at any time, calling forth more
               trolleys, but there seems to be no way to explore the gallery beyond this small
               lobby. 
             As absurd as it seems, this scenario is played out daily on the web sites of
               libraries, archives, galleries and museums around the world, where keyword search is
               the central — often the only — way to access the collection. The
               dichotomy embodied here can be framed through the notion of generosity. Decades of
               digitisation have made a wealth of digital cultural material available online. The
                  Victoria and Albert Museum
               offers over a million items; Europeana’s aggregated collection numbers some 31 million; the National
               Library of Australia’s Trove hosts
               around 128 million digitised newspaper articles. A recent survey of some 1200
               institutions in the UK and Europe found that 80% have digitised collections, and
               these are increasingly coming online . This is a truly
               generous mass: large, abundant, ample. Yet in response to this abundance, collection
               interfaces wheel out miserly lists, one page at a time. Generosity entails more than
               scale, too: another of its senses describes an ethos of giving or sharing freely.
               These values tally well with the aims of many collecting institutions — especially
               public institutions, mandated to provide broad and open access. But here too, search
               is ungenerous. It fails to be liberal in sharing: instead of throwing open the doors,
               its greeting is Yes, what?
            
             As an interface, search fails to match the ample abundance of our digital
               collections and the generous ethos of the institutions that hold them. A more
               generous interface would do more to represent the scale and richness of its
               collection. It would open the doors, tear down the drab lobby; instead of demanding a
               query it would offer multiple ways in, and support exploration as well as the focused
               enquiry where search excels. In revealing the complexity of digital collections, a
               generous interface would also enrich interpretation by revealing relationships and
               structures within a collection. 
             This is not to question the effectiveness of search or its value for many users.
               Empirical research shows that many visitors come to a museum website seeking specific
               information . However, a significant number of visitors
               do not have a specific goal: in a survey of the motivations of some 34,000 visitors
               to Dutch museum websites, 29% report seeking specific information, but 21% visit to
                  engage in casual browsing
               . Another recent study finds that browse features are valued
               highly by non-expert visitors to online art collections . Thus from the user’s perspective, search is an incomplete solution. 
             In this context, more generous interfaces are beginning to emerge. The sites of the
                  
                  Rijksmuseum and the Walker Art Centre, for example, emphasise browsing and visual exploration.
               While the Victoria and Albert
                  Museum’s collections page privileges search, it also generously includes a
               random sampling of works. Experimental and overtly poetic approaches to digital
               collections — such as Tim Sherratt’s The Real Face of White
                     Australia — are a promising and potentially radical new form.
               However, these examples are the exception, rather than the rule; and in some cases
               generosity is only superficial. The Met Museum’s beautiful browse-centric interface leads abruptly to a
               standard search display, showing thirty records at a time. This ostensibly browsable
               interface (like the Rijksmuseum’s) is in fact a highly curated set of predefined
               starting points, rather than a comprehensive representation of the collection. 
             The stakes here are high, because the interface plays an inescapable role in
               mediating digital heritage. Whether a command-line console or an immersive
               visualisation, these collections come to us in some specific, concrete form; and
               crucially, that form is constructed and contingent. It can always be otherwise. As
               our cultural heritage is increasingly networked and digital, the life and use of that
               heritage will increasingly be conditioned by the forms in which it reaches us, how it
               is made concrete and available both for scholars and the wider public. As argued
               above, search-centred conventions offer meagre representational tools; while there
               are promising signs of a new generosity emerging, much more is possible. 
             To demonstrate and interrogate that potential, this paper documents applied research
               into generous interfaces for cultural collections. In order to frame the problem more
               thoroughly, it first draws together a range of practical precedents and related
               theory from fields spanning information retrieval, human-computer interaction,
               information visualisation and digital humanities. This interdisciplinary terrain
               provides a useful framework, but also raises important tensions between the
               philosophical orientations of these fields; I argue finally for a humanistic model of
               interface and interaction that emphasises exploration and interpretation over task
               and information retrieval. Next, the paper presents a series of practical projects
               developed in partnership with Australian cultural institutions: Manly Images (supported by Manly Public Library and the State Library of
               New South Wales); Australian Prints and Printmaking (in
               partnership with the National Gallery of Australia); and Discover the Queenslander (with the State Library of Queensland). I
               reflect on these projects as a designer and developer, and analyse them against the
               conceptual framework outlined earlier, offering practical strategies and critical
               injunctions for the creation of generous interfaces. 
         

            Escaping the Search Box: Contexts and Precedents for Generous Interfaces
             In the opening scenario search is cast as the villain; but it’s also, more usefully,
               a puzzle. How did we come to be trapped in the search box; and do the limitations of
               search indicate richer alternatives? Search has a deep heritage in the history of
               computing, and especially the field of library and information science; it is deeply
               ingrained in the thinking and practices of digital collections, but equally its
               limitations have long been documented in the scholarship around information
               retrieval. As Belkin, Oddy and Brooks wrote in 1982, 
                  One can identify two assumptions basic
                     to the best-match [search] principle: that it is possible for the user to
                     specify precisely the information that he/she requires; and, that information
                     needs ... are functionally equivalent to document texts
                  
               . Both of these questionable assumptions are directly relevant to digital
               cultural collections. As Taylor’s foundational work on information needs explains, a
               search query is a compromised and imperfect expression of a feeling that arises as a 
                  vague dissatistfaction
                  
               . Rather than an information need, Belkin and collaborators propose an anomalous state of knowledge, and
               observe that in general, the user is
                  unable to specify precisely what is needed to resolve that anomaly
               . Some twenty-five years later, little seems to
               have changed: writing on grand challenges
                  for information retrieval, Belkin states: 
                  only considering specified search as the
                     basis for IR models and techniques, is clearly inadequate, and
                     inappropriate
                  
               . Yet despite its flaws, search has been so effective that other techniques
               have been largely neglected — at least in practice. Research suggests that for
               humanities scholars search is both ubiquitous and imperfect. Kemman and colleagues
               confirm the dominance of Google and keyword search for contemporary researchers . Rimmer and collaborators report that humanities
               researchers tend not to use advanced search techniques, but do use more exploratory
               strategies including chaining — following links through the
               literature via citations — and browsing, especially in physical libraries . 
             Browsing is the most prominent practical alternative to search, though in digital
               collections browse-based collection interfaces are typically impractical and
               uninspired: pages of alphabetised lists. By contrast, theorists in information
               retrieval argue that browsing is 
                  a rich and fundamental human information
                     behaviour
                  
               . The literature on browsing develops a portrait of a complex, open-ended,
               embodied human experience, rather than the input-output exchange that characterises
               traditional information retrieval . Researchers
               develop models of browsing with a number of relevant features. Browsing is an
               iterative process that entails scanning  or
               glimpsing  a field of potential resources, and selecting or
               sampling items for further investigation and evaluation. Browsing entails movement
               through a field of resources ; Kwasnik stipulates
                  movement in a connected space
               . This movement depends in turn on
               orientation: a knowledge of the structure and content of the
               browsing field and an ability to navigate within it .
               Where information retrieval is premised on a specific intention or question, browsing
               reflects broader and more complex motivations. Browsing may be instrumental and
               purposeful, or intrinsically pleasurable; it may be cognitively or affectively
               rewarding, or both . We may browse with or
               without a goal in mind, and goals may change as the process unfolds. The model of
               browsing that emerges here ultimately challenges the instrumentalist basis of
               disciplines such as information retrieval; as Toms suggests, successful browsing is
               not a task but a pleasure . 
             Models of browsing tend to emphasise physical spaces and resources; similarly for
               humanities researchers, physical libraries seem to be favoured as browsable,
               serendipitous and enjoyable information spaces .
               Theorists of browsing offer some clues as to how browsing can be supported in digital
               environments. Bates critiques the conventional forms — a long list or a set of thumbnails and calls instead
               for rich scenes, full of potential objects
                  of interest, that the eye can take in at once — what she terms a massively parallel glimpse
               . Toms and Bates both emphasise stability and orientation;
               interface elements that establish and maintain continuity within a browsing space
                  . 
             From the complementary fields of interface design and information visualisation,
               Shneiderman’s visual information seeking approach is deservedly
               influential . Shneiderman sets out a
                  mantra for the visual exploration of digital collections:
                  overview first, zoom and filter,
                  then details-on-demand. Overview is a zoomed out view of the
               whole collection; zoom and filter enable focus on a subset; detailed information on
               an item is displayed in its context (maintaining orientation). Shneiderman adds tasks
               for relate — to view relationships between items;
                  history — preserving the user’s path through the system; and
                  extract — to save and share selected views or subsets.
               Shneiderman emphasises information visualisation here, and his approach has been most
               influential in that field; in later work with Greene et al. the implications of this
               approach for digital libraries are spelled out clearly. 
             In a paper that amounts to a how-to manual for generous interfaces, Greene and
               colleagues observe that designers often
                  fail to provide appropriate views...to give an overall sense of the structure and
                  materials available
               . Drawing on library and information studies, they
               emphasise the information
                  surrogate in collection interfaces; surrogates (such as catalog records)
               are compact, browsable abstractions of primary content — rich scenes for Bates’
                  massively parallel glimpse. In
               this formulation a preview (for example a thumbnail image) provides a
               surrogate for a single item; an overview provides a surrogate for a
               collection of items. The authors show how previews and overviews can be nested and
               articulated in systems designed for interactive information seeking (as distinct from information
               retrieval). Given suitable data, we can break collections into intelligible
               aggregates or subsets, reveal relationships between these, and link these overviews
               to previews of collection items. Surrogates should be salient
               (to the task and needs of users),
               hierarchical (showing multiple levels while maintaining orientation) and leverage
               structures in the collection (using temporal ordering, for example) . The authors also indicate some of the design
               challenges involved: overviews should be fairly exhaustive, but limits in the data might limit the coverage of the overview; a preview
               should faithfully represent its object, but nonetheless has the potential to be misleading
               . These points lead into important questions about
               the representation of digital cultural collections, to be taken up below. 
             While the examples in Greene’s paper show their late-1990s age, for information
               density, browsability and generosity they trounce most contemporary interfaces to
               digital cultural collections. Whatever happened to Greene’s previews and overviews,
               or Shneiderman’s notion of exploratory information seeking in digital collections? Why are we still, it seems,
               stuck in the search box? Perhaps, as Kemman and colleagues suggest, Google’s uncanny
               effectiveness reassures us that search is the only interface we need ; or academic work in information retrieval and
               visualisation has simply failed to connect with the custodians of our increasingly
               digital cultural heritage. The reasons are beyond the scope of this paper, except to
               note that the practical work presented here is aimed squarely at this implementation
               gap — creating rich, browsable interfaces for large, real-world digital collections. 
             While this practical challenge is appealing, it also entails some theoretical
               issues. In applying techniques from information retrieval and visualisation to
               cultural material, this project must negotiate with a significant interdisciplinary
               boundary. Johanna Drucker poses the challenge clearly as she critiques the use of
               information visualisation within the digital humanities: bar charts and Google maps,
               she argues, constitute an epistemological Trojan horse .
               These devices conceal realist models of knowledge — claims to transparently show
                  what is that are at odds with the critical tradition of the
               humanities. Similarly in calling for a model of humanistic interface
                  design, Drucker critiques the orientation of mainstream HCI and
               information visualisation . In the work of researchers
               such as Shneiderman, Drucker says, we find a pragmatic, but highly mechanistic approach, based
               on functional models of task and goal that are inappropriate in the humanities, where
                  distraction, engagement, flow
                  experience and pleasure-driven activity are not goal-oriented, but motivated by
                  the process
                     . Rather than borrowing from HCI, Drucker
               calls on the digital humanities to reinvent interface design in a form suited to its critical principles. 
             As Drucker argues, the functional, task-based approach — and its inbuilt assumptions
               — is ubiquitous in HCI and IR. However those fields also suggest the seeds of
               alternative approaches, and these in turn, I suggest, offer ways forward for generous
               interfaces. The theorisations of browsing outlined above, for example, quickly exceed
               a narrow task focus; like Drucker, they recognise that browsing can be its own reward
                  
               . Information retrieval theorists recognise the
               paradoxical limits of explicit information; the inarticulate feeling of
               a query, an anomalous state of knowledge . In other
               formulations such as exploratory search, outlined by Marchionini, information-seeking
               emerges as a complex, open-ended process, rather than a goal-oriented transaction
                  . 
             More recent work develops this theme within IR and HCI into a more holistic and
               humanistic model of the information seeker. Marian Dörk and collaborators propose the
                  Information Flaneur: a contemporary
               information-seeker modeled on the urban flaneur of 1840s Paris:  Following the ﬂaneur’s attitude toward the city, the
                  information ﬂaneur sees beauty and meaning in growing information spaces. By
                  envisioning the information ﬂaneur as a curious, creative, and critical persona,
                  we promote a shift from negative concepts such as needs and problems towards
                  positive information experiences . 
            
             This proposal posits that information interfaces are not inevitable technical solutions, but cultural
                  artefacts” demanding “reflection, critique, and appropriation; and that
                  information seeking is an inherently
                  complex human experience
               . The information flaneur embodies this model,
               emphasising curiosity and pleasure while maintaining a critical and reflective
               stance. For the info-flaneur, immersion in complex information is an everyday
               experience; casual, ambient, and cultural, rather than need-driven and instrumental.
               The authors also offer practical suggestions for flaneur-friendly interfaces,
               emphasising a continuum between horizontal
                  exploration — overview, orientation, and multi-dimensonal browsing — and
                  vertical immersion — the
               pleasures of detailed investigation and sense-making . 
             These contexts and precedents support a proposal for generous interfaces, and
               outline both the gap in practice it addresses and the multidisciplinary field it
               draws on. Work in information retrieval validates the subjective assertion that
               search alone is inadequate
               , while models of browsing offer richer, more
               complex models of experience, interaction and interpretation. Yet digital collections
               do not support browsing well: Bates observed in 2007 that browse interfaces consisted
               mainly of lists, and little has changed . Shneiderman,
               Greene and collaborators make essentially the same case for the value of visual
               exploration in digital collections, and offer concrete examples and techniques to
               that end . In fact, across this literature — spanning
               information retrieval, information visualisation and HCI — a consistent set of
               principles emerges for browsable or exploratory interfaces: overview — Bates’ massively parallel glimpse; detail or
               preview of individual items; movement and navigating relationships; and the
               articulation of these modes while preserving orientation. 
             Drucker offers a salutary warning about importing the realist
               epistemologies of HCI into the humanities, along with its techniques. At the same
               time, humanistic models like the information flaneur suggest a productive
               interdisciplinary middle ground that builds on pragmatic approaches while also
               critically interrogating their performance. Reflective practice is a useful approach
               here because it occupies a similarly in-between site, shuttling between
               conceptualisation, practical production and analysis. In my experience the making of
               generous interfaces is not a neat implementation but a productive wrangling of
               digital materials, formal abstractions and conceptual concerns, as the following
               sections aim to show. 
         

            Case Studies: Generous Interfaces in Practice
            
               1. Manly Images
               
                  Manly
                        Images is an experimental web interface for a collection of
                  around 7000 historic images held by the Manly Public Library, in Sydney,
                  Australia. The project was commissioned by the State Library of New South Wales to
                  explore the potential for rich web interfaces for such collections, often held by
                  local libraries. This collection documents the life of this local region through
                  the 20th century: portraits of soldiers and council officials, street scenes and
                  beach views, school sporting teams and real-estate advertising. Manly Library
                  makes the images available through a third-party interface that
                  does little to convey the scope and character of the collection. The collection
                  metadata is limited, but informative; all items have descriptive titles, most have
                  dates (often imprecise); many have subject metadata. 
                Given this collection, the central design challenge was overview: creating a rich
                  but workably compact representation of the collection as a whole. Show everything — a provocative
                  edict from visualisation studio Stamen Design  — offers
                  a simple and literal-minded starting point. We adopted this approach in previous
                  Java-based projects 
                  ; but here it was not technically (let alone
                  perceptually) feasible to render all 7000 items in the web browser. Creating a
                  navigable overview thus requires some kind of intermediate representation, a set
                  of proxies that aggregate all 7000 items into a smaller number of appropriate
                  clusters. Manly Images clusters the collection in two
                  different dimensions, providing twin but complementary representations. One set of
                  clusters simply groups items by decade (including a group for undated items); the
                  other uses a frequency analysis of terms in item titles, creating sets of items
                  grouped around specific, characteristic terms. The title clusters were developed
                  here in the absence of other metadata (such as tags) that might help group related
                  items, and extensively tuned to the specific qualities of this collection.
                  In my experience this experimental process of wrangling patchy and idiosyncratic
                  metadata is characteristic in developing generous interfaces. 
                This clustered data provides the basis for the visual interface design. Groups of
                  items become tiles in a browsable mosaic; each tile represents a cluster, and
                  offers clues to — and previews of — the items it contains (see Figure 1). Each
                  tile is a visual composite; an overlay of synoptic features and specific contents.
                  The size of each tile is related to the number of items in that cluster — a
                  summative, quantitative representation. Tiles also show the key facet of that
                  cluster; either most frequent title term, or decade. Hovering over a larger tile
                  also reveals a deeper list of title terms (synoptic qualitative features). Finally
                  each tile shows the actual images within its cluster, and these preview images
                  gradually change so that each tile progressively reveals its contents. Thus the
                  interface as a whole forms a slowly shifting mosaic, as if rotating a complex,
                  multi-faceted object. In the terms of Greene et al, this is a heirarchical
                  interleaving of preview and overview: at any moment each tile offers both a
                  preview of a specific item, and an overview of the other items it contains. The
                  mosaic as a whole forms a composite, higher-order overview, encoding collection
                  structure and distribution while also revealing its visual character and texture.
                  Selecting a tile opens a horizontal slider display for browsing items in that
                  cluster, while maintaining the context of the mosaic interface and the sense of
                  global orientation that it provides. Selecting an item displays a large image in a
                  lightbox, along with links to the item’s permanent URLs on the Manly Library site
                  and Trove, where they can be bookmarked, shared or cited. 
               
                  Manly Images title interface.
                  
               
            
            
               2. Australian Prints and Printmaking
                The Prints and Printmaking
                     Collection of the National Gallery of Australia contains records of some
                  40,000 works by more than 4,000 artists. In a project commissioned by the Gallery,
                  I worked with Ben Ennis Butler to develop three separate
                     generous interfaces offering multiple, complementary
                  views. Launched in March 2013, these interfaces
                  appear on the main collection site as a prominent alternative to search. In this
                  case the metadata is comprehensive, with highly structured relationships including
                  detailed information on works and artists. Digitised images are available for
                  around half of the works in the collection. 
                The structured data here enables two separate overview interfaces, each focusing
                  on a different aspect of the collection. In the All
                     Artists interface all 4000 of the collection’s creators, printers,
                  publishers, workshops and artists appear as a sortable array of tiles. Each one
                  includes the artist’s name, birth and activity dates, gender, and number of works
                  in the collection. Some data points are visually encoded: gender (including
                  companies) is represented in a colour-coded left-hand border, while number of
                  works is reflected in the width of the tile. Scanning a page of these tiles the
                  distribution of males, females, and companies is immediately apparent. Similarly
                  the long tail distribution of works within the collection is
                  clear; most artists contribute a small number of works, while a few contribute
                  many works. A panel of facets filters the display according to role, work count,
                  and gender; so for example we may focus on female artists, or female printers, or
                  only female printers with more than ten works in the collection. While such facets
                  are a familiar feature in many collection search interfaces, there are two key
                  differences here. These facets are also visual variables — bar-chart elements that
                  show patterns of distribution at a glance. Second, these facets don’t require a
                  preceding search, but enable refinement (Shneiderman’s zoom and
                     filter) of the initial overview as well as comparison of different
                  subsets — showing, for example, the relative distributions of male and female
                  artists for different roles. 
               
                  All Artists interface, Australian Prints and
                     Printmaking.
                  
               
                This display also enables investigation of individual artists in depth. Selecting
                  an artist opens an inset display showing their works, as well as additional data
                  such as collaborators. We can open multiple artists, and
                  compare their works; when the display is sorted chronologically, this enables us
                  to explore the work of contemporaries or observe stylistic changes and distinctive
                  period aesthetics. The detail appears in place within the global context of the
                  page, maintaining orientation while also providing visual samples of the
                  collection content. 
                The Decade Summary interface presents a
                  complementary overview focusing on works, rather than artists. The central device
                  here is a chronological bar graph: each horizontal bar shows number of works per
                  decade, and is segmented in turn into different work types such as intaglio,
                  monoprint, and relief. We also include a section for undated works — essential to
                  ensure that inevitably patchy metadata does not compromise the representation of
                  works in the collection. The resulting graph is informative in itself, showing the
                  chronological shape of the collection and the relative distribution of different
                  print types. The boom in stencil printing in the 1970s and 80s, for example, is
                  clear. The graph also acts as an interface; selecting a segment loads the
                  corresponding set of works into the right hand pane. These cropped thumbnails
                  provide a rich and immediate visual sample of the character of each group of
                  works, and an exploratory interface in themselves. Hovering reveals full work
                  images, titles and artists; clicking loads a larger image in the central pane. By
                  showing three levels of scale concurrently — from whole collection, to focused
                  subset, to individual work — the Decade Summary
                  provides a single-screen interface to the entire 40,000-work collection. The
                  hierarchy of scales provides a sort of visual compression of the collection, but
                  also supports juxtapositions and lateral readings, encouraging context-rich
                  exploration. 
               
                   Decade Summary interface, Australian Prints
                     and Printmaking.
                  
               
                The third interface in this set takes a different approach, offering not so much
                  an overview as a local or inner view. The Works and Networks display focuses on a single artist,
                  showing their works as a navigable grid; networks here refers to relationships
                  between artists and other makers — a signficant factor in the collaborative
                  artform of printmaking. The display lists each artist’s collaborators by role
                  (printers, publishers, studios etc); selecting one re-focuses the display on that
                  individual. Browsing collaborators and their works leads to new discoveries, and
                  still more collaborations. Rather than a synoptic overview of the collection, this
                  display encourages a piecing together of local views through the same
                     chaining process Rimmer and colleagues identify in
                  humanities information seeking . This display also
                  works in conjunction with the two overviews: focusing on an artist in the All Artists and Decade
                     Browser views loads the corresponding artist in Works and Networks. Thus the three interfaces work together to provide
                  a three-way parallax (triangulation?) while the more immersive
                     innerview of Works and
                     Networks complements the top-down overview of the other displays. This
                  echoes the articulation of horizontal exploration and vertical immersion that Dörk
                  and collaborators identify in the exploratory behaviour of the information flaneur
                     . 
               
                  Works and Networks interface, Australian Prints
                     and Printmaking
                  
               
            
            
               3. Discover the Queenslander
               
                  Discover the Queenslander is a generous interface to a
                  collection of some 1000 digitised pages and covers from The
                     Queenslander. This newspaper, published 1866-1939, was the illustrated
                  weekend supplement to the Brisbane Courier Mail; its
                  covers and illustrations offer a delightful core-sample of Australian visual
                  culture before World War II. Collection holders the State Library of Queensland
                  commissioned this project to create a rich, exploratory, visual interface for a
                  wide audience, improving on some of the shortfalls of the Library’s
                  vendor-provided digital collection infrastructure. Launched in June 2014, this
                  project was designed and developed in collaboration with my University of Canberra
                  colleague Geoff Hinchcliffe. 
                With fairly complete, well-structured metadata and high-quality images, this
                  collection provides rich opportunities for a generous interface. Once again we
                  construct two complementary views of the collection. The Mosaic view reuses the
                  mosaic-tile approach from Manly Images, segmenting
                  the collection by year (Figure 5). Tile sizes show the distribution of the
                  collection by date, and again the tiles progressively reveal their contents; in
                  this case each tile’s slide show is also directly navigable. As in Manly Images, the mosaic provides a glanceable overview
                  that shows both the shape of the collection and a changing chronological sampling
                  of its contents; here the mosaic also provides a self-sufficient interface to
                  navigate the entire collection. 

               
                  Mosaic interface, Discover the
                     Queenslander.
                  
               
                Where the Mosaic emphasises visual overview, the Grid focuses on exploring the
                  contents of the collection through item-level metadata (Figure 6). The layout is
                  conventional: a panel of facets, term-clouds and filters provides a navigable
                  overview, mediating the display of individual items in an orderly grid below.
                  Filters are cross-linked and update dynamically: selecting a specific year will
                  refine the term clouds for that subset, while focusing on a specific subject or
                  creator will show the temporal distribution of those items. Grid items reflect the
                  current filters, but can also be used to modify those filters through their own
                  item-level attributes, within the context of the grid. Where the main filter panel
                  emphasises global overview, and the exploration of collection-wide features and
                  correlations, the item-level controls enable navigation through local affinity or
                  relationship. 
               
                   Grid interface, Discover the
                     Queenslander.
                  
               
                In working with the collection material the graphic character of the items — in
                  particular colour — emerged as a focal point. Drawing on some recent work at the
                  Cooper Hewitt Museum , we pre-generated a simple colour
                  palette for each item — a form of automatic content-based metadata. The filter
                  panel includes a colour overview, an aggregated 64-colour
                  palette based on items in the current selection. Colours also act as filters,
                  selecting items whose palettes contain similar shades, while also cross-linking
                  with date, creator and subject. Colour becomes a visually engaging tool for
                  browsing the collection, but also reveals the structures and patterns within it;
                  the favoured palettes of specific artists, or the rapid turn away from colour
                  illustration towards monochrome photography in the final years of the newspaper. 
                In Shneiderman’s schema, the Mosaic and Grid views fill the roles of overview,
                  zoom and filter; detail here is an item page that privileges the high-resolution
                  image but also links the item to both internal and external contexts. Item
                  metadata facets lead back to the Grid view, while a link out to Trove reunites
                  each item — a single page or cover from a specific issue of The Queenslander — with its full digitised edition as held by the
                  National Library of Australia. While it’s a long way from the expansive scope of
                  linked data approaches, this small effort shows how structured data (and services
                  such as the Trove API) enable easy, ad-hoc bridges between disparate
                  collections.
            
         

            Unpacking Overview: Contingency, Parallax and Interpretation
             Overview plays a founding role in these generous interfaces, and creating overviews
               poses significant challenges. While these interfaces propose a range of practical
               approaches they do not seek to solve overview; they do raise
               important questions around its contingencies and potentials. In proposing to more
               generously show digital cultural collections, we should also take note of exactly
               what is shown, and how. 
             As introduced in the work of Shneiderman, Greene and their colleagues, overview has
               a neutral, unproblematic character; yet of course an overview is a constructed
               representation. Specific features of a collection are selected and aggregated; other
               features are elided or ignored. Manly Images shows this
               clearly. The title view selects and priveleges title terms, and runs them through a
               computational process that strongly shapes the final interface. A recursive process
               groups items around the most frequently occurring terms, creating ever-smaller
               clusters down to a lower threshhold (here five items). But these clusters don’t
               account for the whole collection: some 380 items remain unclustered in a
                  long tail with relatively infrequent title terms. They appear
               in the others tile — a false unity that marks the point where
               this aggregation process is finally defeated by the diversity of the collection. So
               to one of the central representational questions of overview — the cost, as it were,
               of compression: what misses out?  In this case it is the heterogenity of
               the long tail — the outliers or oddities in the collection. Where overviews emphasise
               quantitative features — the distribution of items within a collection — they will
               often privelege the common, and hide (or minimise) the rare. Metadata and collection
               structure matters; tightly-structured metadata (such as dates) makes for easier
               aggregations, as shown in Manly Images and Discover the Queenslander. We can account for items with
               missing metadata relatively easily (Decade Browser, Manly
                  Images); but complex, unstructured, diverse metadata (terms, tags,
               subjects) resists the compression that overview demands. 
             This resistance is more (and more important) than a technical inconvenience: the
               complexity and diversity of digital cultural collections is central, I assert, to
               their character and their value. This complexity is exactly what a generous interface
               should aspire to reveal, so this is a significant challenge, especially when it can
               be difficult to distinguish between the signal of long-tail diversity and the noise
               of poor metadata. In response this work presents some specific strategies for
               overviews that honor complexity and represent diversity. Multiple overviews can form
               complementary composites, revealing different aspects of a collection — what Drucker
               terms parallax
               . The All
                  Artists and Decade Browser interfaces to the
               Prints and Printmaking collection demonstrate this, as do the Mosaic and Grid views
               in the Queenslander project. Links between different
               views encourage a shuttling or alternation, emphasising the parallax effect — as in
               the Queenslander, where Mosaic tiles link to the Grid
               view for the corresponding year. Multiple views also make an important metatextual
               point: that any interface is intrinsically contingent, rather than necessary. If we
               can create two or three different overviews, why not four or five? A
                  parallax interface suggests an open-ended proliferation of
               partial views; rather than a single total or definitive representation, it emphasises
               a human interpretive process. 
             Another strategy used here is the layering and juxtaposition of different
               representational forms within a single overview, creating a form of internalised
               parallax that provokes rather than determines interpretation. In Manly Images and The Queenslander overviews
               are also multi-faceted previews; aggregations are shown as tiles that juxtapose
               generalising aggregate features (term or year, item count) with the specific texture
               of individual items. Previews act as rich exemplars that support interpretive
               inferences about the collection — a stitching together of inevitably partial proxies
               and clues supplied by the interface. The tiles in Manly
                  Images combine (specific) image with (aggregate) text in this way. The use
               of animation in both interfaces adds a layer of temporal parallax, a gradual
               unfurling that reveals the diversity within each aggregate. 
             For Greene and collaborators both previews and overviews are information surrogates;
               one of their key guidlines is to use
                  salient surrogates
               . Salience here requires
                  a solid understanding of data and
                  users; the interface designer should identify the most important or
               prominent features for a given task, with a given collection. Of course this rests on
               a stack of questionable assumptions, including the very existence of a
                  task and a knowable and generalised
               user; any pre-baked salience immediately closes down alternative
               readings of the collection. By using multiple and multi-level surrogates (also among
               Greene’s recommendations) we hope to support open-ended exploration and
               interpretation, presenting a rich set of partial information — fragments and clues
               that invite further investigation. Drucker’s call for fragmented and correlated points of view that resist
                  self-evident reification resonates here . 
             In the tradition of information retrieval, access to collection content remains the
               overarching goal in creating browsable interfaces. On the other hand these
               experiments suggest that content discovery is only part of the story. Cross-linked
               and hierarchical displays emphasise context — complex, multi-dimensional
               relationships between items — as well as macro-scale patterns and structures within
               collections. As with overview however, we regard these features as contingent and
               generative, prompting further investigation, rather than claiming to show what
                  is. For example the Australian Prints Decade
                  Summary shows a noticeable bump in relief printing in
               the 1920s and 30s; investigation reveals the work of noted Australian artist Margaret
               Preston and her Japanese-influenced wood-cut techniques, as well as a strong graphic
               turn among her contemporaries. These discoveries both reinforce and complicate a
               familiar art-historical narrative of Australian Modernism, hinting at the milieu
               around a prominent individual such as Preston. While the overview’s dimensions —
               decade and print type — enable this discovery, those dimensions are not necessarily
                  salient (prominent or significant) in themselves. Rather they
               form a scaffold or framework against which more complex features can be investigated.
               Similarly in The Queenslander, the year-based histogram
               acts as an interpretive lens as well as a navigable overview. It reveals, among other
               things, the changing prevalence of photography over the paper’s run; and the prolific but interrupted output
               of its most distinctive illustrator, Garnet Agnew (Figure 7). Again, these observations are not self-evident
               answers but questions prompting further investigation — both within and beyond these
               interfaces. These interfaces are not scholarly analyses, but they may prompt such
               analyses both by scholars and (importantly) wider communities of interest. 

            
                Grid interface, Discover the Queenslander;
                  details showing distribution of photographs (above) and works by Garnet Agnew
                  (below).
               
            

             Local, browsable innerviews offer a further layer of parallax,
               and a useful counterpoint to the top-down perspective (and potential dominance) of
               overview; they are well suited to a model of exploration that emphasises process and
               interpretation, as in Kwasnik’s theory of browsing . In
               the Works and Networks interface to Australian Prints and Printmaking, each view is strictly local — showing
               a single artist’s works and collaborators — yet in wandering the local connections we
               can develop a complex appreciation of intra-collection structures that is not
               available via an overview such as the Decade Browser.
               Similarly in The Queenslander, the grid view encourages
               traversing the collection through related slices or subsets; local, partial views
               that build up a more fine-grained familiarity. Linking innerviews with overviews
               promotes the alternation between modes that Dörk and colleagues see as characteristic
               of exploration in complex information spaces . 
             Slipping the functional modality of information retrieval also opens the way for a
               wider range of experiences, potentially exceeding the frame of the interface as such.
               For the contemporary information-flaneur digital collections are sites for leisure
               and pleasure as much as focused investigation; so why not drift idly, rather than
               clicking and scrolling? The animated tiles in Manly
                  Images and The Queenslander allow such a
               passive, contemplative mode of engagement as well as active navigation. Passive or
               ambient collection displays would be well suited to contexts beyond the web browser —
               from on-site institutional displays to domestic media environments. The proposal for
               generous interfaces thus extends beyond the web, to consider a generous (and various)
               range of technical platforms and cultural modes of encounter. 
         

            Technical Considerations and Design Process
             In general this work demonstrates, as Dörk and colleagues argue, that the
               contemporary web is well placed to support media- and data-rich visual interfaces
                  . These projects are built in HTML and
               Javascript, and run in modern, standards-compliant browsers on a wide range of
               devices and platforms. Manly Images and the Prints and
               Printmaking interfaces use jQuery; The Queenslander uses
               Angular.js; in either case, the data parsing and processing, and construction of the
               interface is handled in the browser. This approach is effective and light-weight; it
               simplifies design and development, but does introduce some interesting challenges,
               especially with larger collections. 
             A search-based collection interface uses a traditional client/server architecture.
               The server hosts the source data (in the form of a database); clients send requests
               for data, and the server replies with a small set of results. This model mirrors the
               search paradigm; in general the server’s only mode of response is to reply to a
               query. By contrast, constructing an overvew requires some level of data for the
               entire collection. In the work presented here we use two complementary approaches.
               For smaller collections (in Manly Images and The Queenslander) we package the whole collection’s metadata
               into a single static (JSON) file; the Manly Images
               metadata for 7000 images packs down to around 700kb. This client-side approach has a
               number of advantages. Because the browser retains a complete representation of the
               collection, it can build and rebuild the display without reloading the metadata. The
               collection can be clustered, filtered and traversed without the performance penalty
               of a server / database request; the result is a more responsive interface and faster,
               easier exploration. 
             Client-side item metadata is practical for a collection of 5000, but not for
               5,000,000 items. Overviews of larger collections depend on some form of aggregate or
               summary data. In the case of the Decade Summary
               overview, a custom API generates an aggregated table of item counts per decade and
               print type. Selecting a facet or segment of the collection triggers a second API call
               delivering item-level metadata for the relevant works. In this case the overview data
               is a single additional layer on top of the item data; for larger collections a deeper
               tree of overviews would be necessary. While there are no significant technical
               obstacles to providing such overviews, off-the-shelf frameworks and infrastructures
               (which underpin most digital cultural collections) are not designed to provide this
               sort of synoptic data. So far our own work has emphasised front
                  end or client-side development; generous interfaces for large
               collections will require more back-end development to provide the data that rich
               overviews demand. 
             Designing and developing generous interfaces involves some interesting challenges.
               The projects presented here reflect an ongoing process of practical experimentation
               and the development of an ad-hoc repertoire of strategies and techniques. The
               underlying design process here is one of hands-on investigation and iterative
               exploration, as well as an attentiveness to the digital materials involved (as
               described by ). Notably in order to understand the
               features of a collection that might be represented, we must first represent the
               collection: the riches and voids in each collection are only evident through a
               process of exploratory visualisation. Synoptic devices such as histograms and tag
               clouds offer starting points for sketches, which can in turn develop into
               fully-fledged interfaces. For a designer this process presents a challenge in that
               preconceived visual or information structures rarely survive contact with the
               collection data. At the same time, exploratory visualisations can lead to further
               work with the metadata, which in turn transforms the potential representations. Given
               the wide range of potential interfaces and the potentially endless circularity of
               exploration and revisualization, our approach in these projects is pragmatic. We
               adapt familiar visualisation and interface conventions such as column graphs and
               timelines, facets and tags. While these may not be the optimal representational forms
               for generous interfaces, they offer practical starting points. 
             The tight coupling of collection data and dynamic representation that these
               interfaces require also raises some interesting challenges to conventional roles and
               capacities. Traditional collection interfaces reflect a clear delineation of
                  back end (collection management and metadata) and
                  front end (web design) as distinct functions and roles.
               Generous interfaces require a combination of approaches and skills spanning
               visualization, information design, data analysis, manipulation and processing. My
               collaborators and I draw on backgrounds in digital art and design and specifically
               creative code, where hybrid skill-sets and a playful, pragmatic experimentalism are
               central features of practice. 
         

            Conclusion
             Cultural heritage collections are increasingly digitised and networked: they come to
               us largely through the web browser, and thus they are shaped and conditioned by
               practices (and philosophies) of interface design and information retrieval, as well
               as by back end processes of collection, curation and
               digitisation. In this paper I argue that search, as the dominant interface to our
               cultural collections, is inadequate. Keyword search is ungenerous: it demands a
               query, discourages exploration, and withholds more than it provides. This paper
               argues instead for generous interfaces that better match both the ethos
               of collecting institutions, and the opportunities of the contemporary web. Generous
               interfaces provide rich, navigable representations of large digital collections; they
               invite exploration and support browsing, using overviews to establish context and
               maintain orientation while revealing detail at multiple scales. Generous interfaces
               use multiple, fragmentary representations to reveal the complexity and diversity of
               cultural collections, and to privilege the process of interpretation. While they draw
               on techniques and models established in information retrieval and visualisation,
               generous interfaces emphasise process, pleasure and thoughtful engagement rather than
               the functional satisfaction of an information need. Like any interface or
               visualisation, these interfaces are inescapably contingent and constructed; as the
               representational scope of the interface multiplies so do the cultural stakes, and the
               need for critical attention and reflective practice. Yet if there are risks in doing
               too much, they are outweighed by the opportunities of doing more with the immense
               riches of our digital cultural collections. As the experiments presented here show,
               much more is possible. 
         
