Title:  Beyond the Margins: Intersectionality and the Digital
               Humanities
Volume:  009
Issue:  2
Date:  2 September 2015
Abstract:  
            This article examines the relationship between intersectionality and the digital
               humanities. Intersectionality offers a critical approach to debates between theory
               and method in the field, transcending simplistic hack vs. yack binaries. This article
               situates debates over difference in the digital humanities within the context of the
               culture wars within the U.S. academy during the 1980s and 1990s, locating the stakes
               for diversity in the digital humanities. It surveys digital humanities projects,
               outlining the need for alternate histories of the digital humanities told through
               intersectional lenses. Finally, the article proposes ways of looking forward towards
               the deeper intersectional analysis needed to expand intellectual diversity in the
               field and move difference beyond the margins of the digital humanities.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            While digital humanities has grown, so too has the number of voices making the case
               for attention to race, class, gender, sexuality, ability, nationality, and other
               categories of identity in the field. Increasing numbers of panels at the annual
               meetings of Digital Humanities; Modern Language Association; American Studies
               Association; American Historical Association; National Women’s Studies Association;
               and Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology Alliance and Collaboratory (HASTAC)
               examine the role of difference in digital humanities scholarship. In today’s
                  digital humanities moment
               , the field often re-encounters the growing pains of the 
                  eternal September of the digital
                     humanities
                  
               . As a result, recurring questions insist on the need for cultural critique in
               the field: 
                  Where is cultural criticism in the digital
                     humanities?
                  
               , 
                  Can we describe digital archives as
                     feminist?
                  
               , 
                  Why are the digital humanities so
                     white?
                  
               , and 
                  Can information be unfettered?
                  
               . The persistence of these questions demonstrates the need for more answers to
               the pressing matter of inclusion and exclusion within the field.
            A recent special issue of the journal differences,
                  In the Shadow of the Digital Humanities, considers
               the fraught relationship between digital humanities and diversity. The call for
               papers for the Canadian Society for Digital Humanities and Association for Computers
               and the Humanities joint conference encourages proposals from 
                  women, people of color, LGBTQ, or
                     other under-represented groups
                  
               . The 2015 Digital Diversity conference in Edmonton celebrates the 20th anniversary of The Orlando
                  Project and asks, 
                  Have decades of digital
                     studies enhanced, altered, or muted the project to recover and represent more
                     diverse histories of writers, thinkers, and artists positioned differently by
                     gender, race, ethnicity, sexualities, social class, and/or global
                     location?
                  
               . Such calls suggest that scholars within digital humanities have begun
               recognizing the need for inclusive representation and a critical approach that
               foregrounds intellectual diversity within the field. 
            Resistance to the utility of cultural criticism abounds. Notably, Matthew
               Kirschenbaum argues many critics target a construct of digital
                  humanities rather than the varied range of projects that comprise the
               field . In distinguishing between a discursive
               subject of criticism and material praxis, he echoes debates over the hack
                  vs. yack binary – doing vs. theorizing – that have taken place in the
               field ; ; ; . Invoking a division between
               the two has been something of a stock move, used in equal measure to call digital
               humanists untheoretical  and to distance digital humanities
               from the messy realities of race, gender, sexuality, class, and other forms of
               difference . As Bethany Nowviskie notes, the binary has
               become a strawman for a false claim of a 
                  fundamental opposition in thinking
                     between humanities theorists and deliberately anti-theoretical DH
                        builders
                  
               . The division between hack and yack
               has been complicated by the idea of tacit knowledge  that
               emerges from 
                  journeyman learning
                     experiences
                  
                and by the intimate link between building and knowing within the field ; . Yet, the binary
               persists, both in questionable arguments that cultural criticism targets a discursive
               construction of the field alone and invalid claims that an emphasis on building makes
               digital humanities untheoretical.
            The relationship between theory and praxis is integral to the digital humanities.
               Connections between the two appear in the archives built, corpora analyzed, oral
               histories recorded, and geographies mapped. As Alan Liu has suggested, the practices
               of digital humanities make engagement with cultural critique online possible . In turn, theory contributes to the development of the field’s
               metadiscourse and enables a critical look at material practices, including their
               omissions. Those of us who work with issues of difference often perceive the ways
               that many digital humanities projects fail to engage with race, gender, disability,
               class, sexuality, or a combination thereof. Some of the most developed digital
               humanities work – The Rossetti Archive, The Walt Whitman Archive, The William Blake
               Archive – preserve the writing of dead white men, specifically individuals unlikely
               to be forgotten in Anglophone literary history even if these projects did not exist.
               There are practical explanations for such subjects. For example, the body of pre-1923
               public domain material digitized and ready for study privileges canonical writers and
               texts. As Earhart argues, fewer scholars are working with digital textual recovery
               and diversifying the available texts . Yet, as Skye
               Bianco has argued, the consolidation of digital humanities as a recognizable field
               for institutions and grantors has led to exposure for disciplinarily legible projects that rely on
               canonicity for justification, yielding a field that trades on 
                  its kinship to much older modes of
                     humanistic study
                  
               . Bianco describes this trend as a form of retro-humanism
               that does not account for recent developments in the humanities, like cultural
               studies, feminism, postcolonial studies, critical race studies, or queer studies . Earhart proposes that digital humanities might intervene
               by reviving digital textual recovery work and identifying the omissions of the canon: 
                  crucial work by women, people of color,
                     and the GLBTQ community
                  
               . The stakes here are high; as digital humanities becomes the public face of
               the humanities through organizations like 4Humanities and HASTAC, retro-humanism
               cannot be the order of the day. Without attention to the omissions that exist within
               digital humanities scholarship, the field risks replicating the exclusions of a
               dominant culture that already relegates difference to its margins.
            To avoid this pitfall, we need critical approaches that transcend false binaries
               between hack and yack. Intersectionality is
               one such frame that offers a way of examining the history of digital humanities to
               identify strategies for greater intellectual diversity in the field.
               Intersectionality originates in the work of Kimberlé Crenshaw, a legal scholar who
               sought a model for understanding the relationship between race, gender, and violence
               against women of color. The concept articulates Crenshaw’s perception that 
                  the experiences of women of color are
                     frequently the product of intersecting patterns of racism and sexism
                  
               . Through her research with women living in shelters, Crenshaw saw the ways the
               women encountered 
                  burdens, largely the consequence of
                     gender and class oppression...compounded by the racially discriminatory
                     employment and housing practices women of color often face, as well as by the
                     disproportionately high unemployment among people of color
                  
               . Crenshaw proposes that multilayered and routinized forms of domination...often converge to shape
               the experiences and limit the opportunities of women of color – black women in
               particular – whose concerns are not adequately represented by either anti-racist or
               feminist discourse alone . From Crenshaw’s
               grounded analysis in the 1980s to now, intersectionality has come to signify the ways
               that oppression manifests through multiple facets of identity that confer or withhold
               privilege, unearned advantages that accrue to individuals on the basis of their
               identities . In its more expansive definition,
               intersectionality is generally understood to look beyond the race-class-gender triad
               described by Crenshaw to additional axes of difference including sexuality and
               ability. As a lens for scholarship in the digital humanities, intersectionality
               resists binary logic, encourages complex analysis, and foregrounds difference.
            This article proposes that intersectionality is a viable approach to cultural
               criticism in the digital humanities, enabling us to write alternate histories of the
               field that transcend simplistic hack vs.
                  yack binaries. I begin by situating debates over difference
               in the digital humanities within the larger context of the culture wars within the US
               academy in the 1980s and 1990s to locate the stakes of diversity within the field.
               Then, I suggest what an intersectional approach to digital humanities might look like
               and offer a survey of projects through an intersectional lens. Finally, I suggest
               ways the field might look forward towards deeper intersectional analysis needed to
               develop a transformed, inclusive digital humanities. 
         

            The Lessons of Theory
            In 2009, William Pannapacker called digital humanities the next big thing, a move that recalls the
               rise of critical theory, the last big thing to shape the humanities . Responses to digital humanities from cultural critics
               in the mainstream press often echo the culture wars of the late 1980s and early
               1990s, the struggle within the US academy over the fraught relationship between
               literature and theory. As the story goes, with the advent of theory, Shakespeare was
               going to be jettisoned for Saussure, Defoe for Derrida. Cultural critic Roger Kimball
               argued that ideological posturing, pop
                  culture, and hermetic word games were supplanting humanities education
                  . Critics of the digital humanities have made
               analogous charges. For example, Adam Kirsch suggests, 
                  ...the very idea of language as the
                     basis of humane education – even of human identity – seems to give way to a
                     post- or pre-verbal discourse of pictures and objects. Digital humanities
                     becomes another name for the obsequies of humanism
                  
               . Digital humanities reduces literature to data. Distant
               reading is destroying close reading.
            History repeats itself in other ways too. The backlash against theory for its elision
               of difference resonates with arguments for cultural critique within digital
               humanities. Along with theory came criticism of its rise from black, ethnic, and
               women’s studies. Many scholars in these fields were conscious of their hard-won gains
               during the 1960s and 1970s – establishing academic departments and journals and
               having their work recognized as scholarship – and worried their position within the
               academy would be jeopardized by the arrival of theory in the 1980s. They did not see
               theoretical models based on the work of Karl Marx, Michel Foucault, and Jacques
               Derrida as schools of thought that promoted their goals. Rather, they viewed the rise
               of theory in opposition to their work, which was located not in continental
               philosophy but in lived experiences of difference in the U.S. 
            In her essay The Race for Theory, Barbara Christian
               writes about the growing importance of theory in the academy in the late 1980s,
               articulating concerns about inclusion and exclusion that are strikingly relevant to
               the digital humanities. She begins, 
                  The New Philosophers, eager to
                     understand a world that is today fast escaping their political control, have
                     redefined literature so that the distinctions implied by the term…have been
                     blurred. They have changed literary critical language to suit their own
                     purposes as philosophers, and they have reinvented the meaning of
                     theory
                  
               . Just as theory’s New Philosophers have begun
               transforming literary studies through theory, so too are digital humanists opening up
               new possibilities for scholarship. Christian’s literary critical language is digital humanities’
                  methodologies. She anticipates a shift in the landscape of
               the academy, wondering what will happen to radical critics if theory becomes a
               defining part of literary scholarship and a commodity for appointment, tenure, and
               promotion. Christian sees the possibility of radical critique being domesticated as
                  black, women, [and] third world scholars
               invested in intersectional approaches to literature are coerced into adopting the
               language of theory and 
                  speaking a language and defining
                     their discussion in terms alien to and opposed to our needs and
                     orientations
                  
               . Likewise, scholars in the digital humanities advocating for cultural critique
               recognize that engaging with difference is not only a question of representation but
               also one of method.
            Digital humanities scholars who work with difference fear for its viability, much
               like Christian and her colleagues worried about their relationship to theory in the
               1980s. Will black, ethnic, and women’s studies be legible within digital humanities?
               Will other forms of difference – gender, sexuality, ability – have a place in the
               field as well? Scholars who take up these issues focus on the ways digital humanities
               intersects with how we engage difference in our work. These approaches are grounded
               in core questions of difference above, articulated by Alan Liu, Jacqueline Wernimont,
               Tara McPherson, and Amy Earhart, among others. Newer groups within digital humanities
               have been inspired by their concerns. For example, #transformDH is 
                  an academic guerilla movement
                     seeking to (re)define capital-letter Digital Humanities as a force for
                     transformative scholarship by collecting, sharing, and highlighting projects
                     that push at its boundaries and work for social justice, accessibility, and
                     inclusion
                  
               . The roots of #transformDH lie in 
                  intersectional critical cultural
                     studies” such as “critical race and ethnic studies; feminist, gender, queer
                     studies; postcolonial, transnational, diaspora; disability studies; DIY (Add
                     your own!)
                  
               . As a result, #transformDH operates under the assertion that gender, sexuality, race, nationality, and ability are
                  all central to how we encounter and participate in digital humanities and
               that 
                  we must work collectively towards
                     transformative, social justice oriented engagements
                  
               . Similarly, Postcolonial Digital Humanities, or #dhpoco, has sought to build a
               community of scholars working at the intersections of postcolonial studies and the
               digital humanities, to promote 
                  global explorations of race, class,
                     gender, sexuality, and disability within cultures of technology
                  
               . Another initiative, Global Outlook::Digital Humanities (GO::DH), a special
               interest group of the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO), fosters
               communication and collaboration around the world, navigating not only geographic but
               also economic difference and the practical challenges of embracing multilingualism
               within ADHO. The organization has supported the development of regional and
               linguistic tracks like South Asian Digital Humanities, Red Humanidades Digitales, and
               Associação das Humanidades Digitais; a whisper campaign to facilitate on-the-fly
               translations at the Digital Humanities 2014 meeting; and Alex Gil’s Around DH in 80 Days website that showcases the
               international scope of projects. Groups like #transformDH, Postcolonial Digital
               Humanities, and GO::DH situate their missions at the intersections of multiple axes
               of difference, recognizing the need for attention to the complex power relations that
               serve as barriers to achieving inclusivity within the digital humanities. 
            The recent popularity of digital humanities obscures a longer history of which these
               initiatives are part. Just as Christian pushes back against the newness of theory and
               argues, 
                  people of color have always
                     theorized
                  
               , there are earlier, oft-unrecognized instances of digital humanities work that
               engages with difference. Since the 1990s, Afrofuturist scholars have been framing
               technoculture through intersectional lenses. Afrofuturism is an African American
               literary and artistic movement that foregrounds speculative approaches to
               displacement, belonging, and home for the African diaspora. Its literary dimensions
               encompass science and speculative fiction by writers like Nalo Hopkinson, Octavia
               Butler, and Samuel R. Delaney, while its critical angle has considered the ways that
               blackness, gender, class, and sexuality intersect in technoculture. Alondra Nelson
               created the Afrofuturism listserv in the 1990s to examine futurist themes in African
               diasporic cultural production, blackness in science fiction, and the possibilities of
               black technoculture. Her 2001 edited volume Technicolor: Race,
                  Technology, and Everyday Life (with Thuy Linh Tu) was one of the first
               collections to consider the influence of racial politics on technoculture, and she
               also edited a 2002 issue of Social Text on Afrofuturism,
               with an emphasis on how new media, culture, and technology influence the African
               Diaspora. Kali Tal, who developed the Afrofuturism website, is perhaps best known for
               her article Life Behind the Screen, which considers
               omissions in cyberculture scholarship in the mid-1990s .
               Scholars like W.E.B. Du Bois, she argues, have been theorizing identity in ways
               useful for but largely ignored by cyberculture studies. This body of work, which
               situates the African diaspora within the digital milieu, exists alongside early
               efforts at textual recovery for African American studies during the 1990s. As Earhart
               has suggested, projects like The Charles Chesnutt
                  Archive and Race and Place: An African-American
                  Community in the Jim Crow South embraced the affordances of emerging
               Internet technologies to resist canon bias among early digital projects . To recognize this work within digital humanities is to
               embrace the possibilities of digital cultural recovery for the African diaspora.
               Earhart herself has begun archiving and recovering early work through her project
                  The Diverse History of Digital Humanities. 
            Another area of scholarship that inspires digital humanities scholars invested in
               intersectionality is new media studies, which has been asking difficult questions
               about difference and the Internet since the 2000s. Lisa Nakamura’s work interrogates
               the ways that online experiences shape perceptions of race, ethnicity, and identity,
               drawing on critical race theory as she identifies a relationship between operations
               of stereotypes online and offline ; . She further suggests that the Internet is a space of
               re-embodiment along the lines of race and gender, as biotechnologies and other forces
               shape the online body . Similarly, Wendy Chun has
               examined how superficial views of difference have led to troubling beliefs that
               online spaces are disembodied and therefore insulated from the realities of social
               inequalities ; . Anna Everett also
               takes up related issues, ranging from race in the digital public sphere  to black public life and black women’s experiences online
                   and the influence of intersectional forms of
               difference in video games . Bringing a postcolonial lens
               to these debates, Pramod Nayar argues that technologized bodies are raced, gendered, and classed, and situated in
                  particular social, and economic, and cultural contexts and emphasizes the
               importance of acknowledging subalternity in cyberspace . Drawing on theories of globalization as well as postcolonial studies,
               Radhika Gajjala examines the nature of South Asian technospaces, the effects of
               microfinance and peer-to-peer lending on women’s craft communities, and the ways
               silence and voice are shaped online, insisting on the relationship between the local,
               global, and digital ; .
               Attending to questions of media and migration, Isabelle Rigoni argues that
               intersectionality is an important tool for analyzing ethnic minority media. She
               suggests that while representation is increasingly happening in digital media, little
               attention has been paid to how race, gender, and postcolonial migration together 
                  produce and maintain the unequal
                     distribution of power in the mediascape
                  
               . Her work situates the affordances of intersectionality for analysis of
               digital media, arguing that it 
                  provide[s] an important analytical and
                     conceptual tool for enabling us to understand gender, race, and class, as
                     dimensions of social identities in transition, especially as reflected in the
                     media
                  
               . Ben Aslinger and Nina Huntemann also identify a relationship between new
               media studies and intersectionality, suggesting that new media studies may be a safe
               space for intersectional analysis and a challenge to the 
                  often described conflation/caricature
                     of the new media scholar as an apolitical white heterosexual male
                     academic
                  
               . Together, these developments in new media speak to the strides that feminist,
               queer, and critical race theory scholars have made in interrogating the relationship
               between digital media and multiple categories of identity, changing the ways we
               understand the relationship between networks, digital media, and subjectivity. 
            Recent calls for intersectional analysis in digital humanities are further indebted
               to Sandra Harding’s ground-breaking work in feminist and postcolonial science and
               technology studies, which considers the relationship between feminist ways of knowing
               in scientific paradigms, the role of multiculturalism in science studies, and the
               imperialist foundations of European and American science ; . This scholarship speaks to the relationship between
               difference and technology in a range of intersectional forms. Implications for
               digital humanities include the emphasis on technoscience, which enables critical
               analysis of the materiality of digital and computational technologies in relation to
               power, embodiment, and difference. Emphasizing that technologies themselves are
               implicated in intersectionality, Claire Potter has suggested, 
                  New digital technologies have their own
                     history, one that is recent to be sure, but that nevertheless resonates to
                     historical questions of race, class, gender, nationalism, and sexuality that
                     are at the heart of a feminist intellectual enterprise
                  
               . Together, these scholarly contributions to difference in technoculture have
               places in the alternate histories we must write about the digital humanities. They
               offer models that foreshadow the role of intersectional analysis in the field by
               making the case that engagement with computational technologies is inextricably
               linked to questions of history, culture, identity, and difference. They hint at
               methods that advocate inclusion and critical analysis but are situated in the
               materiality of technologies – the very methods central to an intersectional approach
               to digital humanities. 
         

            Towards an Intersectional Digital Humanities
            These concerns are vital to the analytical work of digital humanities, the
               computational technologies developed or used to produce scholarship, and the ways
               projects are designed. Like any scholarly field, digital humanities veers towards the
               monolithic, constructing centers and peripheries. Every definition is necessarily
               exclusionary but the task of defining is an inevitable part of academic practice.
               Yet, acts of exclusion often come at the expense of those who inhabit the margins and
               whose identities are shaped by intersecting axes of difference. This phenomenon
               manifests in multiple ways, from the presumptive white maleness of digital humanities
                   to the canon bias within the field ; . That is to say, this is not
               only a matter of the diversity of individuals within digital humanities but also of
               intellectual diversity. Therefore, it is incumbent on those at the center of the
               digital humanities to understand the position of those whose work dwells in the
               peripheries, to understand the historical legacies that link knowledge production
               with the denigration – even the destruction – of that which is other.
            What I offer here is the beginning of a genealogy that identifies the influences of
               intersectionality on digital humanities, in its approach to theory and practice. I
               chart the ways intersectionality has been part of conversations in the digital
               humanities and survey projects in which we might find hints of intersectionality.
               These are the traces on which we might build to properly situate intersectionality as
               critical approach to the field. Broad in range, hallmarks of intersectionality in
               digital humanities include common sense advice for cultivating a diverse community,
               theoretical models for understanding the ways difference shapes digital practices,
               applied theoretical models that position intersectionality as an already existing but
               oft-overlooked part of computation, and practical tweaks like acknowledging
               inclusions and exclusions in data or developing search functions that enable
               intersectional engagement. Projects that are explicitly intersectional in their
               design and development are more rare but nonetheless essential. 
            Among early voices advocating for a theoretically intersectional approach to digital
               humanities is Martha Nell Smith, who proposes that the rigor of the field depends on
               it. She suggests, 
                  Our pliant and accommodating standards
                     need also to be more interdisciplinary and take into account the
                        messy facts of authorship, production, and reception:
                     race, class, gender, and sexuality
                  
               . Undertaking such a task of embracing messy
                  humanity in all its diversities is, according to Smith, 
                  no longer a luxury for our community, it
                     is a necessity
                  
               . More recently, Smith has issued a call to integrate feminist, critical race,
               sexuality, and class-based analysis into digital humanities, particularly in digital
               archival practice. Such an approach would address questions like 
                  How have these items of knowledge and the
                     organizations and working groups who made them come into being? Who has stakes
                     in their presentation? What is visible in these new media archives and what
                     might not be? Can what is invisible but relevant be known to users of new
                     digital archives?
                  
               . To thaw the 
                  frozen social relations
                  
                that she identifies within digital humanities scholarship, Smith suggests, 
                  Producers should make every effort to
                     make clear what has been occluded by remediation, by principles and practices
                     of selection, and to unfreeze old binaries of authority and involve users in
                     knowledge production
                  
               . That is to say, digital humanities scholarship must be self-reflexive,
               interrogating its own positionality within the broader landscape of knowledge
               production, along axes of difference. 
            Another consideration is the tensions evoked by engagement with difference in the
               digital humanities. The field is beleaguered by its own creation myths and investment
               in niceness,
               collegiality, and openness. Tom Scheinfeldt
               attributes this niceness to the field’s investment in method, suggesting that
               methodological debates are easier to resolve than theoretical ones . Conversely, Bianco has proposed that depictions of
               digital humanities as the cool kids’ table from outside the
               field and the emphasis on niceness within mean digital humanities is 
                  constructing itself through the
                     competing narratives of privileged, middle-class, white high-school politics in
                     tension with privileged, middle-class, white people who work
                        nicely together
                  
               . These issues – niceness, method, difference, theory – came to the fore in
               responses to Miriam Posner’s essay about coding. While not opposed to code, Posner
               identifies the way that knowledge of coding plays out along gendered, classed, and
               racialized lines, noting that men –
                  middle-class white men are more likely to have been encouraged to engage
               with computational technology at a young age . Identifying
               the intersectional structural biases influencing trends in who is most likely to know
               how to code, Posner suggests, 
                  If you [digital humanists] want women
                     and people of color in your community, if it is important to you to have a
                     diverse discipline, you need to do something besides exhort us to code
                  
               . Responses to Posner’s post, which included dissent, revealed how
               misunderstood the connection between theory and method can be. She responded by
               linking method – coding – to theory – arguing, Let’s make inequities of power something else we decide to
                  abandon and proposing guidelines for intersectional engagement in the
               digital humanities community: 
                  1. Let’s think about ways to build
                     communities of underrepresented people...2. Let’s acknowledge that we all do
                     racist and sexist stuff sometimes...3. Let’s talk about when our niceness could
                     be shutting down important conversations...4. Let’s believe people when they
                     tell us they feel uncomfortable
                  
               . Here, Posner identifies the influence of difference, arguably a theoretical
               concern, on method. These guidelines are a precondition to an intersectional response
               to difference in digital humanities that embraces the relationship between theory and
               method. 
            Approaching difference by blending Smith’s recommendations for intersectional
               analysis and Posner’s community guidelines reveals the ways the field is already
               informed by intersectionality. As Bianco has suggested, computational scholarship
               already is 
                  a radically heterogeneous and a
                     multimodally layered – read, not visible – set of practices, constraints and
                     codifications that operate below the level of user interaction
                  
               . In that layer, operations of intersectionality may be visible if we look for
               them. Accordingly, Bianco notes, 
                  Our ethics, methods and theory are
                        not transparent in our tools, unless you have the serious
                     know-how to critically make them or hack them
                  
               . While digital humanists themselves may have access to that layer by virtue of
               technical skill, users engaging with digital humanities scholarship may not.
               Similarly, Smith argues, Tools cannot be
                  separated from the knowledge systems in which they have been imagined and
                  made but proposes we might frame intersectional practices as tools
               themselves . To do so would ensure that digital
               humanities scholarship unsettles essentialist categories, rather than reifying
               existing assumptions about race, gender, class, ability, sexuality, or other
               categories of difference. Therefore, it is incumbent on us to make the critical
               layers visible to users in the apparatus developed around our work. 
            By approaching intersectionality in the digital humanities at the juncture of
               disciplinary knowledge and technical specification, we blend theory and method and
               avoid what Moya Bailey calls 
                  the add and stir model of diversity, a
                     practice of sprinkling in more women, people of color, disabled folks and
                     assuming that is enough to change current paradigms
                  
               . Bailey frames this issue in intersectional terms, proposing, 
                  This identity based mixing does little
                     to address the structural parameters that are set up when a homogeneous group
                     has been at the center and don’t automatically engender understanding across
                     forms of difference
                  
               . Axes of difference are fluid and converge in multiple ways. For example, the
               considerations necessary for a project on black lesbian activism would necessarily be
               different from one on oral histories of Latina transwomen; these might range from
               technical specifications to design principles to issues of safety that a public
               project might raise. As a result, there is not simply one way of doing intersectional
               digital humanities. Rather, it is a provisional lens that suggests practitioners
               begin their work with an understanding of the particularities necessary to design
               projects that account for influences of difference on knowledge-production. To date,
               we have few alternatives that enable such an approach. For example, Kara Keeling’s
                  Queer OS or queer operating system suggests
               that a queer perspective, broadly construed, would change how we view technology.
               Queer OS 
                  would take historical, sociocultural,
                     conceptual phenomena that currently shape our realities in deep and profound
                     ways, such as race, gender, class citizenship, and ability … to be mutually
                     constitutive with sexuality and with media and information technologies,
                     thereby making it impossible to think of any of them in isolation
                  
               . By viewing queer as an operating system, Keeling proposes to decenter
               social norms in favor of their alternatives. Moreover, she frames Queer OS in
               intersectional terms, emphasizing the relationship between sexuality and other
               categories like race, ability, and nationality. Offering another alternative, Fobazi
               M. Ettarh interrogates the relationship between Boolean search terms and
               intersectional identity. Describing her experiences in library school, she notes, 
                  I am proof that these [race, gender, and
                     sexuality] are not separate issues. I am not Black one day and Queer the next.
                     Instead, I am Black AND Queer. In Principles of Searching we learn how
                     important and, or, and nor are in Boolean searching. Too long the environment
                     has been Black OR Queer
                  
               . As such, she identifies a conceptual fit between intersectionality and
               structures of information. These issues are further explored by Alexis Lothian and
               Amanda Phillips who ask, 
                  Can digital humanities mean
                     transformative critique?
                  
               . They argue that if scholars in fields like ethnic studies, gender studies,
               cultural studies, disability studies, or queer studies are engaging with technology
               in their scholarship, they should 
                  lay claim to our place within digital
                     humanities
                  
               . Through such an intersectional bent Lothian and Phillips look forward to
               transformative digital humanities 
                  where neither the digital nor the
                     humanities will be terms taken for granted
                  
               . These theoretical perspectives offer models of how intersectionality operates
               in relationship to the digital humanities, from the nature of computation itself to
               the way we constitute relationships between the humanistic inquiry and the digital. 
            In additional to theoretical precursors, we have projects that, in their own ways,
               provide models for how to approach digital humanities through an intersectional lens.
               An acknowledgment of the inclusions and exclusions within a data set or the source
               material is an important start. Allison Booth’s Collective
                  Biographies of Women
               , for example, focuses on prosopography, or collective biography,
               a genre of text comprised of short biographies. Using print volumes and digital
               resources like Project Gutenberg or Google Books, CBW
               compiles biographical narratives and develops tools for prosopography. The project’s
                  About page offers an important model of how projects
               can be positioned in intersectional terms: 
                  Prosopography must be selective, but it can
                     claim a share of attention for marginal identities. Most women have gone
                     missing in history and have no printed memorial. The Anglo-American catalogues
                     in CBW tended to exclude all but the rare working woman, woman of color, or
                     woman who did not belong to the Christian middle class of English descent.
                     Religious nonconformists and various minorities nevertheless began to use this
                     tool of recognition. The collections camouflage or accept some examples of
                     diverse sexuality and same-sex relationships and many examples of single or old
                     women. It is high-ranking women who pursue heterosexual affairs who get
                     censured in these books — but not always or not with conviction. Some books
                     celebrate opposites of the good woman type. The
                     limitations of the lists – and any canons or lists – notwithstanding, a search
                     through this bibliography and the books it registers helps to correct some
                     distorted generalizations about the lack of records of women in the
                     past.
                  
               
            
            The project’s Pop Chart or index of most frequently
               recurring subjects indicates a bias towards white European or American women, with
               Pocahontas and Cleopatra being notable exceptions. However, the CBW’s proactive foregrounding of questions of race, class, gender, and
               sexuality in the fashioning of the project is a fitting model of how to engage with
               intersectional digital humanities. Key here is making the intersecting phenomena that
               shape a project visible even though they may not be readily understood. The Orlando Project does this as well. Orlando examines women’s literary history but its focus on women’s
               writing may obscure its intersectional underpinnings upon first glance. However, the
               scholarly introduction to the project notes that while gender is an indispensable tool for historical analysis, the project
               creators 
                  see gender as one among other constituents
                     of identity
                  
               . Therefore, the project includes documents that examine race, class, sexuality
               or other categories of difference to illuminate the “cultural formation” of writers.
               Identifying such a frame, the project makes clear that its engagement with gender is
               situated in the flexible and provisional spirit of intersectionality. 
            A project might also structure its search mechanism to optimize intersectional
               analysis. Brad Pasanek’s The Mind is a Metaphor
               database, for example, makes clear that its scope and textual sources only cover
                  18th century British metaphors . Yet, the metaphors themselves are tagged to enable intersectional searches. A
               user can sort by not only literary period, metaphor category, and genre but also
               gender, race, and nationality. Among the latter, African or
                  Afro-British is one such category, which when selected with
                  female produces a list of metaphors by Phillis Wheatley.
               Despite the predictable underrepresentation of black women in a database of 18th century British writing, the ability to navigate the
               database in such a way acknowledges the importance of intersectionality. The Emory Women Writers Resource Project (EWWRP) similarly
               foregrounds an intersectional approach through the way it structures project data.
               Among the collections through which the site is organized are Native American,
               Abolition, Freedom, and Rights, and Women’s Advocacy, but the collections are fluid, with texts fitting
               multiple categories appearing in more than one collection .
                  A Celebration of Women Writers, a site that preserves
               public domain women’s texts compiled by Mary Mark Ockerbloom, also enables ethnicity
               as one method of browsing the archive .
            User integration is another way digital humanities projects can make intersectional
               interventions possible. NINES: Nineteenth-century Scholarship
                  Online material is beginning to grow more diverse. Visible tags on the
               project website, including women,
               Chinese,
               African, and diaspora, suggest an effort to foreground a range of
               objects from 125 federated websites. The Collex interface offers possibilities for
               creating exhibits, which allows users to interact with the material through curation;
               even users without specialized training could arrange the material to explore a range
               of topics through available objects. Moreover, Collex offers the possibility of
               expanding the archive of affiliated websites via RDF, allowing creators of
               substantial projects to seek peer review and inclusion in NINES. NINES demonstrates
               openness towards greater representation and offers tools to make that possible.
                  The Women Writers Project, which undertakes
               electronic text encoding for pre-Victorian women’s writing, includes a publication
               series called Women Writers in Context, which features
               exhibits 
                  designed to engage readers in the exploration
                     and discovery of topics related to early modern women’s writing
                  
               . One such exhibit on women and race allowed creator Kim Hall to explore the
               role of intersectional analysis and engagement with The Women
                  Writers Project. Accordingly, she notes, 
                  Rather than isolating race as a focus, the
                     best research sees race in relation to concerns of gender, class, religion, and
                     sexuality. To say that race is connected to these other social divisions is not
                     to say that race is analogous to these other categories, nor is it to say that
                     all marginalized people are oppressed or made marginal in the same ways
                  
               . Though the scope of The Women Writers Project,
               namely the periods of literary history it examines, privileges the writing of white
               women, the Women Writers in Context series signifies how
               scholars might find interpretive paths through the material. Through user engagement,
               these projects make intersectional analysis more legible in the archive.
            Beyond projects that address intersectionality indirectly, we can look to the
               examples of those that foreground it in project design. An example of an
               intersectional digital archive, Amy Earhart’s project The 19th Century Concord Digital Archive examines the
               relationship between Concord, Massachusetts and American literature and history. The
               archive 
                  invites the scholar to utilize a broad set of
                     digital documents to reconsider how the town and its writers are situated
                     within broader scholarly conversations
                  
               . Addressing scope, the project statement notes, 
                  These [Concord] authors interacted with groups
                     less frequently recorded in textual documents of the time period: free
                     African-Americans, Irish immigrants, the poor, and criminal class
                  
               . The archive offers insight on these engagements across lines of gender,
               nationality, class, and more: 
                  By digitizing a broad range of materials that
                     represent the diverse people associated with literary production the archive
                     allows scholars to rethink the way we conceptualize individual work associated
                     with Concord, to redefine our assumptions about literary and historical
                     representation, and to reconsider the very foundation of our disciplinary
                     studies
                  
               . The archive reflects Earhart’s observation that 
                  scholars invested in early work on race
                     in digital humanities insisted on building editions and digital texts as
                     activist intervention in the closed canon
                  
               . Indeed, Earhart’s own project is an example of what intersectional activism
               in the canon looks like. 
            A further dimension to consider is how intersectional analysis can be engaged through
               text mining. In their work on the Black Drama database, Shlomo Argamon, Charles
               Cooney, Russell Horton, Mark Olsen, Sterling Stein, and Robert Voyer made space for
               intersectional structures within the database as they considered 
                  the degree to which machine learning
                     can isolate stylistic or content characteristics of authors and/or characters
                     having particular attributes – gender, race, and nationality
                  
               . The database contains 963 texts written by 128 men and 243 by fifty-three
               women; 831 titles are by US authors while 375 are by authors from Caribbean or
               African countries. There are further variations in the number of speeches by women
               and male characters and black and white characters, with a small number of speeches
               by characters of other ethnic backgrounds. Metadata for the project contains 30
               fields to describe characters and authors from the black stage, including 
                  Race, age, gender, nationality,
                     ethnicity, occupation, sexual orientation, performers, if a real person and
                     type
                  
               . They use the ARTFL search system PhiloLogic, which 
                  allows joining of object attribute
                     searches, forming a matrix of author/title/character searching
                  
               . Argamon et al. demonstrate the range of intersectional analysis made possible
               by choice of platform, noting that 
                  one can search for words in speeches by
                     female, black American characters depicted by male, non-American authors in
                     comedies first published during the first half of the 20th century
                  
               . Argamon et al.’s work suggests how data mining can provide new understandings
               of language use and its relationship to representation. For example, they note that
               analysis of racial epithets reveals variations of language use based on gender and
               nation and propose that such test cases 
                  hint at larger discursive and
                     representation issues
                  
               . As Argamon et al.’s work with the Black Drama database begins looking at how
               to represent attributes like gender, race or nation as textual characteristics
               through computation, we might ask, Can the database
                  be intersectional?
            
            Conversation within the 2014 Critical Code Studies Working Group indicates the
               importance of intersectionality to our understanding of code as well. The CCSWG 2014
               featured a week on Feminist Programming, led by Arielle
               Schlesinger and featuring Jacqueline Wernimont and Ben Wiedermann as discussants.
               Schlesinger began by asking the group, What is feminist code? What is feminist coding? in relation to code
               snippets by Mez Breeze and micha cárdenas. Among the conversations generated were the
               relationship between executable code and cárdenas’s work code poems, an issue raised
               by Mark Marino. cárdenas explained, 
                  I am more committed to the visionary
                     and speculative possibilities of these code snippets than their literal
                     executable possibilities
                  
               . Wernimont raised the issue of absence, evoking a generative possibility in 
                  allowing the absent-presence of
                     feminist executable code to operate as an irritant
                  
               . She described this in feminist terms as 
                  an occasion to continue to question the
                     structures that have not permitted such a thing to exist
                  
               . cárdenas further complicated the notion of feminist by
               noting that feminist without
                  qualification can easily be equated to white, cis-gender, first world
                  feminism, asking What is
                  gained and lost by the formulation of this code as feminist, as opposed to say,
                  decolonial, in the sense of rejecting western systems of epistemology and
               raising the question of the role of intersectionality in code . Viola Lasmana responded by invoking Trinh T. Minh-ha:
                  Shake syntax, smash the myths, and if
                  you lose, unearth some new linguistic paths (qtd. in . She suggests that such processes occur in the code poems
               written by cárdenas and Breeze. The question of executable code raises the issue of
               whether executability may be a limit to both intersectional praxis and digital
               humanities methodology. Given the reliance of digital humanities methodologies on
               executable code, is engaged intersectional work limited by it? By examining this
               question, we may consider the limits of code as not only sets of operations but also
               a language that may enable or foreclose intersectional conversations. 
            Finally, practicing digital humanities through social media, Jessica M. Johnson’s
                  The Codex, is an example of intersectional engagement
               in digital humanities. The Codex is a social media triptych composed of three sites:
                  African Diaspora, PhD, Diaspora
                  Hypertext, and Seeing Dark Matter
               . Guiding the development of these sites is Johnson’s
               intersectional praxis, which by her own description, is 
                  anti-oppression, feminist and social
                     justice oriented
                  
               . African Diaspora, PhD showcases developments in
               African diaspora history, from an intersectional lens. A survey of recent posts shows
               attention to scholarship on a range of subjects like images of faithful
                  slaves in Confederate discourse, including mammies and kinship, and
               race and gender in Atlantic New Orleans. Johnson’s site is an important resource for
               African diaspora scholarship, which she frames in intersectional terms: 
                  The field is also interdisciplinary,
                     supporting and supported by research emerging from the fields of African,
                     Africana/African-American, and Latin American studies; women, gender, and
                     sexuality studies; and feminist, post-colonial, and race theory
                  
               . Diaspora Hypertext showcases Johnson’s work as a 
                  black feminist/radical woman of color
                     digital humanist and media maker
                  
               . Organized into writing,
               research, and teaching tracks, the site provides a range of resources
               on African Atlantic Diaspora history. Complementing these sites is Seeing Dark Matter, a Tumblr-driven digital archive devoted
               to black diasporic visual culture and to 
                  processing Atlantic slavery through
                     application, code, and screen
                  
               . In its multiple modes, Johnson’s work demonstrates how engaging a range of
               tools enables more full exploration of intersectionality within an interdisciplinary
               field. 
            The theoretical approaches and projects I have described here are intentionally
               diverse in subject, providing a survey of intersectional traces in the digital
               humanities. Some projects, like Earhart’s, Argamon et al.’s and Johnson’s work,
               consciously integrate intersectionality into their design. Others, like Orlando, CBW, and NINES, suggest how intersectional engagement possible, even
               if not a primary goal. This cursory look for hints of intersectionality is intended
               as an opening salvo for new histories of the digital humanities that locate
               intersectionality at their center and intervene at the locus of theory and method.
               What I have offered here is the work of survey, a pre-cursor to the deep analysis
               necessary for further developing an intersectional history of digital humanities.
               Yet, I have only examined the relatively painless ways that intersectional
               perspectives can be integrated into scholarship: acknowledging the inclusions or
               exclusions of data, defining terms in inclusive ways, or adding another tag. This is
               the surface-level work of representation that is unlikely to destabilize the moorings
               of digital humanities. The pursuit of a more inclusive field only will begin by
               looking at these practices as ways of being thoughtful, intentional, and
               intersectional about digital humanities. Yet, painful work must be done too. This
               includes looking more closely at digital humanities projects, opening the black boxes
               to examine the imprints of intersectionality on archive, code, metadata, database,
               and more. In the writing and rewriting of these histories, digital humanities
               practitioners must situate them in the histories of Afrofuturism, digital textual
               recovery, new media studies, and science and technology studies, being careful not to
               erase or write over the contributions that scholars of race, class, gender,
               sexuality, disability, or other forms of difference are making to the digital
               humanities – or risk reaffirming the power of Western academic hegemony. Moreover, we
               must develop intersectional practices for the digital humanities that account for
               difference from the ground up, integrating theory and method. At the juncture of the
               two, we must attend to discourses and histories of race and racialization,
               complexities of gender, complications of class, the operations of sexuality, and
               their intersections. In doing so, we can create projects that engage, rather than
               rebuff, difference. 
         

            Conclusion
            The affordances of the digital humanities are often thought to reside in its ethos of
               building and hacking, in the pursuit of knowledge that emerge from the act of making.
               As this survey of theoretical and project-based traces of intersectionality within
               digital humanities proposes, cultural critique is perhaps misunderstood by its
               detractors in the field as an attempt to force a theoretical rubric onto digital
               humanities or to rehearse a hack vs. yack binary. Rather, theoretical
               moves are implicit within digital humanities projects and excavating them is
               necessary to ensuring intellectual diversity. We have the opportunity to build a more
               inclusive field, new methodologies, and new forms of analysis. 
            Why an intersectional approach? As Kathy Davis suggests, intersectionality is not a
                  normative straitjacket or
               predetermined method of feminist analysis .
               Drawing on Patricia Hill Collins’s observation that intersectionality is often taken
               as pre-defined and ignores convergence and contradiction within intersectional
               scholarship, Anna Carastathis argues that intersectionality must be viewed as a
               provisional concept that 
                  anticipates, rather than arrives
                     at, the normative or theoretical goals often imputed to it
                  
               . The axes of difference within intersectionality are dynamic and do not
               operate in predictable ways; rather, they are fluid and constructed, the power
               valances in each in flux. Intersectionality is not a prescriptive method because
               there isn’t one particular way of doing intersectionality. Rather,
               intersectional digital humanities asks us to begin with the specificities of a data
               set, identify the layers of difference that intersect within it, and use that
               knowledge as a basis for project design. 
            The fluidity of intersectionality is a natural fit for the flexibility that digital
               humanities connotes. In its recent popularity, Patrik Svensson suggests, digital
               humanities has seen 
                  a higher degree of heterogeneity and
                     inclusion of other epistemic traditions
                  
               . He positions such growth in broad ways, suggesting we might view information
               technology as 
                  a tool, an object of study, an
                     exploratory laboratory, an expressive medium, and an activist venue
                  
               . Svensson proposes that a big-tent digital humanities would encompass this proliferation of modes
                  . As an alternative to the tent, however, Svensson
               proposes a model of digital humanities that is a meeting place, innovation hub, and trading zone
               to emphasize 
                  commitment to interdisciplinary work
                     and deep collaboration
                  
               . The affordance of such a model is a 
                  fractioned (not homogeneous)
                     collaborative (not coerced) trading zone and a meeting space that supports
                     deeply collaborative work, individual expression, unexpected connections, and
                     synergetic power
                  
               . To appreciate such benefits, Svensson argues, the digital humanities 
                  needs to support and allow multiple
                     modes of engagement between the humanities and the digital...[to] maximize
                     points of interaction, tackle large research and methodology challenges, and
                     facilitate deep integration between thinking and making
                  
               . These are the spaces where complex negotiations between theory and method are
               made possible. They require difficult thinking, which Mark
               Sample defines as 
                  imagining the world from multiple
                     perspectives and wrestling with conflicting evidence about the world
                  
               . As Sample proposes, difficult thinking does not seek easy reconcilement for
               conflicting ideas but 
                  faces these ambiguities head-on and even
                     preserves them
                  
               . Intersectionality, in its emphasis on anti-essentialism and possibilities of
               accounting for competing axes of difference in multiple permutations, makes difficult
               thinking possible and perhaps even brings Svensson’s vision of digital humanities to
               fruition. 
            Working at the intersections of digital humanities and intersectionality, we can
               intervene in the false dichotomy between digital humanities and cultural critique.
               For, as Bianco reminds, 
                  We are not required to choose between
                     the philosophical, critical, cultural, and computational; we are
                     required to integrate and to experiment
                  
               . Existing digital humanities projects provide examples of how, in small and
               large ways, theory and method can be combined to address recurring questions of the
               role of race, class, gender, ability, sexuality, nationality, and other categories of
               difference within the field. These phenomena subtend the development and production
               of digital humanities projects but they may not be evident. Therefore, it is
               incumbent on us, as digital humanities practitioners, to make them legible, to move
               them beyond the margins. To suggest we embrace intersectionality as a critical
               approach for the digital humanities is not to impose a static, single model of
               analysis. Rather, it opens space to engage with the variety of ways difference
               informs our work. There is no single way of being intersectional
               – instead, intersectionality privileges exploration and innovation in feminist
               praxis. And aren’t exploration and innovation at the very heart of digital
               humanities?
         

            Acknowledgments
            I gratefully acknowledge the advice of Jacqueline Wernimont and three anonymous
                  DHQ reviewers whose extensive, generous comments were
               indispensable to this article. I am also grateful for the valuable feedback on parts
               of this article presented at the Harriet Tubman Institute at York University and the
               Kelly Writers House at the University of Pennsylvania. 
         
