Title:  The Shock of the Familiar: Three Timelines about Gender and
               Technology in the Library
Volume:  009
Issue:  2
Date:  2 September 2015
Abstract:  
            Widespread ideals about libraries are in conflict with deep-rooted gender-based
               inequities within the library and gendered perceptions of libraries and librarians by
               the larger public. These contradictions are particularly striking when we look at
               gender in conjunction with information technologies that help to structure work-roles
               in the library, especially as these change. This article uses conventional and
                  fictional timelines to survey the historical junctures of
               gender and technology in the library and to speculate about the future of the
               academic library, with particular attention to deployments of the digital humanities
               in the library and its potential for disrupting these long-standing gender
               patterns.
         
Full Body Text: 
 As an institution that is defined by information technologies and as a workplace where
            women have been in the majority for over a century, the library offers a unique
            perspective from which to view the evolving relations of gender and technology. My
               focus here is on the library as a generalized entity, insofar as
               it is possible to speak of it as an institution with a cohesive history and
               homogeneous objectives, practices, and conflicts. This approach is not uncommon in
               historical treatments. See, for example, ; ; ; ;
                  ; . Widespread
            ideals about libraries as essential to the functioning
               of a democratic society...the great symbols of the freedom of the mind are in
            conflict with deep-rooted gender-based inequities within the library and gendered
            perceptions of libraries and librarians by the larger public — and can only be enacted
            through technologies that are now in flux, like books, catalogs, databases, and the
            internet. Franklin Delano Roosevelt, qtd. in ALA Democracy. In similar terms, the first annual report of the Boston Public
               Library stated that, ...under political, social and religious institutions like ours, it is of
                  paramount importance that the means of general information should be so diffused
                  that the largest number of persons should be induced to read and understand
                  questions going down to the very foundations of social order, which are constantly
                  presenting themselves, and which we, as a people, are constantly required to
                  decide...; public libraries — as opposed to private, social, or commercial
               libraries — are necessary in
                  order to diffuse through our society that knowledge without which we have no right
                  to hope, that the condition of those who are to come after us will be as happy and
                  prosperous as our own
               . This conception of libraries as vital
               democratic institutions remains very current. Nancy Kranich, the 2000-01 President of
               the ALA, made Libraries: The Cornerstones of Democracy a
               Presidential initiative, and published Libraries and Democracy:
                  The Cornerstones of Liberty
               . Additional representative works limning this role are
                  , , and . In other words, library ideals are stressed along
            gender lines and in terms of technological practices. This juncture, where gender and
            technology meet in the library, thus deserves our particular attention, not only for
            feminist analyses of technology and technological culture, but for ongoing debates about
            the identity of the library in a period of technology-driven transformation. The
               library’s identity in the digital age has become a public question frequently
               addressed in the mass media — in articles and blog posts about book-less
                  libraries and the Digital Public Library of America, for example — as
               well as a widely-debated professional question for librarians. The first conversation
               is frequently cast as a question of future development; see, for example, , , ,
                  , and . As an index of
               the activity of the latter discourse: the terms library 2.0 or
                  web 2.0 have been referenced in over 50 reviews and articles
               in just one journal, the international quarterly Journal of
                  Librarianship and Information Science, since they first appeared in
               September 2007. See, for example, , , , ,
               and .
         
This juncture is equally important to the identity of the digital humanities, given the
            library’s complex and symbiotic relationship to the digital humanities. Practically
            speaking, the library, especially the academic library, is the space where many
            institutional embodiments of the digital humanities are staged, in digital humanities
            programs or centers that are located within the library or congruent to it; this means
            that many practitioners of the digital humanities work in libraries or in units that
            rely on libraries. Indeed, the digital humanities center in/adjacent to the library has
            emerged as a key paradigm not only for the implementation of the digital humanities but
            also for library responses to the changing information environment. See, for
               example, the list of digital humanities centers maintained by the European
               Association for Digital Humanities (EADH) and the directory maintained by centerNet
               (centerNet), showing that many centers are located in libraries — although this
               location or relationship is not always explicit. As evidence of librarians’
               perceptions of DH in the library, see  and . The library serves symbolically as the founding genius
            loci of the digital humanities, as an inter-disciplinary laboratory and repository — but
            it is also perceived as an agent of the old humanities, structured
            by traditional disciplinary distinctions, one-way communication systems, slow
            technology, and fixed professional identities. The library is responsible for some of
            the confusion about the very definition of the digital humanities, as the host of many
            of the digital tools, digitized resources, digitization programs, and digitization
            specialists that make the digital humanities possible, but are not in and of themselves
            expressions of the digital humanities...except for when they are. Finally, library
            ideals — the library as guardian of free speech, information safe-haven, repository of
            cultural memory, and nursery of self-determination, dedicated to serving community needs
            — engage values that are also associated with the digital humanities, whose
            practitioners often claim commitments to public discourse, open access, and service to a
            broadly defined interdisciplinary community. Because of this operational interdependency
            and congruency of principles, questions about gender and technology in the library
            matter to the digital humanities and vice versa — and gain new urgency when we imagine a
            future in which technological change continues to influence both libraries and the
            digital humanities.
One way to think our way into these connected futures is to survey their histories for
            predictive patterns. The timeline, a visual representation of chronological time, offers
            a means of discerning such patterns by sequencing thematically connected but temporally
            distant moments within particular stretches of history. The timeline’s signature
            rhetorical elements — the indicative presentation of a single date and fact, multiplied
            and ordered in a supposedly unassailable progression — implicitly assert its
            completeness and accuracy, creating the illusion of a record so fully mastered it can be
            delineated in a few strokes, like a connect-the-dots picture, and freed from the usual
            proof obligations, such as footnotes. While the selectivity, linearity, and compression
            of the timeline can reify the historical status quo, resulting, for example, in a traditional and parochial display of Eurocentrism
               regarding the history of science and technology, the timeline can also be a
            tool of revision: by identifying and linking isolated bits of data within a mass of
            accumulated historical phenomena, timelines can help us see and tell new stories . Timelines can even serve as interpretationally
               flexible devices for feeling our way towards an understanding of events
            that are not yet finished. This phrase is derived from interpretively flexible, in . It is in the spirit of this latter conception of a
            timeline’s utility that I offer the three timelines below. The timelines here
               presented are dominated by North American and European histories, and are especially
               focused on librarianship in the U.S. context. They are concerned with gender more
               than with race, class, sexuality, or other vectors of inequality in the library,
               which would be necessary for a comprehensive consideration of the library as a
               workplace and ideal. Finally, I elide most of the distinctions that are observed
               within librarianship between public and academic institutions — not to mention school
               and special libraries — for two practical reasons. First, because the general idea of
               the library is familiar and widespread, it is in this form that library ideals are
               most often articulated. Secondly, the general idea of the library as it developed
               over time helps us see that gender troubles, especially in relation to technology,
               are systemic and persistent, even as specific stress points have shifted. 
         
 Timeline I — not a conventional timeline at all — sets up the symbolic landscape: how
            library ideals function within a civilization’s self-description, as they appear in one
            representative sci-fi future. In this biased bullet-point recap of a particular
            speculative fiction, library ideals that come into view as mere background to the plot
            can be seen as significant vehicles of gender patterning with respect to technology.
            This timeline-that-is-not-one thus also helps illustrate the narrative losses and gains
            of the timeline as a device.
Timeline II, organized into three chronological periods, reviews selected events in
            library history since the mid-nineteenth century. Each set of events is brought together
            by a focus on the library identity that has been created by historically specific
            imbrications of gender and technology. While I make this focus more legible at the end
            of each set and then reduce the whole chronological stretch into a few key points, the
            events themselves may seem to exceed the interpretation I extract from them — as indeed
            they should. I hope that readers will feel free to skim, skip, or dip more deeply into
            events, or identify missing events, to corroborate or question my historical deductions. 
Timeline III returns to the mode of speculative fiction: how might different
            configurations of gender and technology play out in the library of the future? Three
            possibilities for the academic library are described — three versions of the future,
            circa 2030 — each with a title that again names a particular library identity. For each,
            I have attempted to draw out what particular library commitments might mean for gender
            roles within the library, for the digital humanities, and for disciplines more
            generally. Here again the governing structure is less a conventional timeline than a
               time outline, each a model of an idea about the future. Multiple
            options again offer an invitation to the reader: to contest or embellish these models,
            propose others, or refigure their gender and disciplinary implications. 
 All of these timelines employ to a degree the genre’s indicative mood and fantasy of
            comprehensiveness, but I have attempted to frustrate these properties in several ways:
            by adding commentary and interpretation; by including historical events that do not
            exactly adhere to the interpretive scaffolding I have put in place, and that therefore
            gesture to other possible stories; and of course by turning the instrument of the
            timeline towards chronologies that are incompatible with its factual arrays, ie,
            fictions and suppositions.I provide citations where specific quotations appear in
               timeline events, but in general, in keeping with the conventions of timeline
               presentation, I do not. Most importantly, because we are still immersed in the
            sequences they chart, these timelines cannot be conclusive — in the case of the final
            three possibilities, we have not even reached the temporal horizon they depict. They are
            necessarily shaped by weighted interpretations of history and current concerns; they
            inevitably are or will be wrong, according to the criteria of a
            later analysis.What is or may prove to be wrong: the absence of intersectional
               vectors like race, class, and sexuality; important events I have overlooked; my
               incomplete grasp of present concerns; events that contradict the European and North
               American biases inherent in my selection of events; different ways to combine events
               into descriptions of the longue durée of the library; and of course, turns that we
               have not yet taken, which will only become visible in the future. I take heart from
               Kathleen Fitzpatrick’s recent meditation on critical temporality .  To compound the inaccuracy by setting these
            timelines within the fixed frame of a traditional argument seems to me both unwise and,
            ultimately, antithetical to their more open-ended purpose: to use the past to refocus
            our view of the present and our possibilities for the future. So, in place of a thesis
            statement, I offer the guiding questions below — and, at the very end, a proposal for a
            possible, partial remedy for the gender fractures in library ideals, and their
            disciplinary and technological repercussions. My aim is not to suggest a single answer,
            but to prompt a more explicit conversation about the relationship between the library
            and the digital humanities in terms of gender and technology. 
First, the questions that have shaped this selection of timeline events. Where do gender
            stresses in libraries come from, how have they shifted, and in what forms do they
            persist — despite decades of feminist attention? What is the history of technology in
            the library, especially those technologies that are indigenous to the library and those
            in the deep background of digital poesis? Does the history of gender in the library look
            different when we examine it in tandem with the history of technology? Does the future?
            What does the rise of the digital humanities in the twenty-first century augur for
            libraries in terms of these long-standing gender stresses? In short, why do we who work
            in libraries — which have been, historically, on the front lines of the shock
               of the new when it comes to information technology — still experience
               the shock of the familiar when it comes to gender? 

            Timeline I: Back to the Present, 2077 to 2013
            
               
                  March 14, 2077. It is sixty years after a nuclear war with a
                  race of aliens called Scavs. Earth is a wasteland.
                Technician Jack Harper is two weeks from the end of his five-year mission,
                  monitoring and repairing the drones that defend the coastal water rigs that
                  deliver fusion energy to the human colony on Saturn’s moon Titan, established
                  after Earth became uninhabitable.
            

            
               Jack Harper repairs a drone with chewing gum. 
               
            
            
               The other member of the tiny mop-up team of two is
                  Victoria, Jack’s communications liaison and girlfriend. They live in a tower high
                  above the planet surface. While Jack visits the surface every day to work on
                  drones, Victoria stays in the tower to coordinate the directives conveyed by their
                  commander from the Tet, a space station. 
            
            
               Victoria in the Tower. 
               
            
            
                On this day, Jack is eager to complete the day’s patrol. But Earth is a
                  dangerous place. Jack has to fend off guerrilla Scavs who attack him and his
                  drones while he navigates a landscape rife with peril. The blue planet is a
                  desert; a radioactive zone impedes travel; cities are buried in sand from the
                  massive earthquakes and floods that restructured the terrain after the Scavs blew
                  apart the moon.
                Jack tracks a missing drone to a sinkhole and lowers himself in after it,
                  where he lands inside the damaged but still recognizable Rose Reading Room of the
                  New York Public Library.
            
            
               New York Public Library Reading Room. 
               
            
            
                Jack’s visit to the library is cut short by a crisis, as you might expect, but
                  he does manage to borrow a book on his way out: Thomas Babington Macaulay’s Lays of Ancient Rome, a series of poems about heroic
                  Roman feats. (In later scenes, we see that Jack’s copy, a leather-bound volume
                  with raised headbands and gilt decoration, looks a lot like the first edition of
                  1842.)
            
            
               Jack Harper finds Macaulay’s Lays of Ancient Rome.
                     
               
            
            
               Back at the tower, Jack is drawn to one particular verse: And how can man die better / Than facing fearful odds, / For the
                     ashes of his fathers, / And the temples of his gods
                     (XXVII).Macaulay wrote the lays when he was serving on the
                     Governor-General's Council in India in the 1830s; he was afterwards Secretary
                     of War under Whig Prime Minister William Lamb. There is an imperialist and
                     anti-imperialist tension in Oblivion that is
                     beyond my scope here. But it is interesting that the critique of a
                     world-dominating, technocratic power that eventually emerges in the film is
                     symbolically anchored by this book that justifies imperial ambition through
                     recourse to the historical model of Rome. 
               
               The next day. Jack brings The
                     Lays to his hand-built secret hide-out by a lake in a luscious green
                  canyon far from the tower, where it joins a larger collection of salvaged media
                  and technologies: LPs, a turntable, lots of other books.
            
            
               Jack’s hide-out. 
               
            
            
               In the end. The hide-out — a repository of the past out of
                  which Jack rewrites his present — becomes the origin for a new future for Earth:
                  in the film’s final scenes, it is where Jack’s daughter is born and where a human
                  resistance to a controlling artificial intelligence gathers force.
            
             What is the New York Public Library doing in the sci-fi future of Oblivion, a 2013 action-movie vehicle for Tom Cruise? It is
               there to flaunt its symbolic capital as a metaphor for civilization and,
               specifically, civilization’s continuation over time. Many of the library’s iconic
               features are present in the set: stone arches (carved with the words New York Public Library, just barely legible); the long
               tables and lamps of the reading room; a wooden book cart; a large globe; shelves;
                  books.Viewers may not know the Rose Reading Room by name, but are sure to
                  recognize the general setting from the Reading Room’s iconic presence in popular
                  culture — for example, in digital news photo-features like Temples of books: The world’s most beautiful libraries on the BBC
                  website . While Jack’s hide-out has all the
               accoutrements of a beloved personal library, at the other end of the public-private
               spectrum, the two spaces are connected by the books themselves — these are the true
                  temples for the ashes of the fathers.
               Oblivion incorporates many of the preoccupations of
               mainstream science fiction: a deep ambivalence about technological change, for one
               thing — excitement about its promises coupled with fears about its potential effects;
               a tenacious attachment to traditional gender roles, for another. Jack’s and
               Victoria’s respective relationships to the technologies of the mission are
               illustrative. Jack descends every day from the tower to the surface, which he reaches
               via the gyroscopic spaceship that he flies with aplomb; he fixes drones with chewing
               gum and gins up pre-war record players in his secret lake house. In contrast, as
               communications officer, Victoria ascends every day to the top of their Jetson-style
               quarters — a domestic pedestal far removed from the contradictions of the surface.
               Victoria dresses more like a sexy secretary à la Mad Men fantasy than a military
               staffer; in her tight, pale skirts and silver shoes, with a delicate radio
               transmitter on one ear, she sits at her hi-tech podium and moves icons around on its
               many screens, mediating between Jack and mission control, uploading and downloading
               data, watching his activities through grainy video feeds, and losing contact with him
               when he goes rogue. Like most films of its ilk, Oblivion
               assures us that the future, with respect to the ways gender animates technology, will
               look a lot like the present: Jack hacks; Victoria yacks.
            One key exception to this rule is signaled by the library.The return of Julia,
                  Jack’s wife from the pre-war era, potentially constitutes another disruption of
                  the separate gender spheres mapped out by Jack and Victoria: Julia awakens Jack’s
                  personal memories and the film’s revolutionary plot. But Julia is ultimately
                  portrayed as Jack’s sidekick. Her main independent contribution to the future, as
                  the mother of Jack’s child, places her firmly within the film’s conventional
                  gender schema. It is Jack who is interested in yacking with the past
               through old technologies, who creates his own library of rescued books and LPs so he
               might mine them for a connection to history and a better future. It would even be
               possible to argue that Jack himself represents a kind of human library, an archive of
               personal memories that are preserved (as we eventually learn) through many iterations
               of Jack clone bodies. As for the scene set in the ruins of the NYPL, it is important
               that Oblivion offers clues for recognizing the actual
               building, for it is a structure that symbolizes two of the library’s most admired
               missions: it is a democratic institution that is also a precinct of scholarship.
               Given its age — the building was designed in 1895 and opened in 1911 — it serves
               perfectly as the emblem of library ideals that were articulated in the late
               nineteenth century, through the public library movement and the professionalization
               of librarianship, and have come to define the library as an
               institution. But all of the library scenes in Oblivion —
               the NYPL, Jack’s hide-out, and a collection of books and works of art maintained by
               the Scavs — express enduring and cherished conceptions of the library as a storehouse
               of human knowledge and achievement, and by extension, of democratic principles. The
               library, then, is a storehouse not just of cultural matériel but of cultural memory
               itself, and thereby its promise of continuation — it links a civilization’s past and
               present to its future. These are functions the film suggests are timeless, sacred,
               and worth dying for.It may be hard to see, in the thumbnail sketch of the film
                  I have provided, how the library becomes a vehicle for self-sacrifice. Spoiler
                  alert: the Scavs turn out to be human survivors of the war who inhabit an
                  underground bunker filled with the remnants of (mostly American) material culture,
                  which they have rescued and preserved: the Liberty Bell, rugs, paintings, more
                  books; Andrew Wyeth’s Christina’s World makes a cameo
                  appearance. This post-apocalyptic proto-civilization, led by Beech, portrayed by
                  Morgan Freeman, becomes the pseudo-protagonist of the film by virtue of its
                  cultural heritage stewardship. Artistic and historical artifacts represent the
                  values it is dedicated to defending when it engages in lethal conflict with the
                     Tet, the non-human intelligence controlling Earth. Jack
                  and Beech destroy the Tet by activating a nuclear bomb inside it, thus
                  annihilating themselves but also setting into motion the regeneration of
                  civilization through Jack.
            In keeping with its reiteration of time-honored library ideals, Oblivion also replicates the gender stresses that are, in fact, as
               intrinsic to the library’s actual operations as the library mythos is to the values
               it protects. These stresses, originating in patriarchal systems that regulated
               women’s legal rights, work, education, and self-determination, took on forms specific
               to the library with the advent of the public library movement, when the articulation
               of modern library ethics and a related practical expansion opened up librarianship to
               women. That shift led in turn to feminized definitions of library work and public
               perceptions of the library, which secured the library’s inferior and precarious status.. Not only does the film recreate for
               the future the present’s yack/hack technological gender divide, but its
               representation of the library as a masculine preserve — the NYPL a stage for Jack’s
               action, his private hide-out a cultural refuge — echoes long-standing anxieties about
               librarianship’s gender, and reiterates moves made throughout the twentieth century to
               rescue it from the damaging effects of a feminized professional identity. 
         

            Timeline II: Some Scenes from History, 1841 to 2014
            
                Part 1: The Professional
               
                  1841. Anthony Panizzi, a sub-librarian at the British
                     Museum, develops Ninety-One Cataloguing Rules,
                     which provide the foundation for succeeding cataloguing rules and digital
                     cataloguing elements. 
                  1848. William Frederick Poole, an undergraduate,
                     publishes his first general index to periodical literature. A new edition
                     supported by the American Library Association (ALA) is published in six volumes
                     between 1882 and 1908; with the release of the final volume, the index provides
                     article level indexing by subject matter to 482,000 articles and 378,000
                     subjects in 12,241 volumes of 479 British and American periodicals from 1802 to
                     1906.
               
               
                   William Frederick Poole, from the Introduction to An
                        Alphabetical Index to Subjects Treated in the Reviews and Other Periodicals,
                        To Which No Indexes Have Been Published.
                     
                  
               
               
                  1852.
                     The first woman clerk is hired at the Boston
                        Public Library; by 1878 fully two-thirds of the library workers there are
                        female. In 1910, 78.5 per cent of library workers in the United
                        States are 8 women, the third most feminized
                     profession after teaching and nursing. By 1920, 90 per cent of librarians are
                     women, and librarianship 
                        employs a larger percentage of
                           women than either social work or teaching
                        
                     . 
                  1853. The head of the Boston Athenaeum describes his
                     card catalog at a library conference. Versions of card cataloging date back to
                     1789, but it does not become widely adopted until the 1860s, overtaking other
                     cataloging systems like the Rudolph Continuous Indexer.
               
               
                  A 12-tray Library Bureau card catalog belonging to Norman D. Stevens, circa
                     1903. Image via 
                  
               
               
                  
                     1876. The American Library Association (ALA) is founded at
                     the centennial celebration in Philadelphia; the society endorses two standard
                     sizes of catalog cards. Melvil Dewey, who helped launch the organization, also
                     unveils his Dewey Decimal System of classification (DDC). By 1927, over 90 per
                     cent of American public libraries employ the Dewey Decimal System. 
                  1879. At the annual meeting of the ALA, William
                     Frederick Poole makes recommendations for the modern library building:
                     book-stacks arranged by classification, work-space divided by function.
                  1881. Melvil Dewey incorporates the Library Bureau, a
                     business supplying library fixtures, furniture
                        and fittings.
                  
               
               
                  A Library Bureau postcard showing the company’s main building in Ilion, New
                     York, circa 1911. Image via 
                  
               
               
                  1887. The School of Library Economy is established at
                     Columbia University. Library handwriting becomes a part of
                     its curriculum, and the student rule book describes best practices for a fast,
                     legible hand to be used in writing out catalog cards. Typewriters gradually
                     replace manuscript as standard library equipment in the early twentieth
                     century. 
                  1892. The motto for the ALA is adopted: “The best
                     reading, for the largest number, at the least cost” .
                  1893. A report issued by the U.S. Bureau of Education
                     on the number of volumes in major libraries reveals that quantity in many
                     libraries has doubled or even quadrupled since 1876.
                  1893. A survey reveals that out of 146 public
                     libraries, 75 percent have an age limit barring children below the age of 12,
                     or in some cases 16. Within the next decade, children’s services are seen as an
                     important part of the public library mission and are largely administered by
                     women. 
                  1895. The International Institute of Bibliography
                     (originally Institut International de Bibliographie) is established in
                     Brussels.
                  1897. Herbert Putnam invents Library of Congress
                     classification, which offers more categories and sub-categories than the Dewey
                     Decimal System. Like the DDC, it is theoretically a universal
                        classification system to cover all subjects, but is essentially
                     descriptive — that is, it is an inventory system for actual books. It therefore
                     lacks epistemological capacity. 
               
               
                   George Herbert Putnam, Librarian of Congress from 1899 to 1939.
                     Photographer unknown. Image via 
                  
               
               
                  1899. The main theme of the International Council of
                     Women’s congress is Women in the Professions. It
                     is the first international women’s meeting to feature a session on
                     librarianship as a career. Technical professions are not so welcoming: one
                     French delegate remarks, 
                        It is not forbidden for a woman to
                           be an engineer, but because there are no courses available to prepare her
                           for this goal, it is absolutely the same as if this profession was barred
                           to her
                        
                     .
                  1899. A Harvard University professor notes the chief
                     metaphors used to describe a university library — the laboratory of the Humanities,
                     the heart of the
                        university,
                     the brain of the academic
                        body...no longer a mere storehouse of books, but a great workshop —
                     in the course of complaining about an inadequate library building. Also in use
                     are the phrases the center of
                        the university and storehouse of knowledge
                     . 
                  About 1900. The Newark circulation system is invented.
                     Borrowers are issued library cards with a unique registration number. Each book
                     in a library’s collection is equipped with a pocket holding a standardized book
                     card. When a book is checked out, the library attendant records on the book
                     card the borrower’s registration number and loan period; the card is then filed
                     by call number under each due date. This system is widely adopted, prevailing
                     over older ledger book-keeping systems and indicator
                     systems.
                  1904. The floor space occupied by card catalogs is
                     identified as a serious problem for library architecture.
                  1908. The President of Harvard University gives a
                     series of lectures about the problems of storing rapidly expanding book
                     collections.
                  1911. Theresa West Elmendorf, the first female
                     president of the ALA, takes office.
                  1912. Librarians receive less pay than teachers and
                     work longer hours. By the 1920s, as more employment opportunities for
                     middle-class women open up, a vicious cycle is
                     established: library work does
                        not attract men, and salaries remain low because they are paid to
                        women
                     .
               
               
                  Interior of Broadhead Public Library, 1912. (Wisconsin Historical Society,
                     University of Wisconsin Digital Collections, Image 63779) 
                  
               
               
                  1923. C. C. Williamson writes a report for the Carnegie
                     Corporation called Training for Library Service,
                     which calls for more standardized, academically rigorous, and professional
                     librarian education: programs should be integrated into universities, clerical
                     studies should be eliminated, and a national certification board should be
                     created. 
               
               In the latter half of the nineteenth century and the first decades of the
                  twentieth century, the American librarian became a
                     professional, part of a 
                     national movement towards
                        occupational cohesion
                     
                  . Professionalization transformed librarianship from a job variously
                  undertaken by clerks, amateurs, and scholars into a specialized work-role. Key to
                  this shift was the development of a library association, training programs, and a
                  classification science. In a parallel move, attitudes about
                  library architecture turned away from the alcoves and galleries of older libraries
                  towards large buildings spatially organized by distinct library functions —
                  reference, cataloging, business departments — and by the classification of
                  books.
               Late nineteenth-century professionalization helped to advance a vigorous
                     masculine culture of enterprise, in opposition to
                     feminine genteel culture. This conflict had special
                  consequences for librarianship. Women in the library work force were perceived as
                  important custodians of morality and providers of service who could enhance the
                  credibility of the new public library movement, especially as agents of the
                  civilizing influences of reading; at the same time, by
                     feminizing the profession, they undermined the library’s
                  contribution to masculine projects such as serious
                  scholarship, civic engagement, science, and business. By the early twentieth
                  century, women dominated the work force in public libraries and librarianship’s
                  low pay and low status were secured.
               The professionalization of librarianship in these years coincided with an
                  unprecedented expansion of print culture. The industrialization of print
                  technology that began in the early nineteenth century led, by century’s end, to
                  new techniques of mass production and complex trade networks. Within these
                  networks, librarians had to invent new tools and systems for selecting, ingesting,
                  storing, organizing, and circulating books and periodicals, as both the quantity
                  of material and patron traffic increased. The need for automation thus became
                  apparent.
            

            
               Part 2: The Librarian
               
                  1926. The ALA publishes a two-year survey of adult
                     education programs in public libraries, recommending that the public library should lay most stress upon service
                        to the individual, and should concentrate its attention upon serving the
                        adult education programs of other groups rather than sponsoring
                           library's own programs
                     . Reader’s advisory
                     bureaus, begun in the late nineteenth century, grow into full-fledged public
                     services: librarians make suggestions and help patrons find particular
                     materials. Numerous studies thereafter track the numbers of patrons requesting
                     help and their requests.
                  1928. A graduate library school is established at the
                     University of Chicago with a million-dollar grant from the Carnegie
                     Corporation. The program offers the first Ph.D. in library science and is meant
                     to attract male students, but most practicing librarians believe that research
                     is less important than training for librarians. Early faculty members are men
                     with advanced degrees, not practicing librarians. The first person to earn the
                     Ph.D. is Eleanor Upton in 1930.
               
               
                   Eleanor Upton, seated in center, dressed as Agamemnon for a play, June
                     1899. (The Upton Family Papers, 1853-1937, Sophia Smith Collection, Smith
                     College)
                  
               
               
                  1931. The Gaylord book charging machine is invented,
                     automating the Newark book charging procedure. A punch-card double charging
                     system is adopted at the University of Texas in 1936. Photo-charging is
                     introduced at the Gary Public Library in 1940.
                  1933. Pierce Butler publishes An
                        Introduction to Library Science, which introduces the term
                        library science and advocates for a philosophy of librarianship as a
                     quantitative, social scientific approach to practical problem-solving .
                  1935. Newspaper preservation on microfilm begins with
                     the filming of The New York Times by Kodak.
                     University Microfilms International (UMI) is founded in 1938; it starts a
                     dissertation publishing program the following year and a newspaper preservation
                     program in 1940.
               
               
                  Microfilm reader in an issue of Popular
                        Mechanics, 1948. Image via 
                  
               
               
                  1938. The American Documentation Institution is created
                     to deal with the challenges that non-book and non-periodical materials present
                     to bibliographic control.
                  1943. The young adult novel A Tree
                        Grows in Brooklyn is published, about a girl who wants to be a
                     writer; its portrayal of early twentieth-century Williamsburg includes a
                     callous lady librarian .
                  1944.
                     The Survey Report on the Army Medical Library
                     recommends a classification system for medical information, modeled on the
                     Library of Congress system. It is organized by physiological system, regions of
                     the body, and related specialty or specialties . 
                  1944. In The Scholar and the
                        Future of the Research Library, Fremont Rider predicts that library
                     holdings will double every decade or two, outpacing storage .
                  1946. In Frank Capra’s It’s A
                        Wonderful Life, Jimmy Stewart’s character understands that his life
                     has value when he learns what would have happened to his wife without him:
                        She’s an old maid! She never
                        married!...She’s just about to close up the library!
                     .
                  1950. The general report of the Public Library Inquiry
                     of the Social Sciences Research Council concludes that the public library fails
                     as an agent of mass communication.
                  1951. The 38 branch catalogs of the King County Public
                     Library are published in tabulating-machine format and updated every six weeks,
                     in order to facilitate exchange with the other branches. 
               
               
                  IBM Junior Rolling Total Tabulator, 1951. Image via 
                  
               
               
                  1952. The inaugural issue of Library Trends is published, to answer a need for synthesis and interpretation of
                     library research and developments and to provide a well-rounded view of the state of the
                        progress of different areas of librarianship .
                  1955. William J. Barrow writes Manuscripts and Documents: Their Deterioration and Restoration.
                     Although his studies on acidic paper and document repair began in the 1930s,
                     this work does not reach a wide audience until the 1950s and ’60s .
               
               
                  William J. Barrow in his laboratory conducting tests on the folding
                     endurance of paper, from the Council on Library Resources’ Fourth Annual
                     Report, 1960. 
                  
               
               
                  
                     1956-57. The Adult Services Division and Reference
                     Services Division of the ALA are created, part of a restructuring of the
                     organization that emphasizes type of
                        library and type of
                        activity divisions, following a report by a management consulting
                     firm — a sign that services are increasingly
                     important.
                  1957. The musical The Music
                        Man opens on Broadway, featuring Marian the Librarian, and is
                     adapted into a film in 1962 
                     .
                  1957. The film Desk Set is
                     released, about the romance between the reference librarian at a broadcasting
                     company, played by Katherine Hepburn, and an efficiency
                        expert, Spencer Tracy. Tracy’s character uses an
                        electronic brain to measure productivity at the library
                        .
                  1958. National Library Week is inaugurated; the first
                     slogan is Wake Up and Read!
               
               
                  National Library Week poster, 1959. Image via 
                  
               
               
                  1967. The Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules (AACR) are
                     first published, covering the description of,
                        and the provision of access points for, all library materials commonly
                        collected at the present time (AACR2).
               
               The mid-twentieth century could be called the golden age of the
                     librarian — the bookish spinster as a recognizable pop culture
                  figure. In contrast to the prevailing image of the generic shush
                     lady, part clerk, part bluestocking, however, librarianship became
                  more specialized and systematic as libraries had to adapt to changes in the
                  knowledge economy and escalating demands for services. As research with an
                  emphasis on empirical detail assumed a central role in academia, university
                  library collections expanded and use intensified. New management problems arose
                  from the growth not only in the number but of types of items in libraries. And the
                  aging of library materials led to the recognition of the need for conservation and
                  preservation programs, adding to the obligations of good stewardship.
               The administrative challenges of providing ongoing access to an increasingly
                  complex and sizeable set of print materials affected classification, cataloging,
                  circulation, and preservation methods. In these arenas, new protocols developed
                  from bureaucratic innovation and experimental competition: different methods and
                  tools were tried out over time, until a particular method or tool became dominant.
                  Librarians studied, reported on, and debated these practices in new professional
                  journals and library groups, which served as fora for developing consensus.
                  Automated and mechanized processes were embraced to save time, money, and
                  labor.
               This approach to information management — a problem-identifying and
                  problem-solving process which favored technical, pragmatic, and standardizing
                  solutions — also influenced the approach librarians took to public service.
                  Service to library patrons gained momentum through the adult education movement,
                  but this also created distinctions: librarians would not serve as teachers in
                  their own right. Rather, as readers’ advisor became a common
                  duty central to librarianship, readers’ and reference services were codified
                  through the development of definitions, guidelines, and standards.
               Librarianship was still tied to the ideals of self-improvement and public
                  education that motivated the public library movement of the late nineteenth
                  century, but library leaders wanted to modernize the work force by defining a
                  distinct area of library expertise and building up professional credentials. This
                  set of pressures led to a turn away from the older idea of the librarian’s
                  educational role and towards an identity that prioritized access to information
                  and the librarian as a service provider.
            

            
               Part 3: The Information Specialist
               
                  1962. At the Seattle World’s Fair, the ALA puts on a
                        Library 21 exhibit featuring a Sperry-Rand
                     Univac Solid State 90 computer that answers ready
                        reference questions to visitors by providing instant, annotated
                     bibliographies. The 84 librarians staffing the exhibit are largely unpaid,
                     making the value of human
                        labor uncertain .
               
               
                   Univac computer, American Library Association exhibit, Century 21
                     Exposition, 1962. (University of Washington Libraries Digital Collections Image
                     SEA2419)
                  
               
               
                  1963. The Council on Library Resources gives the
                     Library of Congress a grant to study the feasibility of automated library
                     systems; a pilot project is underway by 1966, and a MARC operational system is
                     launched in 1969. The author of MARC (Machine Readable Cataloging) is Henriette
                     Davidson Avram.
               
               
                  Henriette Avram presents a roll of magnetic tape holding over 9,000
                     bibliographic records to Richard Coward of the British National Bibliography,
                     1967. 
                  
               
               
                  1966. In response to a petition drive, the Information
                     Science and Automation Division of the ALA is established. The issue of how to
                     become a part of ALA is complicated
                        by the fact that automation crossed over various organizational lines...
                        Acquisitions, serials control, and cataloging fell within the
                        responsibilities of the Resources and Technical Services Division (RTSD),
                        but circulation and general management came under the Library Administration
                        Division. There were also information retrieval or
                           documentation committees in several divisions and an
                        Interdivisional Committee on Documentation
                     .
                  1966. A Data and Computation Center is founded at the
                     University of Wisconsin, which includes a Data and Program Library Service
                     division, in response to a need for assistance in social science research problems related to large-scale data
                        collection and computation
                     .
                  1968. The American Documentation Institute is renamed
                     the American Society for Information Science, reflecting in part the importance
                     of automated systems for information storage and retrieval. In 2000, the name
                     is changed again to the American Society for Information Science and
                     Technology.
                  1969. The National Women’s Liberation Front for
                     Librarians is formed as a joke, but it becomes an official committee of the ALA
                     the next year, called the Status of Women in Librarianship. In 1980, it is
                     renamed the Feminist Task Force. In 1976, the Committee on the Status of Women
                     in Librarianship (COWSL) is formed.
               
               
                  Newsletter of the ALA Task Force on Women, 1976. 
                  
               
               
                  1969. A study suggests that librarians are not
                     perceived as professionals, since the public is not convinced that there is a basic science of librarianship;
                        the skill is thought to be only clerical or administrative — a
                     perception also noted in 1921 .
                  
                     1970. Anita R. Schiller publishes The
                        Disadvantaged Majority: Women Employed in Libraries in American Libraries
                     .
                  1971. The social responsibility of the
                        librarian is defined as the collecting, organizing, servicing and
                        administering of the graphic records of civilization; therefore,
                        he cannot be an educator in the
                        proper sense
                     .
                  1973. The Association for Literary and Linguistic
                     Computing is founded; its name changes to the European Association for Digital
                     Humanities in 2011.
                  1974 – 1979. Father Roberto Busa publishes a database
                     version of his concordance to the works of Thomas Aquinas, considered to be the
                     first electronic text project.
                  1975. The first online public access catalog (OPAC) is
                     developed at Ohio State University. By the end of the 1980s, commercial systems
                     have mostly replaced library-built systems and complex search functions are
                     common.
                  1976. A humorous library history called The Happy Bookers predicts that in the future the onetime library patron will press a
                        button and turn a dial on his TV, whereupon the requested book, in the
                        desired language, will appear on the screen...
                     .
               
               
                  Campbell Grant, Dial a book.
                     
                  
               
               
                  1976. Clara Stanton Jones, the first African-American
                     president of the ALA, takes office. 
               
               
                  Clara Stanton Jones. Image via 
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                     1978. The Association for Computers and the Humanities is
                     founded.
                  1979.
                     The Role of Women in Librarianship, 1876-1976: The Entry,
                        Advancement and Struggle for Equalization in One Profession is
                     published .
                  1979.
                     Apostles of Culture: The Public Librarian and American
                        Society, 1876-1920 is published; its author recommends that
                     librarianship rest on a
                        systematic body of theory and scientifically based abstract
                        knowledge and expertise to compensate for the profession’s low
                     status and pay related to the feminization of its work
                     force .
                  1982. The status of information
                        science continues to rise in relation to
                        librarianship; by 1982, 50 percent of ALA-accredited
                     library schools have added the term information to their titles.
               
               
                  Institutions with Information in Their Title.
                     
                  
               
               
                  1982. A study notes that the composition of library
                     school faculties appears to be shifting: 75.4 percent of deans and directors
                     are men, and men make up a majority of full and associate professors, but 57.2
                     percent of assistant professorships are held by women .
                  1983. The Committee on the Status of Women in
                     Librarianship (COWSL) publishes a study showing that almost half of the male
                     members of the ALA are administrators, even though only 21.7 percent of the
                     members are men. The study also finds that being male is significantly associated with receiving a
                        higher salary even when personal, professional and organizational variables
                        are comparable to those of females in the sample
                     .
                  1983. A study finds a 21.5 percent disparity in
                     salaries between teaching faculty and librarians at academic institutions that
                     grant faculty status to librarians; there is a 24.6 percent disparity at
                     academic institutions that do not grant faculty status to librarians. Overall,
                     mean salaries for librarians lag behind teaching faculty salaries by 29
                     percent. In 2008, the disparity between mean salaries has grown to 32 percent
                        .
                  1984. Seeking to understand how the gender ecology of a
                     workplace — whether it is male- or female-dominated — affects job satisfaction,
                     a study finds a correlation between gender and job satisfaction when male and
                     female librarians are compared to male and female faculty; both male librarians
                     (in the minority) and male faculty (in the majority) report higher rates of job
                     satisfaction than female librarians (in the majority) and female faculty (in
                     the minority). The study also shows that greater autonomy and decision-making
                     power are correlated with job satisfaction .
                  1986. Survey results published in Academic and Public Librarians: Data by Race, Ethnicity and Sex
                     indicate that academic and public library staffs are 88.5 percent white, and
                     that top managers are disproportionately male and white .
               
               
                  Distribution of Total Work Force by
                        Racial/Ethnic/Sexual Group for Librarians in Academic and Public
                        Libraries.
                     
                  
                  
               
               
                  1986. The journal Literary and
                        Linguistic Computing publishes its first issue; the editorial team
                     of eight includes three women. 
                  1987. The Text Encoding Initiative is launched; the
                     first version of the TEI Guidelines is published in 1994.
                  1988. The possible first use of the term
                        digital library in print occurs in the title of a
                     report published by the Corporation for National Research Initiatives.
                  1989. A dozen authors and 40 publishers sign an
                     “acid-free paper pledge” at a New York Public Library ceremony .
                  1992. A study of gender and salary data from 1972-1990
                     reveals that a disproportionate number of systems librarian positions (those
                     who install, maintain, and develop library computer and telecommunications
                     systems) go to men. For both men and women working as systems librarians,
                     salaries are significantly lower than for computer scientists in general .
                  1992. The Institute for Advanced Technology in the
                     Humanities is established at the University of Virginia, and is physically
                     located in the university’s library.
                  1993. The National Academy Press (later the National
                     Academies Press) puts its materials on the web for free, initiating the open
                     access model of publication.
                  1993. The Library Support Staff Interests Roundtable
                     (LSSIRT) is established as an official group within the ALA, officially
                     signaling a turn towards the hiring of paraprofessionals for jobs that formerly
                     required a library degree, and fueling librarian anxieties about the
                        de-professionalization of librarianship.
                  1997. The Library of Congress’s Network Development and
                     MARC Standards Office develops Document Type Definitions (DTD) for Standard
                     General Markup Language (SGML).
                  1999. The President of the American Society for
                     Information Science defines information science as the combination of two fundamentally different
                        traditions: a document tradition concerned with signifying objects
                        and their use; and a computational tradition of applying algorithmic,
                        logical, mathematical, and mechanical techniques to information management.
                        Both traditions have been deeply influenced by technological modernism:
                        technology, standards, systems and efficiency enable progress
                     .
                  1999. The National Library of Medicine Classification
                     guide is published for the last time in print. Beginning with the 2002 edition,
                     it is published in electronic form only and updated annually. 
                  2000. The Coalition for Networked Information and the
                     Digital Library Federation establish the Open Archives Initiative (OAI); the
                     following year, the OAI develops its Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (PMH)
                     version 1.0.
               
               
                  THE OAI PMH version 1.0, April 2001. 
                  
               
               
                  2001.
                     A Scientific American article predicts that the
                     World Wide Web of unstructured documents will evolve into a semantic
                        web of machine-readable data .
                  
                     2002. The starting salaries for recent library school
                     graduates are 7.1 per cent higher for men than for women.
                  2002. The HASTAC (Humanities, Arts, Science and
                     Technology Advanced Collaboratory) network is launched. 
                  2003. A figurine modeled on Seattle Public Library
                     librarian Nancy Pearl is brought out as a novelty toy, and arouses controversy
                     because its shushing action reinforces librarian
                     stereotypes.
               
               
                  Librarian action figure. (Image via Archie McPhee Toys, Gifts &
                     Novelties) 
                  
               
               
                  2003. The annual report of the Association for Research
                     Libraries shows that men fill 56 percent of the high-tech positions while only
                     making up 21.4 percent of library school graduates, and have a starting wage
                     that averages 28 percent higher than that of women .
                  
                     2004. The first Library Book Cart Drill Team Championship
                     takes place at the annual conference of the ALA. A National Public Radio story
                     on the 2009 competition begins, 
                        The stereotype of the librarian —
                           horn-rimmed glasses, hair in a bun, finger to her lips stubbornly
                           shushing — was nowhere to be found at this year's Librarian Book Cart
                           Drill Championships held recently in Chicago
                        
                     .
               
               
                  The Valkyries of Oak Park, Illinois, performing at the 2009 Library Book
                     Cart Drill Team Championship. Image via 
                  
               
               
                  2005. A study of electronic resources librarians shows
                     that women occupy these positions at a percentage that is proportionate to
                     their representation in the library work force, but that men are more likely to
                     be supervisors. The sample size is too small to interpret salary data, however,
                     and there is ambiguity about what constitutes an 
                        electronic resources
                           librarian
                        
                     .
                  2005. The online cataloging service LibraryThing is
                     founded by Tim Spaulding, an educational software developer and erstwhile PhD
                     candidate in Greek and Latin. In 2007, Goodreads is founded by Otis Chandler, a
                        bookshelf sharing and book recommendations website.
                        Librarian status is available to applicants with at
                     least 50 books in their profile; these are trusted super-users who can edit book and author data, add book
                        covers, and combine different editions of books... Librarians help correct
                        book issues, like if the data isn’t correct, or is missing things...
                     
                  
                  2006. The National Endowment for the Humanities
                     establishes its Digital Humanities Initiative, renamed the Office of Digital
                     Humanities in 2008.
                  2006. The first version of Zotero — a free, open-source
                     bibliographic management tool — is launched by the Roy Rosenzweig Center for
                     History and New Media at George Mason University.
                  2007. A consolidated edition of the International
                     Standard Bibliographic Description (ISBD) rules are published by the
                     International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA),
                     bringing together rules for different types of publications and providing a
                     standard form of bibliographic description for the international exchange of
                     records.
                  2007. CenterNet is formed, an international network of digital humanities
                        centers
                     .
                  2008. The first THATcamp (The Humanities and
                     Technology) “unconference” is held at George Mason University’s Center for
                     History and New Media; the next year, the first traveling THATcamp takes place
                     at the University of Texas alongside the annual meeting of the Society of
                     American Archivists.
                  2009. A private school de-accessions its library’s
                     print collection and builds laptop-accessible study carrels and a café in the
                     space formerly occupied by stacks and the reference desk, setting off a storm
                     of concern.
               

               
                  When I look at books, I see an
                        outdated technology, like scrolls before books, said headmaster
                     James Tracy. Photo by Mark Wilson for The Boston
                        Globe. 
                  
               
               
                  2011. The more hack,
                        less yack controversy in the digital humanities erupts at the Modern
                     Language Association convention, and energizes an ongoing discourse about race,
                     gender, and technological expertise.See  on
                        the origins of this phrase; see , , and  on the controversy,
                        and the #TransformDH movement, especially PhDeviate, Jan. 1, 2012 and Feb.
                        1, 2012 .
                  2011 and 2012. Two genealogies of the digital
                     humanities written by librarians do not say much about the relationship between
                     the digital humanities and the library , .
                  2013. A special issue of the Journal of Library Administration devoted to Digital Humanities in Libraries: New Models for Scholarly
                        Engagement is published; contributors have to work around the
                     journal’s copyright policy to make open access versions of their articles
                     available .
                  2014. The Wikipedia entry titled Library science begins with the sentence, Library science (often termed library studies
                        or library and information science) is an interdisciplinary or
                        multidisciplinary field that applies the practices, perspectives, and tools
                        of management, information technology, education, and other areas to
                        libraries; the collection, organization, preservation, and dissemination of
                        information resources; and the political economy of information. The
                     entry titled Information science begins Information science (or
                        information studies) is an interdisciplinary field primarily concerned with
                        the analysis, collection, classification, manipulation, storage, retrieval,
                        movement, and dissemination of information… Information science should not
                        be confused with information theory or library science
                     , .Note that while I last accessed these entries in January 2014, the
                        entries go back to Oct. 25, 2001 
                        ("history"), and Nov. 20, 2002 
                        ("history").
                  
                     2014. According to the current mission statement of the
                     ALA, the goal of the library is to
                        enhance learning and ensure access to information for all, while the
                     Constitution states that the organization’s main object shall be to promote library service and
                        librarianship.
               
               In the late twentieth century and early twenty-first century, librarians worked to
                  change their image and the idea of librarianship, both to counter the
                     shush lady stereotype, seen as an impediment to users’
                  comfort with library services and librarians’ professional status, and to grapple
                  with rapid technological change that restructured the information environment. In
                  particular, the librarian’s key role as an information specialist — specifically,
                  a mediator of access to information — grew more important as new technologies
                  complicated information experience, but was also strained by the greater
                  independence these new technologies offered to information seekers.
               One response to technological change was the rise of a field called information
                  science, and the conflicted rapprochement of library science with information
                  science. Whereas information scientists might have associated librarianship with
                  the practical management of repositories, and information science with the history
                  of science and technology, information business, computerization, and the
                  organization of knowledge, librarians might have associated librarianship with
                  public service, information retrieval, and bibliographic control, and information
                  science with library science for
                     boys
                   and the dangerous pursuit of professionalism
                  . Competing research paradigms emerged and
                  then gradually merged: as a pragmatic social science, library science was devoted
                  to studying its own systems and roles and the needs and behaviors of users,
                  whereas information science incorporated theories of information, public policy,
                  and human-computer interaction. Although the two domains are now generally
                  understood to be coincident or at least as complementary, information science is
                  still sometimes represented as distinct from librarianship. Gender is certainly in
                  play in these designations, as many of the traditional functions of librarianship
                  continue to be perceived as feminine, while the status of information science
                  benefits from masculine associations.
               In this period, the feminist presence in librarianship became outspoken.
                  Researchers analyzed patterns of workplace stratification — in terms of sex, race,
                  salary, level of technological responsibility, place in the hierarchy and
                  occupation — and the public perception of librarians. Feminist critique was
                  integrated into the professional apparatus through groups and publications. By the
                  end of this period, a larger proportion of library leaders were women, but many of
                  the general patterns observed in the 1970s and ’80s remained.
               Certain core elements of library practice and philosophy were unaffected by these
                  internal conflicts: the belief in the democratic value of access to information,
                  the understanding of research as central to the academic enterprise, and the
                  valuation of service as a distinguishing feature of librarianship.

            
         

            In Sum 
            
               In the nineteenth century and early twentieth century, libraries were
                  modernized by approaches to information management that took three technologic
                  forms: a symbolic form, ie, classification structures; a physical form, which
                  turned classification structures into information storage and retrieval systems,
                  like architectural designs, shelving, and card catalogs; and an administrative
                  form, which gave rise to procedures to manage the storage and retrieval systems,
                  and services to mediate between readers and the materials they sought. These
                  technologies of information management, but especially the administrative form,
                  became the foundation of library training programs and professional
                  identity.
               These approaches to information management helped libraries address problems of
                  scale: the mass production of printed matter, increasing numbers of library users,
                  and library values that emphasized the provision of free content to all. Library
                  technologies were oriented, accordingly, both towards efficiency, in terms of
                  storage and retrieval, and access, in terms of use. Extensions of these
                  approaches, such as indexing techniques, reader’s services, and eventually,
                  conservation and preservation operations, were designed to improve access and
                  efficiency.
               These technologies of information management, in response to financial and
                  social pressures for space-saving efficiency and access, thus laid the groundwork
                  for machine-readable cataloging, which laid the groundwork for structured query
                  languages and computer mark-up languages, which laid the groundwork for network
                  connectivity and new forms of digital poesis.
                Women gained entry to librarianship in its early professional history because
                  of their civilizing influence, but even when this was no
                  longer an explicit consideration, women could be appointed to positions that
                  emphasized the implementation of efficiency and access technologies and principles
                  without disrupting traditional gender roles — in short, positions that required
                  public service and the ability to use and manage information technologies but not
                  to invent them or brand them with symbolic currency.
               As women increasingly dominated the library workforce, the library assumed an
                  ambivalent public image. As an institution, the library was seen by the public
                  through the filter of ideals that retained masculine associations with freedom of
                  thought, self-determination, and the protection of cultural heritage; but as a
                  workplace, it was seen through the filter of the woman’s work
                  performed within it — as a bureaucracy requiring a service orientation and
                  clerical competence, not professional expertise.
               Feminist responses to the gendered segregation of work roles within the library
                  and low pay focused on opportunities within the library. The ethic of service as
                  the signature of librarianship was retained.
               Technological developments outside the library, and the masculine valence of
                     information science (as opposed to
                     librarianship), raised the cultural status of information
                  technology. As new information technologies migrated into the library, however,
                  the value they brought with them was absorbed by pre-existing gender patterns. In
                  other words, new work roles required by new technologies attracted more men to the
                  library workplace, but fewer women took on these roles relative to their
                  population in the overall library workforce, especially in leadership positions,
                  and the cultural status of these new technologies did not greatly affect public
                  perceptions of librarianship.
            
            Our historical timelines suggest that information technology, as a constitutive
               feature of the library for over 150 years, has always helped to organize the gender
               valences of library work and perceptions of the library, but the changes in,
               authority of, and rising value of technology in the twentieth century have increased
               the stakes of these patterns. As long as they have worked in libraries, women have
               been yackers who interface with the community of users through
               administrative procedures and the provision of services: helping patrons, mediating
               between readers and the materials they seek. In roles that are often more technical,
               men have been hackers — but also yackers
               when it comes to the big picture: modernizing the library through new information
               management technologies, articulating its democratic and scholarly missions, leading
               its major institutions.
            
               Timeline III: Future Fictions, circa 2030
               The highly distilled observations above, drawn from the historical relationship
                  between gender and technology in the library, provide a basis for future
                     speculation.Events in Timeline II that have particular importance for the
                     gender constitution of the library work-force and related power dynamics,
                     particularly in relationship to the symbolic and economic benefits of
                     technological expertise, are 1899, 1912, 1928, 1962, 1969 (both events), 1970,
                     1979 (both events), 1982 (study), 1983 (both events), 1984, 1986, 1992, 2002,
                     2003 (report) and 2005 (study). What comes next?
               Below are three possible views of the academic library fifteen or so years hence.
                  Each describes a kind of library and library workforce that we might encounter in
                  2030 — a time outline rather than a timeline per
                     se. Each could evolve from the path laid down so far, in keeping with
                  certain assumptions about the future of information and higher education: the
                  digital ecosystem will continue to grow in scope, complexity, and importance; and
                  the economic constraints on higher education of the past several decades and
                  especially the past several years will persist, with at best a mix of ups and
                  downs. Second order factors derive from these basic conditions: the importance of
                  the library building as a place for people as opposed to storage for a collection;
                  the increased accountability of the library in terms of advancing institutional
                  missions; the demand for different skills in the library workforce; the
                  recognition that libraries have competition as information providers; and the need
                  to reduce, rearrange, or replace the traditional range of services in order to
                  save money or develop new sources of revenue.These factors are derived
                     primarily from , who consolidate
                     findings from a variety of environmental scans of the past ten years. I have
                     also relied on The ARL 2030 Scenarios: A User’s Guide for
                        Research Libraries
                     ; , especially Lorcan
                     Dempsey’s contribution, revised as Libraries and the
                        Informational Future: Some Notes
                     ; ; and . These sources have also provided much of the
                     information on which I am basing the outlines. All together, these
                  conditions suggest that the academic library will have to shed some of its
                  historic identity and transition or transform into something new.
                        Transitional and
                        transformational changes are more radical forms of
                     organizational change that are undertaken on purpose, perhaps out of necessity,
                     to achieve a new state. They differ from gradual
                        developmental changes that are undertaken to correct or
                     improve an organization’s current state. 
               These outlines of future possibilities are not predictions, nor are they
                  scenarios, in the sense of the term used by the Association of Research Libraries’
                  scenarios user’s guide: stories about the
                     future... devices for ordering perceptions about multiple future
                     environments...built on a set of relevant uncertainties.
                  . Scenarios are used for strategic
                  planning. The outlines below are more like speculative fictions: possible models
                  of a certain idea of the academic library’s future identity, played out in
                  practical terms — including configurations of gender and technology that might
                  follow from that idea and its repercussions for the digital humanities. In other
                  words, they are scoped more narrowly and with more internal consistency than would
                  be likely in reality. 
                While the futures that are imagined in the library scenarios literature are
                  anchored in particular descriptions of the present, the present itself is treated
                  as a historical blank slate — as if it did not evolve from specific histories,
                  which have created certain inherited patterns and commitments. Discipline-specific
                  questions are also mostly neglected in the library scenarios literature;
                     research is often treated as if it were a uniform
                  activity, for example, without disciplinary variations in library and
                  technological needs, institutional support, relationship to teaching, and social
                     status.As a result, the ARL 2030 Scenarios narratives, for example, are
                     almost exclusively centered on science research. The ARL scenarios are also
                     deliberately focused on research to the exclusion of other elements in the
                     higher education mission, such as teaching or community service; it may not be
                     possible to get a good picture of library activities through the lens of
                     research divorced from these other roles.  examine
                     library roles more comprehensively, but also overlook disciplinary
                     variations. The scenarios literature also does not address gender or
                  other vectors of power within the library workforce, in perceptions of the
                  library, or in academia as a whole. These absences undermine the utility of the
                  scenarios for the practical ends for which they are designed, since they distort
                  the picture of how libraries might be needed, used, and staffed in the future. The
                  models below, although they are incomplete in other ways, can at least help us
                  consider the consequences of library transformation in terms of gender patterns
                  and disciplinary impacts. 
            
            
               Version 1: The Connector
               
                  The library as a hub of access to digital content becomes the
                     central mission of academic libraries, eclipsing other traditional
                     roles.
                  The library provides access to the digital content that its affiliates need
                     to conduct research. Because of the cost of subscriptions, especially in the
                     sciences, collections are focused on the most used formats, such as e-journals.
                     The library rents, and in some cases owns, databases and digital
                     collections.
                  It also serves as a repository for and manager of certain sets of data
                     produced by institutional affiliates, especially those datasets that must be
                     made accessible to other researchers for compliance with grant
                     requirements.
                  Because of the cost of maintaining print collections, and the relatively low
                     use of these collections, the library divests from its traditional role as a
                     repository of material collections. Print collections are radically reduced and
                     duplications within regions eliminated; small off-site print collections are
                     maintained by consortia of geographically or socially related institutions, and
                     serviced by small interinstitutional or governmental teams, or private
                     companies.
                  Archival and rare materials remain in the possession of institutions, but
                     are also stored at off-site facilities. Expert researchers may consult them in
                     reading rooms in libraries or in the off-site locations.
                  Library workers perform primarily in these roles. 
                         For quantitative social science and science researchers, librarians
                           curate collections of data, conduct literature reviews, and serve as data
                           specialists on research teams. These librarians are mostly located within
                           academic departments. 
                        For qualitative social science and humanities researchers, librarians
                           primarily work as purchasing and licensing agents, managing a complex
                           system of subscriptions and agreements for digital collections. They may
                           work in the library or as telecommuters.
                        For students, librarians are intermediaries who help students find
                           appropriate content for coursework and projects, primarily through online
                           consultations, or through tools that are embedded in learning management
                           systems or the online facets of courses. These librarians — instructional
                           designers and resource specialists — may work in student help centers in
                           the library or in academic departments, and may be employed as seasonal
                           workers, like adjuncts.
                        On-site staff consist mostly of technical support staff,
                           administrators and administrative support staff, and security
                           personnel.
                     
                  
                   Discovery tools and interfaces — necessary for the navigation of many
                     different kinds of resources — are designed by outsourced user experience
                     specialists. 
                  As pedagogical, primary source, and methodological expertise wanes in
                     importance as a library service, libraries employ few subject specialists. 
                  Library buildings become study and social spaces for undergraduates and some
                     graduate students, with flexible internal arrangements, cafes, theaters, and
                     even student clubs and services, with limited office space for on-site
                     staff.
                  The digital humanities have been integrated into the humanities as primary
                     research outputs and pedagogical methods, supported by departments or
                     interdisciplinary programs funded by their institutions. DH does not fall
                     within the purview of the library — although the library may maintain the
                     servers used to run and archive DH projects.
               

                In this model, the library’s traditional role as a provider of human and
                  technological services remains intact, but these services have been whittled down
                  to the functions that have the broadest applicability and where institutional
                  investments are most readily supplemented by grants and other funding sources,
                  with a focus on data management and digital collections. 
                This model works well for quantitative, data-intensive disciplines with access to
                  government and private funding for research, especially those focused on applied
                  research: medicine, engineering, environmental sciences. Librarians who work with
                  researchers in those areas will enjoy a status and salary comparable to that of
                  today’s lecturers — that is, they will be recognized as faculty peers but not as
                  the originators of research.
                For researchers in the qualitative and interpretive disciplines, the academic
                  library will mainly serve as a conduit to secondary literature and, for some
                  institutions, primary sources; librarians will collect material for these
                  researchers, but will not contribute expertise to these collections or to research
                  products. Since digital materials will be purchased en masse from vendors, these
                  positions are likely to be filled by workers with administrative, legal,
                  technical, and/or financial experience. They will be comparable in status and
                  salary to today’s library workforce in technical services and administration — a
                  few will be managers and specialists, many will be paraprofessionals. 
                A few instructional designers and resource specialists will help students connect
                  to materials needed for classes, but most discovery services will be outsourced
                  and students will mostly rely on pre-packaged user guides supplied by the vendors.
                  These library workers may have some pedagogical or subject expertise, but their
                  jobs will focus on making materials easy to find and usable in specific contexts.
                  In addition, libraries will employ a small number of workers who keep the facility
                  running, and manage and trouble-shoot the technical infrastructure. 
               The digital humanities will be carried out within individual humanities
                  departments or interdisciplinary DH programs; researchers relying on this
                  infrastructure will create a fractured landscape of small and discrete projects,
                  and a few larger cooperative projects that benefit from opportunistic arrangements
                  between institutions. Since the humanities won’t enjoy the funding or prominence
                  of science, whose data production and content needs will be the focus of library
                  services, humanist researchers won’t have access to the infrastructure or
                  technological expertise that would allow them to extend and aggregate projects
                  through centralized databanks and coordinated efforts.
                The gender patterns in this model will follow and potentially amplify existing
                  patterns in the library and in the sciences: librarians attached to scientific
                  research — with expertise that is directly relevant to their research teams, and a
                  relatively high status and salary — are more likely to be men, although women with
                  relevant subject and technological expertise who opt out of research careers may
                  also fill these roles. Instructional designers and resource specialists are more
                  likely to be women with an interest in teaching; administrators and
                  paraprofessionals are more likely to be women with administrative and financial
                  backgrounds. Technical support staff are likely to be both men and women with
                  technical training, and security personnel are likely to be both men and women
                  with little education.
            
            
               Version 2: The Coordinator 
               
                  The library as a suite of services related to the production and consumption
                     of different forms of scholarly communication becomes the central
                     mission of academic libraries, which incorporates some traditional roles and
                     requires new ones.
                   The library provides access to the content that its affiliates need to
                     conduct research, regardless of format. However, because of the cost of
                     subscriptions, especially in the sciences, the emphasis is on the most-used
                     formats, such as e-journals, for selected disciplines that have been designated
                     as institutional areas of strength. 
                  The library serves as a content repository and data manager for the data and
                     publications its affiliates produce, for compliance with grant requirements and
                     re-use.
                  Because of the cost of maintaining print collections, print collections are
                     weeded of material that is not in alignment with institutional areas of
                     strength. Print collections are housed off-site but are accessible through
                     delivery and scanning services managed by the library or local consortia. Once
                     digitized, print materials are de-accessioned unless there is a compelling
                     reason to keep them. 
                  Archival and rare materials remain in the possession of institutions, and
                     are available to expert researchers in reading rooms. Paper materials can be
                     digitized so that they can be incorporated into various forms of scholarly
                     communication.
                  The library joins with its university’s press, if there is one, or works
                     independently, if there is not, to provide publishing services for affiliates,
                     including editorial, legal, technological, and marketing services, on a
                     cost-recovery basis.
                  Library workers perform primarily in these roles. 
                        For all researchers, librarians curate collections of data and digital
                           and analog content. For quantitative studies, they may also conduct
                           literature reviews and serve as data specialists on research teams. For
                           qualitative social science and humanities researchers, librarians are
                           valued for editorial and publication management services, e.g., copyright
                           negotiations for the reproduction of licensed material. Librarians also
                           advocate for open access, open data, and open archives protocols. These
                           librarians may work within academic departments or in the library.
                        Librarians work as purchasing and licensing agents, managing a complex
                           system of subscriptions and agreements for digital collections. Such
                           material is often acquired in alignment with existing institutional
                           strengths so that it may support faculty publications.
                        For students, librarians help students find appropriate content for
                           coursework and projects, and also create information
                              literacy tools so that students are better users of
                           scholarly content, but these tools remain supplemental to coursework.
                           Librarians also help to run writing and media centers located in the
                           library, so that students are better producers of scholarly
                           content.
                         Technology specialists support access systems but also design and
                           support publication platforms. Libraries also employ administrators,
                           administrative support staff, and security personnel.
                     
                  
                  Discovery tools and interfaces — necessary for the navigation of many
                     different kinds of resources — are designed by outsourced user experience
                     specialists.
                   Library buildings become study and social spaces for students, with
                     flexible internal arrangements, but they also provide offices for librarians,
                     meeting rooms, writing/media centers, and restricted data access rooms.
                  The digital humanities have been integrated into the humanities as primary
                     research outputs and pedagogical methods. Libraries support projects that align
                     with institutional strengths through archiving services, managing the back-end,
                     and providing template platforms and interfaces that allow these projects to be
                     published economically, in alliance with other library publications.
               
                In this model, the library’s traditional role as a provider of human and
                  technological access services continues, but the library also takes on a new role
                  by providing data management and publishing services, to support the entire
                  scholarly communications cycle. To maximize synergy and investment, both branches
                  of service are aligned with institutional areas of strength.
               This model works well for advanced researchers in those disciplines that have been
                  designated institutional areas of strength. Librarians who work with researchers
                  in those areas as data or publishing specialists will enjoy a professional status
                  and salary, but there may be status and salary differences between librarians
                  based on their disciplinary associations because of the library’s cost-recovery
                  mandate. Disciplines with access to government and private funding will be able to
                  support specific kinds of expertise in the library, since they can build those
                  costs into their grants; while the library will still provide free data and
                  publishing services to qualifying disciplines that don’t have access to
                  extra-institutional funding, these services may be less extensive. 
               Services for students are secondary to those of advanced researchers, but are
                  addressed through tools, consultations, and library centers that help students
                  become more informed consumers of scholarly content and more adept
                  researchers.
               Digital humanities projects will be conceptualized within individual humanities
                  departments or DH programs and maintained by library services, but these projects
                  will need to conform to library supported platforms and designs. These projects
                  will benefit from congruencies and intersections with other library-supported
                  projects in terms of data use, design, and impact; siloes
                  within an institution’s portfolio will be reduced, but it may be more difficult
                  for institutions to work together because of proprietary designs or architectural
                  discrepancies. Interdisciplinary work may be hampered by the institution’s focus
                  on particular areas of strength.
               The gender patterns in this model will follow existing patterns in the library,
                  complicated by disciplinary gender patterns, especially as they relate to the
                  status of research, teaching, and publishing activities. Librarians associated
                  with high-level technology design or data and publishing services for the science
                  disciplines that are aligned with institutional areas of strength — like big data
                  management — will more likely be men. Librarians who work with students by
                  creating information literacy tools and running writing and media centers, and
                  librarians who work in publishing services, especially in the humanities, will
                  more likely be women.This pattern will be exacerbated not just by the
                     gendering of librarianship, but also by gendering in the publishing industry.
                     See . Librarians who are primarily responsible
                  for purchasing resources will need some subject expertise, in order to curate
                  subject-appropriate collections that align with institutional areas of strength,
                  but will also need financial and legal expertise. They, along with administrators
                  and paraprofessionals, are more likely to be women.
            
            
               Version 3: The Collaborator
               
                  The library as a provider of infrastructure for research and
                        learning becomes the central mission of academic libraries — where
                     infrastructure is seen as a combination of expertise, resources, and
                     technological architecture.
                  The library provides access to the content that its affiliates need to
                     conduct research, regardless of format. Because of the cost of subscriptions,
                     especially in the sciences, the emphasis is on the most used formats, such as
                     e-journals, and on print collections with the potential to support significant
                     use.
                  The library serves as a content repository and data manager for the data and
                     some of the publications its affiliates produce, for compliance with grant
                     requirements and re-use.
                  Because of the cost of maintaining print collections, print collections are
                     weeded of material that is duplicated by other institutions, except where there
                     is evidence of potential for significant use; regional consortia collaborate on
                     shared print collections. Print collections are housed off-site but are
                     accessible through delivery and scanning services managed by these local
                     consortia.
                  Archival and rare materials remain in the possession of institutions. They
                     are consulted in reading rooms, but are also used in classes, exhibitions,
                     publications, and DH projects.
                  Library workers perform primarily in these roles. 
                        For all researchers, librarians curate collections of data and digital
                           and analog content. For quantitative studies, they may also conduct
                           literature reviews and serve as data specialists on research teams. For
                           qualitative social science and humanities researchers, librarians work on
                           teams that create technological infrastructure and provide subject
                           expertise for digital projects that are both research products and
                           pedagogical tools. They are also informed participants in open access,
                           open data, and open archives programs. 
                        Librarians work as purchasing and licensing agents, managing a complex
                           system of subscriptions and agreements for digital collections, and
                           linking institutionally produced projects to institutionally produced
                           discovery tools.
                        For students, librarians help students find appropriate content for
                           coursework and projects, and create “information literacy” tools so that
                           students are better users of scholarly content, but also incorporate the
                           study of information into projects that happen in the library, so that
                           students learn these skills in tandem with/through activities.
                        Technology specialists support access systems but also design and
                           support publication platforms, discovery tools, and other forms of
                           technological infrastructure.
                         Libraries also employ administrators, administrative support staff,
                           and security personnel.
                     
                  
                   Discovery tools, learning modules, and software applications are designed
                     by library developers to fit an institution’s unique collection of digital,
                     print, and archival materials, the expertise of affiliates, and teaching and
                     learning needs. Sometimes these tools are open source, and sometimes they are
                     commercialized.
                  Library buildings become study and social spaces for students, with flexible
                     internal arrangements, but they also provide offices for librarians, restricted
                     data access rooms, and meeting and workspace for centers where data management
                     services are handled, digital projects are created, and enterprise ventures are
                     carried out.
                  The digital humanities have been integrated into the humanities as primary
                     research outputs and pedagogical methods. Libraries are key partners in these
                     projects, providing archiving services, backend management, research and
                     development talent, and pedagogical expertise to facilitate student
                     involvement.
               
               In this model, the library’s traditional role as a provider of access to content
                  continues, but the library takes on new roles in order to integrate “access” into
                  a broader research and learning infrastructure, with a focus on research and
                  learning needs that fall outside the scope of the laboratory, the
                     studiolo, and the classroom. Specifically, the library becomes a
                  place where information technology is not only used and managed, but also
                  analyzed, invented — and even symbolically branded as a key institutional asset. 
               This model works well for interdisciplinary researchers, researchers who
                  experiment with new genres of scholarly communication, and students who want to
                  contribute to information technology projects or conduct research. It blurs the
                  lines between faculty and those librarians who commit technological and subject
                  expertise to projects developed in library centers and who work directly with
                  students. Librarians with this kind of expertise and authority are able to work
                  more effectively on particular collection mandates — curating print collections
                  around significant use potential, actively participating in open access ventures —
                  that can maximize institutional investments and potentially lower collection
                  costs. In turn, and because these librarians are contributing more directly
                  towards institutional missions or even helping to develop information technology
                  products that can be commercialized, institutions can afford to invest in library
                  collections, information technology R & D, and librarians with expertise and
                  authority.
                Students’ needs are met through tools and consultations, but also through
                  library-led ventures in which students participate: DH projects, exhibitions,
                  information technology development teams.
               Digital humanities projects will be created by teams of researchers and librarians
                  with complementary kinds of expertise. The projects will benefit from a broad
                  range of support: archiving, back-end management, R & D, student
                  participation. Interdisciplinary projects will be easier to realize through the
                  common resources provided by the library. Sustainable, inter-institutional
                  collaborations will be facilitated when librarians providing technological
                  expertise are focused on shared architecture, rather than the creation of virtuoso
                  stand-alone projects. But DH projects will require significant institutional
                  investments in DH centers. Where the commercialization of information technology
                  tools is also taking place, intellectual property protectionism may create
                  barriers to collaboration. Sustainability and discoverability may be threatened by
                  a funding environment in which signature stand-alone projects are attractive to
                  donors. Finally, smaller and less wealthy institutions may not be able to afford
                  the investment in library centers that would drive DH.
               The gender patterns in this model will follow existing patterns in the library,
                  but these patterns would be partially disrupted by the need for technological and
                  subject expertise in both the quantitative and qualitative disciplines. Librarians
                  who provide high-level technology design or data services for the science
                  disciplines will more likely be men, but librarians in similar roles for the
                  social sciences and humanities may be men and women. Librarians who work with
                  students through consultations or by creating information literacy tools will more
                  likely be women, but librarians who work with students on library-led ventures —
                  DH projects, information technology development projects, exhibitions — may be men
                  and women. Librarians who are primarily responsible for acquiring and curating
                  resources will need some subject expertise, but will also need financial and legal
                  expertise. They, along with administrators and paraprofessionals, are more likely
                  to be women.
            
            
               In Sum
               These models suggest that academic embodiments of the digital humanities as an
                  innovative, interdisciplinary field of activity will flourish if they have as
                  partners libraries with robust humanities collections — archival materials in
                  original and surrogate forms, print and media holdings, born-digital primary
                  sources — and in-house expertise to develop and steward digital projects. These
                  are also the best conditions for modifying traditional patterns of library labor
                  in terms of gender. In other words, a virtuous circle might be achieved wherein
                  the digital humanities feeds a humanities-friendly library ecosystem, which in
                  turn requires skilled and knowledgeable librarians who are central to digital
                  humanities activities — a workforce that counter-acts the historically low pay and
                  status of librarians and the possibility of a de-skilled
                  library workforce in all areas except for data-intensive science.
               Such a virtuous circle would not be without pitfalls or threats. There would still
                  be categorical divisions in library labor, defined by technological and subject
                  expertise, and possibly also along research versus teaching fault-lines. The
                  funding required by technology-rich, innovative library centers could deepen the
                  inequality that already exists between wealthy and less wealthy institutions.
                  Finally, it is not clear that librarian collaborators, with a status closer to
                  that of faculty, would be granted or would assume the kind of authority within the
                  library that would make them effective collections advocates. In other words,
                  librarians might still feel financial and social pressures to regard faculty input
                  as the sine qua non of collection management data. They might still say, as they
                  do now, If faculty don’t use this collection, we
                     may not need to acquire/keep/fix/digitize/migrate it, regardless of whether
                     librarians use it or see its potential — even if those librarians also
                  work directly with students, conduct research, contribute to DH projects, and
                  develop technology tools. 
            
            
               A Modest Proposal
               Feminist examinations of gender in the library, starting in the 1960s, have
                  focused on the low status of librarianship, its fraught dynamic of
                  professionalization, and role segregation within the library. See ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ;  and ; ; ; ;  and ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; .  These studies have revealed certain patterns
                  recognizable to feminist economists, sociologists, historians, and cultural
                  analysts of other professional arenas — gendered divisions of labor and spheres of
                  influence; histories of exclusion, inequity, and community-building. The picture
                  that emerges when we view gender alongside the history of technology in the
                  library suggests that information technology, broadly defined, has helped to
                  organize all of these gender patterns since the beginning of the modern library
                  era. Mostly it has served as a way to demarcate masculine, higher-status positions
                  within and associations with the library from feminine, lower-status positions and
                  associations. Specifically, those who invent and symbolically invest certain
                  technologies with cultural meaning are men, while those who use and manage
                  technologies are women. What is mystifying is how technology continues to serve
                  this function even as feminist efforts within libraries — where most workers are
                  women — have attempted to unmask and redirect these historical gender
                  patterns.
               The status, roles, pay, and perceptions of libraries and librarianship may be
                  organized in part by technology, but they are also united by their association
                  with the modern library’s service ethic, the professional signature of
                  librarianship, and the library’s claim to the domain of information services. It
                  was the service ethic that allowed women to enter the profession in the first
                  place in the guise of the genteel library hostess; a lady
                  librarian always ready to serve could
                  assist and defer to masculine pursuits.; Always ready to serve is
                     Garrison’s quotation of Virginia Graeff, The Gentle
                        Librarian: A Transcript from Experience,
                     Library Journal 30 (1905): 922. It
                  emphasized a particular kind of human labor: service is
                     self-effacing.
                  . As the gender of librarianship came
                  under feminist scrutiny, however, the ethic of service migrated — instead of being
                  abolished, it was adopted as an essential component of librarianship as a
                  professional occupation. An orientation towards service is a
                  professional trait for those who are effectively selling knowledge
                     services.Roma Harris notes that an orientation towards
                        service is a core feature of professionalism, which helps to
                     distinguish professions from other occupations . She later notes that service as it is usually practiced in
                     male-dominated professions such as law constitutes a relationship in which the professional
                        takes on the role of the expert with respect to the client and dispenses
                        information for a fee — an arrangement that would radically
                     undermine the equitable sharing of
                        resources that is at the foundation of librarianship .  But it seems to be enacted
                  differently in male- and female-dominated professions. In its more recent
                  historical guises, librarianship has brought service into the realm of services;
                  an attitude of service has become, in effect, a distinguishing feature of library
                  services. Service has gendered services. The relationship between service and
                  services in the library thus raises the question: is an attitude of service the
                  price you must pay for dispensing knowledge in a female-dominated profession?
                  Another way to put this is, if your services are not for sale, and if your ethic
                  of service dictates that you under-sell yourself, where does that leave you as a
                  professional?
               The elision of service and services in librarianship — into what we could call
                  service(s) — coincided historically with efforts to emphasize the human labor of
                  librarianship, as distinct from the library as collection. Library
                     services as a term of art became more prominent as the service ethic
                  was linked to a predominantly female workforce: a Google n-gram analysis suggests
                  that it began to appear in the literature around 1920 and rose to a peak in the
                  late 1970s.My guess is that the decline of this term after 1980 has to do
                     with the books in the Google collection, the migration of library professional
                     literature to journals, and the division of the idea of library
                        services into more discrete units, like access
                        services and systems.
                  
                     Google n-gram graph of the phrase library
                        services.
                     
                   To this day, librarians almost universally speak of library and
                  information services, as opposed to activities or its cognates like projects,
                  programs, or enterprises. Even the pedagogical work that librarians do is coded as
                  instruction, with its more practical and limited sense of ministering a lesson —
                  of serving it up, we might say — as opposed to teaching, a philosophically
                  inflected gerund whose agents make a path to knowledge. Library
                     services as an output are obviously not identical to the ethic of
                  service, but they have been connected by feminized notions of facilitation and
                  assistance, through which the library is positioned as subservient to what the
                  library enables, knowledge production.
               Technologies in the context of the library have also figured historically as
                  services to be used, as means to an end, rather than as forms of knowledge in and
                  of themselves, and have been largely invisible as technologies to non-librarians
                  until recently — this is true both of information technologies like print and the
                  database, and library-use technologies like circulation systems. One reason
                     library services continues to perform so efficiently as
                  shorthand for a particular idea of what libraries are for is that, in contrast to
                  the human valence the word carried fifty years ago, it now erases the distinction
                  between human labor and technological capacity: the people who work in libraries
                  exist on a continuum with the technologies they supply. Both workers and machines
                  are there to deliver the goods, not to create them.
               Computerized library catalogs, then journal databases, and now digital tools like
                  discovery overlays have made library technologies more visible as technologies —
                  more evident and more important. As libraries increasingly employ technology
                  specialists who collaborate with researchers or who themselves work as
                  researchers, in units that manage data or create tools, the library has become a
                  site of information technology production as well as a site of use. But this new
                  role is both obscure and obscurantist when it comes to gender: it is still hidden
                  behind the feminized façade of library services; and, paradoxically, it has
                  contributed to the invisibility of gender patterns. While technology needs have
                  brought more men with specialized and economically desirable skills into the
                  library workforce, these men have tended to earn more than most of their female
                  colleagues — and so far have not altered the overall status of libraries or
                  librarianship, whether they are perceived by the public as librarians or not.
                What this more recent history illustrates is that the simple infusion of new
                  technologies and even new role modalities into the library are not on their own
                  enough to shift inherited gender patterns. The addition of technological
                  specialists to the library has not had this effect, any more than have the
                  addition of faculty status for librarians, the idea of information science, or the
                  pedagogy of information literacy. Likewise, we cannot expect
                  the simple infusion of the digital humanities into the library to have a
                  transformative effect, unless we explicitly address the inherited and gendered
                  ideology of service(s).
               Service(s) are, in a word, a dilemma: what has given us value in the past is
                  precisely what devalues us now and henceforth. To withdraw from the traditional
                  rationale of service(s) would be painful, not only because of the distress of
                  operational change, but because it would affect the library’s core identity — the
                  ideals that enable and ennoble the librarian’s self-effacing role. But we may have
                  to, if we want libraries to survive. It is time to detach service from services.
                  It is time to modernize what we mean by service, and it is time to ditch the
                  paradigm that we think defines us — the idea that the library is just a vehicle
                  for services.
               The digital humanities appear to offer one mechanism for effecting this change, a
                  way forward that will benefit both libraries and the digital humanities. This
                  might just happen if the evolving set of technologies, roles, methods, and
                  outcomes that the digital humanities represent are mashed up with library
                  technologies, roles, methods, and expectations in ways that are designed to
                  terminate the gendered paradigm of services. At the same time, this mash-up might
                  be oriented towards a rigorously reconsidered ethic of service. Emancipated from
                  old patterns, service might even develop into an overarching value that is put
                  into action equitably across the higher education system: service through
                  research, teaching, institutional and disciplinary stewardship, and information
                  technologies that function both as tools and forms of learning.
               A library that is an active, specialized agent is less available as the broad
                  screen onto which we can project our most cherished and elusive civic principles
                  and information dreams. That is a loss, in some ways. But a library that sheds its
                  claims to timeless,
                  Oblivion-esque ideals can address its own internal
                  conflicts with those ideals — and can change in response to new conditions, needs,
                  and principles. What libraries have been is historically specific; what they
                  become is up for grabs, but they will not have the luxury of reinventing
                  themselves in the future if they are already obsolete. Libraries will find it
                  difficult to achieve actual transformation unless the gender and technology
                  frameworks within which they have traditionally operated are laid bare and
                  overturned. And the digital humanities will encounter greater obstacles to its
                  potential growth unless it has as a partner such a transformed library — a deficit
                  that will harm the humanities more generally. If the library does manage to
                  transform in ways that significantly alter its inherited gender and technology
                  formulae, then we will experience a new kind of shock of the
                     familiar — the shock that, looking backwards, we could ever have
                  imagined that what we had once done and been would be sufficient for the future.
               
            
         
