Title:  Introduction: Comics and the Digital Humanities
Volume:  009
Issue:  4
Date:  23 December 2015
Abstract:  
                
                This article reviews the difficulties of editing the Comics
                        as Scholarship special issue by contextualizing the history of
                    comics studies in English departments and the complexities of incorporating
                    scholarly multimedia into the digital humanities.
            
Full Body Text: 
Introduction: Comics and the Digital Humanities
In the July 2014 Critical Inquiry special issue devoted
                to Comics and Media, editors Patrick Jagoda and Hillary
                Chute discuss their interest in 
                    meticulous attention to the materiality
                        comics instantiates
                    
                . Comics and Media combined articles, interviews,
                and discussions about comics in textual form with several full-color comics by
                numerous artists like Alison Bechdel, Lynda Barry, Seth, and Phoebe Gloeckner, among
                others. With such a lineup, the editors felt that the issue should also express
                    its own commitment to the physical
                    object by publishing at a larger size (7x10) and in full color
                    throughout, to distinguish 
                    it from any other issue in the history
                        of Critical Inquiry
                    
                . The issue is a beautiful physical object, with a large fold-out section
                depicting Chris Ware’s poster to Chute’s 2012 Comics Philosophy
                    and Practice, a conference at the University of Chicago that provided
                much of the material for the issue. Ware’s poster, entitled A
                    CONFERENCE addressing the ART of the EMPATHETIC DOODLE, not only
                advertises the conference, it uses Ware’s typical form of satire in order to
                describe the process of becoming a comic artist. 
                    Ruin Your Life, Draw Cartoons! and Doom
                        Yourself to Decades of Grinding Isolation, Solipsism, and Utter Social
                        Disregard
                    
                . With 97 color plates occupying its 272 pages, a great portion of the book is
                reserved for color illustration. The finished object was so eye popping that digital humanities scholar Matt
                Kirschenbaum published a photo of the piece on Twitter the day he received the issue
                    [Figure 1, ]. Kirschenbaum’s affective response parallels Alvaro Aleman’s
                    observation that comic book publishers have historically constructed a variety
                    of packaging strategies in order to lure customers into their shops, including 
                        plastic sealed issues, glossy,
                            foiled and three dimensional covers, commemorative editions, etc
                        
                    . This, for Aleman, is a revirginizing experience in which a capitalist subject is
                    confronted by the yielding
                        of the comic book to sensual experience as a form of consumption
                    offering private control of the otherwise chaotic modernist experience of
                    temporality.

                Matt Kirschenbaum’s Tweet. Photograph by Kirschenbaum.
                
            
The brilliant physical presentation of Comics and Media
                created several problems for its digital archiving and dissemination. University of
                Chicago Press lists the price of the physical book at $30.00, while amazon.com sells
                it for $28.50. For academics looking to access the issue electronically, JSTOR
                publishes each of the articles and images as PDFs. Additionally, a Kindle version of
                the journal issue is available for $9.99 and it is also archived on Scribd. Each of
                these editions proves a poor substitute for the tactile fold-out grasped by
                Kirschenbaum in his tweet, often handling the images as oversized JPGs or
                downloadable PDFs. The Kindle version offers a larger scrollable image of the
                poster, and yet the JPG used in that version is not high resolution and quickly
                pixelates the smaller print abounding on Ware’s strip. JSTOR offers a much better
                image, but the image also appears on its side when first downloaded and must be
                rotated. To read Ware’s writing, the resolution must be increased to at least 200%
                of its original size.
In addition, many questions emerge about the long-term archiving of the issue. It is
                largely impossible to search for Ware’s poster by keyword or as a distinct object
                apart from its placement in the Critical Inquiry issue.
                Whereas, for instance, Ware’s panel with Seth, Daniel Clowes, and Charles Burns
                titled Graphic Novel Forms Today is easily accessed on
                the MLA database with any of a number of subject searches, the poster doesn’t even
                emerge on an author search for Ware, Chris. The metadata associated with
                Ware’s contributions to the issue cover only three general subject terms: Subject
                    literature: American Literature,
                Period: 1900-2099, and Genre: Periodicals, in addition to two skimpy
                topic keywords: The New Yorker and the role of cover illustration.
                Presumably, most of these keywords refer to Ware’s work providing covers for several
                issues of The New Yorker, none of them reflecting the
                cynicism or the typographic, sequential, and print media brilliance of the fold-out
                poster. As John Walsh’s description of Comic Book Markup Language shows, the
                complexities of sequential art require a rich language for keyword searches. A large corpus of digitized comic books, along with
                    encoded transcriptions and descriptive metadata, Walsh argues, would allow scholars to search the text of comic
                    books, search for keywords related to topics of interest, search for the
                    appearance of particular characters, or search for works by particular writers
                    and artists. And if such a rich vocabulary is fully exploited, Walsh
                continues, more complex searches would be possible along with 
                    other forms of computer processing and
                        computational analysis — based upon structural aesthetic, and informational
                        and documentary features peculiar to the genre of comic books
                    
                .
Such complexities are not critiques of Jagoda and Chute’s issue, but they do suggest
                that however much scholars write about comics and invite authors to discuss comics —
                a whole set of institutional and technological divisions between the comics
                industry, digital media, and academia continue to make such collaborations
                difficult. When we began the process of editing a special issue of Digital Humanities Quarterly devoted to Comics as Scholarship, we believed such difficulties were
                limited to the traditional scholarly preference for working in written text. But we
                found that we overestimated the ability of digital technology to bridge those
                divisions. What follows is a discussion of our three-year process editing this issue
                as an introduction to the opportunities and complexities of producing comics as
                scholarship, and the role of the digital humanities in either facilitating or
                resisting such a project. Along the way, we’ll investigate the history of comics
                studies and its need to justify itself as a literary discourse as symptomatic of the
                difficulty English departments have in considering multimedia as legitimate either
                as a form of communication or as an object of scholarship. We argue that these
                difficulties have a central role in understanding the place of multimedia in the
                digital humanities, and the future of comics as scholarship.

                Multimodality, Comics, and the Digital
                It is by no means obvious that a special issue tied to the production of comic
                    books belongs in the journal Digital Humanities
                        Quarterly. Despite many commitments by digital humanities scholars
                    to new forms of scholarly communication, Douglas Eyman and Cheryl Ball point out
                    that the digital humanities continues to largely focus on textual markup and
                    digital archival work. Consequently, 
                        no coherent body of scholarship
                            [exists] that offers a sustained analysis of scholarly multimedia and
                            its growing impact on digital scholarship in the humanities
                        
                    . In fact the most promising scholarship on the affordances of comics as a
                    form of communication comes from the field of multimodal composition. Dale
                    Jacobs, for instance, explores comics as a unique method for teaching multimodal
                    literacy and draws from the New London Group’s suggestion that, in Jacob’s
                    words, a burgeoning variety of text
                        forms associated with information and media technologies require a
                    broader definition of literacy and writing 
                    . Further, Emily Wierszewski underlines the importance
                    of producing comics for teaching multimodality to students, suggesting that the
                    process develops a working
                        understanding of commonly used conventions [...] and the attendant values
                        and effects involved in modalities that use a variety of images to
                    tell a story . While both Jacobs and Wierszewski
                    focus on students and media production, they do not apply the practices to the
                    production of scholarship — both of which are written mostly in scholarly prose
                    with few illustrations. Elizabeth Losh, Joshua Alexander, Alexander Canon, and
                    Zander Canon’s Understanding Rhetoric: A Graphic Guide to
                        Writing, on the other hand, uses the comics form to communicate the
                    basics of rhetoric [Figure 2].
                
                    Discussion of Ethos, Pathos, and Logos in Losh, Alexander, and Canon’s
                            Understanding Rhetoric
                    
                
                The artistic style of Understanding Rhetoric is
                    deliberately cartoony, reflecting Zander Canon’s work in his long-form
                    serialized comic Heck where caricature reveals the
                    creepiness of a descent into Hell underneath an old house. Understanding Rhetoric uses overemphasis, for instance, to reflect
                    the character of different rhetorical appeals on the visual representation of
                    Losh’s mood. In an interview on the blog Reading with
                        Pictures, Alexander discusses how writing the book as a graphic
                    novel caused them to rethink many assumptions they had about scholarly
                    communication. Alexander explains that while graphic books are often narratively driven through
                        dialogue, he and Losh found themselves relying heavily on text bubbles that narrated in a
                            universal voice. Instead of using the
                    graphic form to illustrate the rhetorical lessons in the book, they were using
                        expository communication,
                    consequently [e]ntire chapters had to
                        be rewritten to recast our exposition into dialogue
                    . While considering the various affordances of
                    different modalities of scholarly communication, these composition scholars have
                    been able to use comics both as a pedagogical aid and as a communicative device
                    for exploring different forms of expression.
                Still, for all of the commitment to the sequentiality and visual rhetoric of
                    comics, scholarship has yet to fully account for the remediation of comics as a
                    digital form. Many digital comics are direct translations of print, but
                    digitizing comics offers the opportunity to embed additional information, a
                    point Jaime Lee Kirtz illustrates in her study of paratextual elements like the
                    image processing that occurs when comics are made using Adobe Photoshop or
                    hyperlinks embedded in Kindle and iBook versions of comics that connect readers
                    to information about characters and creators . The
                    relationship of comics with digital modalities has primarily been focused on the
                    web as a medium for distribution that allows for niche and independent comics
                    outside of traditional publishing models, taking the zine scene and its direct
                    distribution to the amplified modality of the web. Many comics produced for the
                    web are commonly referred to as webcomics thanks to their
                    mode of distribution, but as a medium they only rarely take advantage of what
                    the digital form offers them. Such webcomics typically take their formal
                    constraints either from the daily newspaper (as in Scott Kurtz’s PvP, Ryan North’s Dinosaur
                        Comics, Mike Krahulik and Jerry Holkins’s Penny
                        Arcade, and Nicholas Gurewitch’s Perry Bible
                        Fellowship), while others use the page layout of comic books
                    (Brennan Lee Mulligan and Molly Ostertag’s Strong Female
                        Protagonist, R.K. Milholland’s Something
                        Positive and Katie Cook’s Gronk). Scott
                    McCloud famously proposed that comics would abandon the metaphor of the page
                    thanks to digital affordances in 2000, when he suggested that the screen could
                    act as an 
                        infinite canvas
                        
                    . The continued popularity of comics online that could just as easily be
                    conveyed in print seems to contradict Scott McCloud’s vision.
                The affordances of the web that have been most readily adapted are, in most
                    cases, less obvious: comics such as Willis’s
                        Shortpacked, for instance, use mouseover text to add a second
                    punchline to the comic . Zach Whalen has noted that
                    many webcomics make use of additional integrated elements of interactivity or
                    animation, like those of the Korean artist Horang, who programs webcomics that
                    take hold of the browser’s scroll
                        function and move rapidly through a series of carefully juxtaposed images in order to
                    startle their viewers . One of the most notable
                    examples of an animated comic that takes advantage of the digital medium is
                    Andrew Hussie’s Homestuck
                    . The comic has included a range of multimodal
                    aspects (GIFs, chat logs, and Flash games and animations) and has a very strong
                    fan following. The story concerns a video game discovered by a group of
                    teenagers, and a Kickstarter campaign was funded to produce a video game around
                    the comic’s narrative. Such successes demonstrate that the addition of the web
                    modality to the comic form can transform the core interaction of the experience.
                    The interactive approach taken by Hussie in Homestuck does not much resemble Scott McCloud’s prediction of a
                    comics form that would break out of the traditional page: while sections of the
                    comic are experimental and hybrid, the primary approach is still very much a
                    printed comic page. El Santo critiqued Scott McCloud’s proposal for the future
                    of comics by suggesting that an infinite canvas or scrollable page provides 
                        too much information at once in a
                            medium that’s drowning in it
                        
                    . 
                Yet despite this criticism there are several examples of scrolling comics,
                    including Emily Carroll’s His Face All Red (2010),
                    a vertical scrolling comic depicting a wolf hunt; and Drew Weing’s Pup Ponders the Heat Death of the Universe
                    (2003), which employs scrolling in both directions for exploring the scale of
                    the universe. These resemble Scott McCloud’s own infinite canvas comics, which
                    include his own meta-series of Can’t Stop Thinking
                    comics reflecting on the practice itself. Randall Munroe’s xkcd comics have offered some of the most compelling examples of
                    where these forms might lead. Munroe’s Click and
                        Drag, for instance uses an infinite canvas contained within a single
                    frame . Click and Drag
                    had an explorable panel ranging from space to underground and offering so much
                    content that Florian Wesch’s Google Maps adaptation offers the best interface
                    for viewing it in its totality [Figure 3, ].
                
                    Screenshot of Florian Wesch's Zoomable Map of XKCD’s Click and Drag
                    
                
                According to Erik McClure, the map is about 165888 pixels wide. He continues that
                    if an average human being were the size of one of the characters on the map, it
                    would take them 1.67 hours to walk from one end
                        of the image to another and if the author 
                        spent, on average, one hour
                            drawing each frame, it would take him 9.375 days of constant, nonstop
                            work to finish this. If he instead spent an average of 10 minutes per
                            frame, it would take ~37.5 hours, or almost an entire 40-hour work
                            week
                        
                    . Click and Drag maps out an entire
                    underground civilization and features references to Mark Z Danielewski’s House of Leaves, Super Mario Bros., H.P. Lovecraft,
                    and geeky programming humor. One frame, for instance, says 
                        If you’re fencepost errors I feel
                            bad for you, son — I got 99 problems but somehow solved 101
                        
                    . Fencepost problems point to simple errors where intuitive solutions to
                    programming problems might be one or two values off. The comic caused many
                    conversations online, and perhaps the most contested revolved around how Munroe
                    created it. Several readers thought that he simply created a programming script
                    that distinguished the space below and above the horizon, and filled those
                    spaces with black and white respectively. They expected, in other words, that
                    clicking on individual tiles would return a 404 error saying that they did not
                    exist on any server and were spontaneously generated by the script. Luis Montes
                    reports on a Google Plus post that he used HTML 5 canvas to stitch the tiles
                    together and reconstruct the image as a whole. Firefox and Chrome both barfed on 225 (non-empty) huge tiles,
                    Montes says, 
                        so i had to scale them down first
                            with mogrify to 64x64 to even paint the thing on a 5120x2048
                            canvas
                        
                    .
                The widespread interest from comic fans, programmers, and social media
                    commentators surrounding Click and Drag point to
                    the power comics have to reach multiple audiences, particularly when they are
                    enhanced with digital technology. Munroe’s Time
                    shows yet another possibility, in which he embeds 3,099 images in a single panel
                    that changed every thirty minutes. The comic inspired a devoted community that
                    followed the story as it unfolded from March to July 2013, complete with
                    messages in a writing system called Beanish that
                    followers had to decipher. The actions of those readers and their intense study
                    of the comic’s embedded texts and backstory are not unlike the labors of a
                    digital humanities project — with the forum conversation surrounding the comic
                    exceeding over 1,300 pages of commentary. An entire conversation emerged on the
                    xkcd forum when the first panel appeared on March 25, with the first poster
                        rhomboidal commenting that the comic seemed to communicate the idea 
                        that while time might appear
                            to be a strictly linear phenomenon, its manifestation as life is
                            actually a profoundly open, richly holistic, poly-temporal intercreative
                            experience with many points, narratives, and interpretations as there
                            are participants in it
                        
                    . Such a description, while missing the point of most of the narrative
                    that followed, serves as a powerful commentary on the way digital comics can
                    inspire further creative expression. One fan, James Pryor, was inspired enough
                    to create Time — at your own pace in which the
                    panels of the comic could be scrolled through using a mouse-wheel instead of
                    relying on the time-based algorithm of the original comic. Fans also produced a
                    wiki-guide to the comic, a glossary of the world and its inhabitants, and wrote
                    songs relating to its themes .
                As we continue to consider the place of comics within the digital humanities, it
                    is worth noting that many of the creators working with digital comics are
                    careful to separate such artifacts from animation or other digital media. Comic
                    author Mark Waid, one of the more vocal digital comic enthusiasts, argues that
                        the only place I stop short is at the
                        addition of voice, music, or anything else that takes the full and total
                        control of time away from the reader, which he feels is an essential and inviolate element of comic books. Of course, Waid’s
                    distinction would rule out comics like xkcd’s Time,
                    and yet even Lara Hudson — commenting on Munroe’s comic — argues that the
                    temporality of the piece was glacially slow for
                        animation, but imbued with a continual sense of motion that felt utterly
                        unique for a comic. It is clear from these comments that comics
                    continue to inhabit a liminal space between readerly narratives and animated
                    features that make them difficult to place for creators, critics, and scholars
                    alike.
                When we recall the early publishing history of comics, which were closer to the
                    pulp ephemera of newspapers and cheap penny dreadfuls than to the elite literary
                    publications traditionally celebrated in English departments, it’s easy to see
                    this confusion.The American cultural alignment of
                        comics with children’s literature inspires many articles that declare comics
                        are finally coming into their own, growing up, or otherwise being accepted
                        as literature. An example is Peter Schjeldahl’s 2005 article in The New
                        Yorker, where he uses the work of Chris Ware to declare Graphic Novels Come of Age, . The question of the
                            literariness of comics is particularly interesting
                        since the word in question has nothing to do with the technological
                        affordances of the literary medium, and everything to do with what Rocco
                        Versaci identifies in his students as a sensibility defined by works whose importance is beyond
                            question
                        . Donald Ault, who started teaching and
                    researching comics at Berkeley in 1972 and at Vanderbilt in 1978, recalls that
                        Comics were the whacko
                        kinds of things that the news media expected would be taught at a
                            radical institution like Berkeley, where I had
                        acquired what I considered to be a badge of honor when Stephen Greenblatt
                        proleptically dubbed me the Departmental trash
                        man. The technological situation at Berkeley also lead to
                    situations in which finding and distributing comics became increasingly
                    difficult: 
                        Back issues of comics were not yet
                            readily available in quality reprints [...] so I had to put my own
                            copies on reserve in the library. When these photocopies were stolen, I
                            had to resort to putting photocopies on reserve. When the photocopies
                            were stolen, I realized some more secure framework, along the lines of
                            special collections or rare books had to be devised if the course were
                            to be practical at all.
                        
                     Several of the comics stolen from the library were from the
                        collection of Carl Barks, whom Ault befriended and collaborated with for
                        decades before Barks’s death in 2000. As he recounts, 
                            This theft led to Carl Barks
                                stamping the covers of all of his comic books with this message:
                                ‘This is the personal file copy of Carl Barks. Anyone else
                                possessing the book has stolen it
                            
                        .
                Ault would go on to found ImageTexT: Interdisciplinary
                        Comics Studies in 2003 the first online open access journal on
                    comics and cultural theory. It is our contention that — in 2014 — the
                    difficulties surrounding the composition of comics in scholarly
                    contexts is less technological and more social. The institutions of scholarly
                    publishing, with some notable exceptions, continue to favor written prose to the
                    detriment of new technological possibilities that would make comics more favored
                    as a form of communication. As Anastasia, along with Nick Sousanis, Paul
                    Tritter, and Tom Neville recounted in a panel called Expanded Forms of Scholarly Inquiry at the Imagining America: Arts and Scholars in Public Life 2012 conference
                    in New York City, these assumptions lead to problems like: accessing alternate
                    forms of scholarship in archival spaces, the demands on creators working with
                    expressive and analytic acts in different modalities, and the difficulties of
                    evaluating such forms given the dual demands of scholarly and artistic merit
                        . As we chart the history of this issue,
                    we’ll look for inspirations and note specific limitations that resulted in the
                    shape of Comics in Scholarship.
            

                THATCamp and Experimental Pedagogy
                The idea for this issue was born out of a 2012 THATCamp session proposed by
                    Anastasia and attended by Roger entitled Comic Books +
                        Playing with Scholarship
                    . THATCamp has traditionally been an entry point for
                    many scholars into digital humanities discourse, making it a particularly
                    productive ground for interdisciplinary projects and experimentation. The
                    THATCamp Comic Books session was inspired by existing examples of comics that
                    act as scholarship, a tradition best known through the work of Scott McCloud and
                    exemplified by some of the work in Jagoda and Chute’s Comics and Media issue. Other examples can be productively drawn
                    from outside of typical academic discourse. Art Spiegelman’s MetaMaus, and, indeed, the historical and journalistic
                    work of Maus itself, is frequently cited as a
                    central text on the Holocaust and the ultimate example of a comic book that
                    transcended genre to be hailed as a canonical text. In a similar vein of
                    intertwining journalism and scholarship, Mary Talbot and Bryan Talbot’s Dotter of her Father’s Eyes examines the life and
                    influence of James Joyce’s daughter Lucia. Bryan Talbot is well-known for his
                    graphic epic Alice in Sunderland, a work that
                    combines fiction, history, and myth to consider Alice in
                        Wonderland as part of a web of literature.
                From these initial influences, those of us gathered at the THATCamp Comic Books + Playing with Scholarship session
                    discussed a potential moment of convergence for scholars interested in comics as
                    a form for production as well as analysis. First, while journals specializing in
                    scholarly multimedia like Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric,
                        Technology, and Pedagogy, M/C: Media and
                        Culture, and MediaCommons have existed
                    for some time, the rise of interest in open access and alternative publishing in
                    the humanities that correspond with the needs of DH scholars makes publishing a
                    work in comic form a greater possibility than perhaps ever before. Second, more
                    accessible forms of digital production tools make the act of creating multimedia
                    works easier. For instance, Roopika Risam, Anne Cong-Huyen, and Adeline Koh
                    employed the comic application Bitstrips to produce short, humorous, and rapid
                    postcolonial interventions into the digital humanities community [Figure 4].
                
                    Postcolonial #DH, No. 6 by Roopika
                        Risam
                    
                
                Risam’s strip exploits the ability of Bitstrips to show a wide variety of
                    expressions with a relatively limited amount of character poses and emotive
                    choices. In Postcolonial #DH, No. 6 Risam uses
                    humor and different forms of technology to enact Audre Lorde’s well-known
                    critique of Franz Fanon’s optimism regarding the use of the master’s tools to contest colonialism. As Lorde
                    argues, 
                        the master’s tools will never
                            dismantle the master’s house. They may allow us temporarily to beat him
                            at his own game, but they will never enable us to bring about genuine
                            change
                        
                    . The optimism shown by the characters in the strip soon turns to
                    frustration, with Risam rolling on the floor overwhelmed by 
                        too. much. css
                        
                    . Aaron Kashtan, whose work is featured in this issue, sees Bitstrips
                    enabling his own practice-based experimentation in comic studies and media
                    studies. Connecting its use to a long tradition
                        of using the comics medium to theorize itself epitomized by Scott
                    McCloud’s Understanding Comics and Wil Eisner’s
                        Comics and Sequential Art, Kashtan says that 
                        my artistic talent is very
                            limited and [...] without tools such as Bitstrips and Comic Life, it
                            would be prohibitively difficult for me to engage in this sort of
                            theoretical exploitation
                        
                    . While Kashtan's work suggests that such tools can make the visual and
                    symbolic rhetoric of comics accessible to the "non-artist," it is also a
                    reminder that when the medium theorizes itself it will likely be evaluated on
                    aesthetics alongside scholarship.
                Third, graduate students are beginning to ask for different modalities of
                    communication to produce their dissertations. Nick Sousanis wrote his
                    dissertation as a comic and documented the process on his blog Spin, Weave, and Cut from 2010-2014. In his article
                        The Shape of our Thoughts: A Meditation In/On
                        Comics, Sousanis uses the form of a cross-word puzzle to discuss the
                    non-linearity of comics and their power to lead the reader to unexpected
                    insights not available in written prose [Figure 5,
                        .
                
                    Nick Sousanis, Page from The Shape of Our Thoughts: A
                            Meditation In/On Comics.
                        Visual Arts Research. 38.1 (Summer 2012),
                        1-10.
                    
                
                This page eloquently shows how the linear reading of text, signified by the comet
                    slowly floating down the page, breaks up in a myriad of visual and verbal
                    digressions. Each narrative box works modularly to compose different potential
                    readings of the page. We learn that the verbal is overprivileged as the only path to
                        serious thought and this could lead to a single strand and narrows our sight, but our eye could also
                    move to other routes or
                    any of the scientific studies or images featured on the page. The overall effect
                    points to Theirry Groensteen’s argument that comics are defined by iconic solidarity, which
                    means, 
                        independent images that,
                            participating in a series, present the double characteristic of being
                            separated [...] and which are plastically and semantically
                            over-determined by the fact of their coexistence in presentia
                        
                    . In Groensteen’s definition, it is the very fact that images are
                    presented together that makes it possible for them to be read sequentially and
                    not, for example, as a mosaic or as a single composition. Sousanis’s page plays
                    with the tension between the sequentiality and the simultaneity of the comic
                    page in order to show how ideas can be splintered apart and then combined into
                    new regions of thought. Sousanis produced a prose discussion of his process for
                    this issue, where he further uncovers the complexities and possibilities of the
                    comic form for scholarship. His dissertation is also now available as the book
                        Unflattening from Harvard University Press . Jason Helms, whose work appears in this issue as
                    well, also wrote a dissertation that employs comics throughout. As a
                    “non-artist,” Helms began taking drawing classes in 2008 as part of his research
                    methodology, and defended his dissertation, Rhiz|comics:
                        the Structure, Sign, and Play of Image and Text, in 2010. Helms’s
                    dissertation is less of a pure comic than Sousanis’s. It
                    features sections that look and feel like comics, but much of the dissertation
                    consists of text punctuated and interrupted by visual elements (the conclusion,
                    for example, is written entirely as calligrams). However, this is hardly an
                    oversight and reflects his argument for blurring the lines between comics and
                    other media as well as those between image and text. Helms has rewritten his
                    dissertation as a digital monograph for the University of Michigan Press’s
                    Sweetland Digital Rhetoric Collaborative imprint, where it is currently under
                    review.
                Fourth, we found that writing teachers were experimenting with the comics form as
                    an alternative to traditional essays. Roger, for instance, taught two sections
                    of a comics class in 2011 as a Marion L. Brittain Fellow at Georgia Tech in
                    which he asked his students to create a 22-page comic book. Students spent the
                    semester pitching a title, researching audiences and comic genres, writing,
                    illustration, and finally publishing a comic book that they presented to members
                    of the University community at a campus comics convention.
                
                    Detail of a page from Mark Price, Jared Kimmel, Ryan Leary, Gerin
                        Williams, Justin Luk, and Matt Hooper’s comic Loser, completed for Roger Whitson’s ENC 1102 Multimodal
                        Composition class Fall 2010 at Georgia Tech.
                    
                
                Roger’s students spent a good amount of time considering the various impact of
                    different panel arrangements and — as the example above skillfully shows — the
                    effect of juxtaposing different artistic styles with one another [Figure 6]. Here, we see Mark Price’s use of heavy
                    inks and wild composition contrasted with the relatively clean white and grey
                    space of the monitor screen. Fred Johnson discusses a similar project utilizing
                    comics by art-teacher Scott Kolbo in his article Perspicuous Objects: Reading Comics and Writing Instruction.
                    Kolbo’s project had students draw 
                        themselves in two different
                            styles and observ[e] the differences
                        
                    . Both Johnson and Kolbo found that their students had difficulties with
                    basic aspects of sequential art like the use of images to communicate the
                    sadness of Chris Ware’s Jimmy Corrigan: The Smartest Kid on
                        Earth or the way particular artistic styles might denote specific
                    emotional states. We’ll discuss how some of these difficulties extend to
                    scholars producing their own comics later on. The study of comics as an
                        art form is popular amongst various community organizations like
                        Gainesville, Florida’s Sequential Artists Workshop where courses on the
                        history of comics taught by scholar John Ronan are combined with workshops
                        led by local artists Justine Maria Anderson, Tom Hart, and Kurt Wolfgang. In
                        an article about SAW in the magazine Gainesville
                            Today, Hart describes students learning in a variety of media to
                        understand sequential art including musical compositions, literature, opera
                        and theater, and visual art. Learning
                            certain techniques will allow you to break those rules later,
                        Hart says. 
                            Our main goal in this medium
                                is clarity above all else at least at this stage of their
                                learning
                            
                        .
                Each of the examples above illustrates some of the grassroots efforts at
                    understanding comics from broader interdisciplinary perspectives and for a
                    variety of different purposes: journal articles, social media interventions,
                    dissertations and monographs, and teaching pedagogies. Our discussions at
                    THATCamp included many more of these examples, but we found no systematic
                    consideration of how they fit into the scholarship of our various fields. Our
                    purpose in creating this issue grew out of a desire to contextualize the
                    importance of these visual and verbal experiments for scholarly communication,
                    and also to explore the process necessary for creating, evaluating, and sharing
                    work of this kind. As we considered the possibilities, we created a
                        call for papers that acted as a comic itself. As we
                    considered the possibilities, we created a call for papers
                    that acted as a comic itself [Figure 7].
                
                    Anastasia Salter and Roger Whitson, Comics as
                            Scholarship CFP
                    
                
                The CFP was created with a combination of hand-drawing, GIMP, Photoshop, and HTML
                    5 coding. Even while noting Anastasia’s particular skill at rendering
                    caricatures of both of the editors, the CFP foregrounded some of the
                    complications that would emerge as the issue progressed. First, the banner was
                    created by Roger by copying the Digital Humanities
                        Quarterly logo from the site and running it through several filters
                    on Photoshop. The 0 cents is cropped from the digitized cover of Detective Comics #27, which originally sold for 10
                    cents. Finally the font was chosen directly from Photoshop’s font library.
                    Connecting the banner to the images prepared by Anastasia was complicated due to
                    the varying styles and methodologies of both of the editors. It was unclear how
                    hand-drawn images, digitally-processed type fonts, and filters would work
                    together to create a clean, readerly design. Further, as neither Anastasia nor
                    Roger are trained comic artists, we felt some reluctance towards presenting our
                    CFP as sequential art. Thus, we posted the call in two forms: a traditional
                    prose version and the illustrated or sequential CFP. We also wondered if
                    scholars would take the call seriously. Anastasia, therefore, posted a call in
                    traditional prose in addition to the one rendered in sequential art. The text
                    call was easier to distribute in scholarly venues, including email lists and CFP
                    sites, as the rendered version presented both a large file size and difficulties
                    for those mediums. The comic CFP took some time to produce, a lesson we’d
                    integrate into the submission and revision process for the issue .
            

                Submissions, Revisions, Process
                One of the difficulties of producing comics in scholarly circles is the
                    labor-intensive process involved in constructing sequential images that produce
                    a narrative. Rob Guillory, artist on the long-running series Chew from Image Comics, discusses the time it takes to
                    produce a typical 22-page issue for a monthly book: 
                        My overall monthly schedule looks
                            like this: The first week and a half of an issue is spent laying out the
                            issue via thumbnails, then penciling the whole thing out. The two weeks
                            after that are spent inking the pages in groups of two. Then, the last
                            week is spent coloring. My color assistant Taylor Wells sends me the
                            flat colors for the issue, and from there I add texture, lighting,
                            shadow and special effects to the page. So, in the end, it always seems
                            to round out to about 5 weeks per issue.
                        
                     Understanding this process and the fact that Guillory is one of the most
                    efficient professional artists in the industry, we knew that we couldn’t ask for
                    finished comics as first drafts. First, asking for finished drafts would mean
                    that the potential authors would have to invest a significant amount of time
                    before getting any feedback from the editors. Second, if the author was rejected
                    from the issue after producing finished drafts, we knew that it would be
                    relatively difficult for the work to be accepted elsewhere. In consultation with
                        DHQ editor Julia Flanders, we decided to ask
                    for abstracts in the first round, scripts and penciled layouts in the second
                    round (involving outside reviewers), then — if accepted by the reviewers — we
                    would ask for a finished comic book for the final draft.
                Even with these failsafes in place, we had numerous complications. Five
                    contributors pulled out the issue at various stages, often citing lack of time
                    as a major concern. While this is a problem throughout academia, it seemed
                    particularly difficult in the context of producing works for this medium.
                    Outside reviewers, meanwhile, had a number of conflicting and confusing
                    responses to the drafts. Some were concerned that the comics were in a
                    less-than-complete state. Others didn’t understand how the submissions were
                    contributing to the field of digital humanities. Flimsy research and a lack of a
                    critical lens were often cited problems. One reviewer suggested that using
                    comics to make an argument about research is very similar to the work of Scott
                    McCloud, and that the use of humor to make a scholarly argument may be
                    inappropriate. Reviewers critiqued everything from the exuberance of using too
                    many exclamation points to the lack of an original argument, the use of populist
                    appeals to ground claims, and the lack of a bibliography or Works Cited page. We
                    mention these issues not to critique the review process, which significantly
                    added to the quality of the submissions. Rather, we wish to underscore just how
                    complicated producing comics can be, and the way certain modalities of
                    scholarship can create unexpected — and perhaps unwanted — opportunities for
                    different effects. Is it appropriate to use humor in order to assert a scholarly
                    claim? Can quotations and citations be managed using visual references rather
                    than bibliographical or textual ones? Such questions invigorated but also
                    complicated the process of producing the issue.
                For the remainder of the introduction, we’d like to offer brief glimpses of the
                    production of each article for Comics as
                        Scholarship, with the purpose of showing how the process of review
                    transformed the submissions. Nick Sousanis, who contributed
                    an annotated discussion of his dissertation, required the least amount of work.
                    In sum, it was difficult at first for Sousanis to completely contextualize his
                    argument for broader audiences. Given that he produced the piece in a Word
                    document, we were able to use Track Changes to add
                    commentary [Figure 8].
                
                    Some of the comments, were, themselves references to other media.
                        Screenshot of Sousanis’s first draft, with comments by Roger.
                    
                
                While some of the reviewers expressed hesitation with what they saw as a piece
                    without a central argument, we feel that having Sousanis’s discussion of
                    producing the first comic as a dissertation to be a highlight of the issue.
                    Sousanis explores Chapter 3 of his dissertation, in
                    which he outlines the possibilities of multiple modes of knowledge. One
                    particular point of interest involves Sousanis’s self-reflexive discussion of
                    producing a single page of his dissertation. When asked if he produces words or
                    pictures first, he simply replies yes.
                    Sousanis writes notes and sketches simultaneously, then moves to a script, then
                    a storyboard, then revisions and drawing again. Sousanis’s words meld with their
                    images and produce sequential argumentation.
                Jason Helms produced perhaps the most visually unique of our
                    pieces. He uses the comic form to explore the history of comics scholarship,
                    with a special emphasis on the field of rhetoric and composition. His first
                    images included a brilliant recreation of the Bayeux Tapestry, cited by McCloud
                    as one of the first pieces of comic art . Helms
                    beautifully appropriates the texture of the Tapestry to create his modern
                    history [Figure 9].
                
                    Detail of Helms’s Sample Image Featuring a Discussion Between Will Eisner,
                        Scott McCloud, and Robert Harvey
                    
                
                While Helms wanted initially to include full block quotations as well as
                    caricatures from Deleuze and Guattari and media theorist Gregory Ulmer, we both
                    decided that streamlining the theoretical sections and highlighting Helms’s
                    digital artistry in the tapestry section would produce a better result. The
                    first draft of the sample image, further, featured a less-than-clear serif font.
                    A sans-serif combined with a CSS roll-over images that highlight the dialogue
                    and narrative balloons lead to greater readability.
                In all, we felt that Helms’s invocation of the Bayeux Tapestry intervened
                    compellingly into the visualization of comics history. Richard Burt has
                    suggested that films appropriating the Tapestry into their opening and closing
                    sequences have used it to simulate the texture of the
                    medieval past and that such a simulation can point us to the idea that all
                    histories are mediated by the material modes of their presentation . To be sure, the presentation of comics history has a
                    more recent self-reflexive history than the fields of film or literary
                    scholarship. Fred Van Lente and Ryan Dunlavey, for instance, produced a Comic Book History of Comics that tells the story in
                    sequential art . Yet, Helms reminds us how often the
                    particular material affordances of comic history can often be overlooked in a
                    world where comics are produced in single issue floppies, trade paperbacks, and
                    digital formats.
                Aaron Kashtan’s work on comics materiality similarly
                    highlights these affordances. Kashtan was enthusiastic about the project, yet
                    also had anxieties about producing art for a scholarly publication. Most of his
                    project emerged from early experiments with Bitstrips [Figure 10]. 
                        One of Kashtan’s first BitStrips Experiments, Created for a
                            Presentation on Teaching Multimodality with
                                Comics for DragonCon in 2013
                        
                     As his style evolved, Kashtan found that his original definition of
                        artistic talent was too narrow and layered more
                    sophisticated BitStrips models with photographs, hand-written lettering,
                    filtered images, multiple fonts, paintings, manuscripts, word-clouds, Ebook
                    images, comic panels, and internet memes. While emphasizing the ability of
                    sequential art to highlight different materialities, Kashtan found his style by
                    combining those different modes into a unique collage.
                Kashtan also used the form of comics to comment upon theories of materiality from
                    N. Katherine Hayles’s notion of a materiality that combines matter with human
                    signifying strategies to Matt Kirschenbaum’s distinction of forensic and formal
                    materiality and Jane Bennett’s theory of a vibrant matter, in which non-human
                    entities act and communicate without a human mediator 
                    
                    . For us, the value of Kashtan’s work lies in
                    showing how comics forcibly alert
                        the reader to the physicality of the reading experience, in
                    Kashtan’s words, asserting that comic books are a vital object of study for
                    anyone interested in the history of the book, philosophy, media studies, or the
                    digital humanities.
                The use of multiple styles and fonts to illustrate and cite academic sources is
                    also at work in Aaron Humphrey’s multimodal analysis of the
                        Introducing and For
                        Beginners series of comic book introductions to critical theory. In
                    some instances, photocopied and JPG images of the books mimicked the multimedia
                    production of the books themselves [Figure 11].
                        
                        A Panel Featuring Humphrey’s Original Sketches and Photocopies of the
                            Derrida and Foucault Books.
                        
                     Humphrey’s style was already established before he started work on the
                    issue. Much of his work explores the intersection between visual literacy,
                    comics, and education. He argues that his process of hand-lettering was much
                    more time-consuming and labor intensive than typing an article on a word
                    processor, but he wanted to give the sense that the lettering was inseparable
                    from the images he produced. The result is a piece in which words are also
                    objects that Humphrey places in different parts of the page for different visual
                    effects.
                The initial stages of his work proposed to read the books on their own terms,
                    neglecting the powerful rhetorical possibilities inherent in the comic as a
                    multimodal form. As he explored the work of Gunther Kress and the New London
                    group for later revisions, Humphrey crafted a powerful piece comparing the
                    inseparability of different modalities of communication in comics to a division
                    of labor that demands different experts work on each part. He also underlined
                    his point by having his images and text respond to one another, and by asking
                    how such divisions might work to challenge the educational hegemony that sees
                    printed texts as more learned 
                    .
                Robert Watkins and Thomas Lindsley expand the emphasis of
                    educational comics in pedagogy and the digital humanities by beginning their
                    work with Gene Luen-Yang’s American Born Chinese,
                    which Cheryl Gnomes has lauded as being particularly useful for students with
                    learning disabilities . Yet they also situate
                    their discussion of multimodality within the frame of ancient rhetoric and
                    critical pedagogy [Figure 12]. 
                        Early Storyboard Sketch from Watkins and Lindsley
                        
                     Watkins began working by himself, but eventually added Thomas Lindsley
                    as a collaborator to do the art, coding, and web design. As they revised their
                    piece, Watkins and Lindsley also added a more diverse set of examples to back up
                    their claims about rhetoric and comics. Watkins and Lindsley also translated
                    their earlier drawings to HTML5. For us, the piece exemplifies a different
                    aspect of comics history and analysis than the other submissions because it
                    highlights the work of ancient rhetoric in contextualizing and shaping comics
                    history.
                Watkins and Lindsley’s work also shows that teachers can demonstrate the
                    pedagogical effectiveness of the comic form by exploring sequential art similar
                    to their contribution, which visualizes collaborative practices accessible to
                    students as an alternative to the visual flattening of voices in the written
                    essay. This multimodal approach takes advantage of existing tools as well as a
                    grounding in rhetorical theory to explore sequential art as a method for
                    communicating both the process and results of a scholarly act.
                One of the more provocative yet also fascinating pieces came from Religious
                    Studies scholar B.J. Parker, who traces some of the
                    intersections between gender and Judaism in Ezekiel. Unlike many of the other
                    contributors, Parker wanted to construct a fictional narrative out of scholarly
                    sources. The ambition of the piece was matched by early images that were clearly
                    polished and showed a degree of artistic skill [Figure
                        13]. 
                        Detail of an Early Sequence from B.J. Parker
                        
                     Parker integrates scholarly debates around Ezekiel directly into the
                    narrative. Parker’s initial proposal focused on exploring sexual objectification
                    in Ezekiel 16 through comics. Parker’s initial proposal focused on exploring
                    sexual objectification in Ezekiel 16 through multimodal presentations, including
                    this development of sequential art. Given that focus, B.J. Parker’s was one of
                    the most difficult pieces for our reviewers to grapple with. The piece deals
                    with subject matter that we don’t always engage with in digital humanities, and
                    some of the reactions to the early stages of the piece focused on apprehending
                    and responding to the disturbing subject matter. However, these responses and
                    the difficulties the piece poses are essential to Parker’s intentions, as
                    Parker’s work demands we engage with elements of the text that have otherwise
                    often been erased.
                This concept of a scholarly retelling thus resembles the work of creating an
                    annotated edition, with Parker’s annotations expressed both through the editing
                    of the text and the juxtaposition of original imagery. Comic retellings are
                    often thought of as simplifications of the original text, an impression that
                    holds within it an underlying bias towards sequential art as a mode of narrative
                    expression. The Classic Illustrated series, which
                    Parker’s work of adaptation evokes, was often dismissed despite its value. As
                    William B. Jones, Jr. describes in his survey of the series, between 1941 and
                    1962 Classic Illustrated made 
                        the realms of the literary and
                            historical imagination accessible and immediate
                        
                    . Parker’s work likewise makes the original text, and the debates and
                    cultural discourse it evokes, accessible in a way that highlights and
                    recontextualizes its place in religious discourse.
            

                Conclusion
                As you explore the diverse works included in this collection, we invite you
                    particularly to consider the scholarly process that is on display and the
                    opportunities we have in the digital humanities to embrace and refine these
                    processes. Each work represents the different strengths of its author(s) in
                    modality, use of original and remixed imagery, and textual methods. These works
                    only display a small section of what is possible in the broad realm that can be
                    analyzed as sequential art or comics. The history of humanities computing,
                    broadly construed, is filled with multimodal works: however, we are still at our
                    infancy in truly building spaces that are receptive to new methods, with systems
                    of peer review that encourage innovation and experimentation. The challenges we
                    faced in constructing this issue are a reminder that while the academic essay
                    and monograph are entrenched structures with strong institutional support, the
                    scholarly multimedia text is still emerging.
                The practice of critiquing and understanding a mode of expression better through
                    working within its medium is not new, and we are not suggesting that comics are
                    a new method for the digital humanities or even that multimodal texts aren’t
                    already embraced in a number of spaces, such as the fields of digital rhetoric
                    and multimedia composition. However, there is a chasm between what is possible
                    in sequential art as an act of scholarship and what is supported and
                    institutionalized. We showcase these works as a provocation for building new
                    scholarly spaces and experimenting with multimedia research within the digital
                    humanities. We also suggest that these experiments form one part of Johanna
                    Drucker’s call in Graphesis: Visual Forms of Knowledge
                        Production for an approach towards digital technology that
                    acknowledges the complex research in the humanities surrounding perspective and
                    point-of-view . As scholars consider the various
                    ways the culturally-rich forms of knowledge from the humanities can nuance
                    claims made by computational methodologies like big data visualization, it helps
                    to realize that all sorts of experiments with visual perception already exist in
                    the form of sequential art. Apart from simply communicating with comics, Comics as Scholarship also points to a possible future
                    for the digital humanities where data analysis is made even richer by modifying
                    temporal sequence, shifting points of view, or varying the style in which
                    visualizations are presented. More generally, such experiments can suggest that
                    studying comics may prove to be a fundamental part of understanding the digital
                    humanities in the future.
            
