Title:  Algorithmic Close Reading: Using Semantic Triplets
               to Index and Analyze Agency in Holocaust Testimonies
Volume:  016
Issue:  3
Date:  25 June 2022
Abstract:  
            The following article presents a digital humanities exploration of indexing and
               analyzing expressions of agency in Holocaust testimonies. Using a set of text
               analysis methods to identify, classify, and visualize semantic triplets, we
               show how attention to agency complements and extends conventional approaches to
               indexing. Our examples come from two corpora of Holocaust oral histories: the first
               were conducted in Displaced Persons camps in 1946 by an interviewer named David
               Boder; the second were conducted by the USC Shoah Foundation Visual History Archive
               in the 1990s. We focus on two salient testimonies from each corpus in order to
               describe the methodology and what the analysis of agency can contribute to the
               writing of microhistories of the Holocaust. Building on semantic web analyses,
               the methods provide a groundwork for the development of a graph database to search
               testimonies by agency and thereby provide historical insights about what people
               report they did and what was done to them.
         
Full Body Text: 

            1 Introduction
            Oral histories conducted with survivors are infinitely rich sources for understanding
               the complex events of the Holocaust. As first-person narratives, oral history
               interviews with Holocaust survivors provide vital, eyewitness testimony about the
               rise of Nazi Germany, the violent acts of genocide, and reflections on its aftermath.
               The era of the witness, as Annette Wieviorka calls it, coincides with the
               emergence of institutional recording initiatives, such as those at Yad Vashem, Yale’s
               Fortunoff Video Archive, the US Holocaust Memorial Museum (USHMM), and the USC Shoah
               Foundation Visual History Archive . Altogether, these
               archives have recorded well over one-hundred thousand hours of testimony and
               preserved hundreds of thousands of individual stories.
            Because of the sheer size of these collections, indexing systems are critically
               important for accessing their content. As such, all of these collections can be
               searched effectively by names, dates, events, places, organizations, and various
               subject headings. This is because noun-based ontologies form the taxonomic
               structure of most indexing systems and finding aids. Attuned to the objective realm
               of what was said, these ontologies help make the general content of an oral history
               discoverable and accessible to researchers and the broader community of listeners.
               When users enter keywords into a textbox, search and retrieval works because the
               content is consistently and thoroughly described by a standardized, controlled
               vocabulary .
            Not surprisingly, this is also the approach of most entity-recognition software
               packages, such as OpenNLP  and SpaCy , which are very successful at identifying things said,
               such as proper names, organizations, geographic locations, historical events, dates,
               units of time, quantities, and other numerical units, such as percentages and times
               of day. But one of the fundamental limits is the focus on extracting isolated
               elements (primarily nouns) rather than larger narrative units that describe what
               people did and what was done to them. The purpose of this paper is to ask: In what
               ways can oral histories be mined computationally to index how survivors narrate
               behaviors, actions, reactions, assessments, and modes of self-orientation and
               personal agency? This is vitally important in Holocaust testimonies since agency is
               often described within networks of violence and coercion. This paper explores a
               method for extracting, characterizing, and interlinking semantic triplets to
               index and analyze vectors of action and agency, rather than just discrete topics,
               themes, or isolated nouns. In so doing, we complement conventional indexing to gain a
               richer, nuanced understanding of the events, agents, and actions described in a
               testimony.
            A semantic triplet is a grammatical unit consisting of Subjects,
                  Relations, and Objects. Subjects are units
               consisting of nouns, primarily people, pronouns, and proper names, as well as direct
               modifiers of the subject. Relations are verb units including one or more
               verbs, related prepositions, and modifiers like adverbs. Objects, both
               direct and indirect, have a broader range of parts of speech and include regular noun
               units, adjectives, adverbs, and more. For example, I removed the yellow
                  patch Removing the yellow patch refers to removing the yellow
                  star that Jews were forced to wear on their outer garments to identify themselves
                  publicly.  is a semantic triplet expressed as active speech (something the
               subject did), while I was shipped to Auschwitz is a semantic triplet
               expressed as passive speech (something done by an unspecified agent to the subject).
               By linking semantic triplets with descriptive, keyword metadata, we hope to show how
               new patterns of agency and previously unrecognized microhistories
                can be highlighted and discovered within oral
               histories. Rather than considering our method as a reduction or simplification of the
               text into discrete units of data, we argue that semantic triplets form a paratext
               that highlights the richness of the testimonial narrative by adding to existing
               metadata and methods of indexing.
         

            2 Indexing Approaches in Two Corpora of Holocaust Testimonies
            
               2.1 Corpus #1: David Boder’s 1946 Interviews with Displaced Survivors 
               The psychologist and linguist David Boder has a unique place in the history of
                  Holocaust testimony collection because he was the first person to record the
                  voices of displaced survivors in their own words after the end of World War
                     II. Both before and after the time that Boder completed his audio
                     recordings, various Historical Commissions throughout Germany, Poland, Hungary,
                     and Eastern Europe also collected personal stories, primarily through written
                     questionnaires and interviews . In the
                  summer and early fall of 1946, he conducted over a hundred interviews with Jewish
                  survivors and other displaced people in nine different languages (mostly in German
                  and Yiddish, but also in English, Russian, Polish, French, Lithuanian, Latvian,
                  and Spanish), using a relatively new technology called a wire recorder. The
                     best biography of Boder and the significance of his recordings is The Wonder of their Voices: The 1946 Holocaust Interviews of
                        David Boder
                     . He carried out his interviews in Displaced
                  Persons (DP) camps and other safe houses in France, Switzerland, Italy, and
                  Germany, mostly with Jewish survivors of concentration camps and slave labor
                  camps, as well as with a smaller group of non-Jewish refugees consisting of
                  Mennonites and other Christians who had fled Soviet territories. The interviews
                  range in length from about 15 minutes to over four hours, with most about one-hour
                  in duration. He asked over 16,000 questions to his subjects in an attempt to
                  understand the historical events of the Holocaust and learn about his
                  interviewee’s personal story of loss and survival. Boder and his
                     interviewees do not use the term Holocaust, as this term did not come
                     into common usage until the 1950s to describe the Nazi genocide of the Jews. He
                     does, however, refer to and attempt to explicate the
                        concentration camp phenomenon (xiv) in the preface to his book of
                     interviews, I Did Not Interview the Dead (1949).
                     He says that the displaced and uprooted people were dislocated by a world catastrophe (xviii), perhaps
                     referencing the Hebrew word Shoah or the
                     Yiddish word Churban, both of which were used
                     by his interviewees to describe the destruction of the Jewish communities of
                     Europe. Today, Boder’s interviews are available online, as audio files
                  in their original languages as well as in English translation, through the
                  Illinois Institute of Technology’s Voices of the
                     Holocaust project. Copies of the original wire spools were sent
                     to the Library of Congress, which, decades later, procured the technical means
                     to undertake the media transfer of the wire-recorded audio to tape. Later, they
                     were digitized by the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) and made available
                     as WAV files through the Aviary platform. The interviews can be accessed on the
                     Voices of the Holocaust website: https://voices.library.iit.edu/david_boder. The English translations,
                     annotations, and indexing were done by Boder for the testimonies in his book,
                        Topical Autobiographies of Displaced People
                        .
               
               After the interviews were recorded, Boder spent nearly ten years preparing a
                  3,194-page anthology of the survivor reports, which he called Topical Autobiographies of Displaced People. Boder’s full
                     indices are found at the end of Topical Autobiographies of
                        Displaced People
                     . It consisted of typewritten
                  translations, which he marked-up and indexed, of 70 of the testimonies. He
                  developed the first indices for characterizing the experiences of Holocaust
                  survivors, including a subjects and situations index with more than 300
                  entries, a geographic and ethnic index with over 400 entries, a persons
                     and organizations index with close to 300 entries, and a trauma
                     inventory enumerating 46 types of trauma and violence experienced by
                  survivors. His subjects and situations index represented the first
                  controlled vocabulary for indexing Holocaust testimonies and included shared
                  experiences like deportations, selections, mistreatment, and killings as well as
                  personal experiences such as food deprivation, thirst, and screaming.
               Our analysis below will focus on two of these testimonies: The first is an
                  interview he conducted on September 26, 1946, with a 34-year-old, Polish-Jewish
                  woman named Anna Kovitzka (given the pseudonym Anna Kaletska by Boder).
                  Kovitzka lost most of her family, including her young baby, who she had given to a
                  Christian Polish woman in the hopes that the child would be able to survive. That
                  Polish woman was later denounced by a neighbor, and the child was killed. The
                  hour-long interview, spoken in Yiddish, covers about eight years of her life and
                  moves between her birthplace of Kielce, escaping the Grodno ghetto, being deported
                  to Auschwitz, and, finally, at the end of the war, being driven back into Germany,
                  and ending up after the war in Wiesbaden, where she is interviewed. The second
                  interview is with a German-Jewish survivor named Jürgen Bassfreund, who was also
                  deported to Auschwitz, where he worked in a forced labor factory. Conducted in
                  Munich on September 20, 1946, Bassfreund describes the rise of Hitler in Germany,
                  the deportation and death of his mother, and the horrific conditions he endured
                  while being transferred between multiple concentration camps. We chose this
                  particular interview because Bassfreund – who later changed his name to Jack Bass
                  – was re-interviewed by the USC Shoah Foundation in 1997, in his home in
                  Alabama.
            
            
               2.2 Corpus #2: The USC Shoah Foundation Visual History Archive
               Containing about 55,000 audiovisual testimonies, the Shoah Foundation’s Visual
                  History Archive (VHA) is the largest digital archive of Holocaust and genocide
                  testimonies in the world. The videos range in length from several minutes to more
                  than ten hours, although most are between one and three hours in duration.
                  Indexers trained by the Foundation tagged the videos with keywords by linking
                  one-minute segments of video to one or more search terms in its 60,000+ word,
                  hierarchical thesaurus. In addition, transcripts are currently being created for
                  many of the testimonies in their original languages as well as in English
                     translation. The Shoah Foundation generously provided our team with 983
                     English-language transcripts prepared by ProQuest and an additional set of 900
                     German language testimonies prepared by the Freie University in Berlin. While
                     this article describes only the analyses conducted with English-language
                     transcripts, the methods are being developed for German, too.
               
               Using a tool called a Video Indexing Application, the
                  majority of the testimonies were automatically separated into discrete, one-minute
                  segments, and an indexer was prompted to assign a keyword from the thesaurus to
                  the segment (although not every segment had to have an indexing keyword). The VHA
                  derived its indexing protocols from the National Information Standards
                  Organization’s Z39.19 standard for the construction, format, and management of
                  monolingual controlled vocabularies. While useful for identifying topics, people,
                  places, and events for general searching, the index tends to obscure individual
                  actions and agency, not to mention aspects of performative delivery, subjective
                  experiences, and expressions of questioning, doubt, and possibility . Even though the aim of the index is objectivity, it is
                  important to underscore that a human listener decided what to index and what not
                  to index; a human listener decided what indexing term to use and what indexing
                  term not to use; and a human listener decided if a given narrative segment should
                  be described by a keyword or not. What is missing in the indexing system’s philosophy of pursued objectivity
                   are the specific semantic expressions used
                  by survivors to describe actions, give evaluative assessments, provide
                  orientation, and tell about other types of agency and activities, including
                  subjective experiences and everyday behaviors, reactions, and acts of
                  resistance.
               In addition to the Jürgen Bassfreund/Jack Bass re-interview, our analysis will
                  focus on the testimony of Erika Jacoby. Jacoby, a Hungarian Jew deported to
                  Auschwitz with her family in the Summer of 1944, survived the camp with her
                  mother. Her family was among the hundreds of thousands of Hungarian Jews deported
                  to Auschwitz at the height of the mass murder operations at Auschwitz. She was
                  separated from her grandparents and other members of her family at the ramp of
                  Auschwitz-Birkenau and never saw them again. She was able to stay together with
                  her mother, and both were selected for forced labor at Auschwitz. Her testimony
                  was recorded in her home in Los Angeles in 1994. Like the testimony of Bass, the
                  interview follows the structure of a chronological life-story, beginning with
                  childhood, experiences during the War and Holocaust, liberation, and eventual
                  immigration to the United States.
               The four testimonies discussed in this article are intended to provide a
                  proof-of-concept for a method to identify and index expressions of agency. Our
                  hope is that the methods can be used to complement conventional, subject-based
                  indexing and open new possibilities for cross-corpora analysis. 
            
         

            3 Methodology
            
               Processing and Categorizing Triplets 
               
               A flowchart showing the workflow of processing and categorizing semantic
                  triplets from the Holocaust Archives Relational Database into the Holocaust
                  Triplets Graph Database. Metadata and interview transcripts are separated in the
                  first step and recombined at the end.
            
            
               3.1 Semantic Triplets Extraction
               At the highest level, the aim of our research method is the transformation of a
                  Holocaust archives relational database (keywords linked to testimony segments)
                  into a Holocaust triplets graph database (networks of semantic triplets derived
                  from the testimonial transcripts). As shown in Figure 1, we use both interview
                  transcripts and their metadata, while our main contribution, as discussed in this
                  article, is the identification, extraction, and categorization of semantic
                  triplets from the transcripts. Our process can be summarized as follows: First, we
                  identify and extract triplets algorithmically from the cleaned transcripts; then,
                  we use text mining methods to assign categories and cluster the triplets; finally,
                  the results are manually reviewed (human check, correction, and curation). After
                  that, they can be stored, along with the original metadata, in a Tableau dashboard
                  or eventually a graph database for querying, indexing, and visualization. We will
                  introduce these core methods below.


               Triplestore and RDF store are databases optimized for storing and retrieving
                  semantic triplets (; ). In
                  general, triplets take the form of subject-predicate-object expressions and can be
                  searched through network relations between entities. Digital humanities scholars
                  have used semantic web methods, such as linked data, to facilitate interoperable
                  research structures to analyze social or cultural datasets  as well as to model scholarly processes in the
                  humanities by exploring the productive tension between formally structured,
                  semantic data and humanities scholarship .
                  Inspired by both the database design of Triplestore and RDF store and their
                  humanistic applications, we have developed our own process of extracting semantic
                  triplets from spoken testimonies. Our approach is best situated in the field of
                  information extraction for domain specific documents (in our case, Holocaust and
                  genocide testimonies), while the methods and ideas are replicable in other domains
                  such as oral histories more broadly, autobiographies, and personal narratives. 
               Traditionally, researchers proceed by creating open information extractors using
                  token related patterns (; ) or dependency parsing related features (; ). With the advancement of machine learning
                  technologies, we now see a trend of switching the research focus from extracting
                  informative and broad coverage semantic triplets to producing canonical triplets
                  which are linguistically coherent . This trend of
                  research tends to focus on improving the extractors’ accuracy, and, to date, there
                  are few applications that use semantic triplets to analyze spoken, personal
                  narratives, which resist formalized structures. Our semantic triplets extraction
                  method is an automated, rule-based process to aid close reading and focuses on
                  extracting expressions of agency and statements that speak to memories of
                  individual and collective actions. 
               This triplet extraction method leverages a combination of chunk parsing, also
                  known as partial parsing, and domain specific dictionaries. It focuses on the
                  lower-level chunks of nouns and/or adjectives (NAP) and verbs, which are groups of
                  connected but non-recursive tokens with different levels in syntactic structures
                  of sentences. For simplicity and consistency, we still use the name
                        Noun Chunk to represent the extended version, i.e. nouns and/or
                     adjectives (NAP). We convert the basic linguistic representation of the
                  chunks’ rules with regular expression from the NP and VP expressions of Abney
                     (1996)’s rules as: 
                  
                     
                        N
                        A
                        P
                        →
                        D
                        ?
                        A
                        *
                        N
                        *
                        N
                         
                        |
                         
                        D
                        ?
                        A
                        *
                        A
                     
                   and 
                     
                        V
                        P
                        →
                        
                           
                              V
                           
                           
                              -
                              t
                              n
                              s
                           
                        
                         
                        |
                        A
                        u
                        x
                         
                        
                           
                              V
                           
                           
                              -
                              i
                              n
                              g
                           
                        
                      where 
                     D
                   means determiners, 
                     A
                   means adjectives, 
                     N
                   means nouns, 
                     
                        
                           V
                        
                        
                           -
                           t
                           n
                           s
                        
                     
                   means the variation of a verb depending on its tense, 
                     A
                     u
                     x
                   means auxiliary, and 
                     
                        
                           V
                        
                        
                           -
                           i
                           n
                           g
                        
                     
                   means the present participle of a verb. Using the natural language
                  processing tools in SpaCy, we further extend these rules for chunks using the
                  built-in Noun Chunk function and a customized Matcher of verb chunks. Our
                     work is built on the pretrained SpaCy model en_core_web_lg, which is an
                     English pipeline with components including part of speech tagger, dependency
                     parser, and lemmatizer. Our extension includes more parts of speech as
                  the possible components around core nouns, verbs, and adjectives, and we link the
                  chunks together to check if we fully process the sentences. Our method is
                     inspired by the built-in SpaCy function of noun chunk extraction, as described
                     in its python source code syntax_iterators.py.
               
               For example, Figure 2 shows a parsing tree with the different parts of a triplet.
                  In the sentence I was clinging to the window, we
                  detect the active agency of window clinging with I as
                  the subject noun chunk and the window as the object
                  noun chunk. In this case, the verb chunk includes the verb, an auxiliary verb, and
                  a preposition. Using this extraction method, in our four example testimonies, we
                  are able to extract more than 3,000 triplets. Some sentences may contain multiple
                  triplets, such as this sentence: I went with her down to the
                     door, and there I stood across the street, hidden in the gate, and I saw how my
                     child was lying on the snow. In this example, four triplets were
                  extracted: I went with her,
                  I stood across the street,
                  I hidden in the gate, and my
                     child was lying on the snow.
               
               
                  A Parsing Tree with Lexical Chunks that Form a Triplet
                  
                  A parsing tree showing how the sentence I was
                        clinging to the window is separated into a semantic triplet
                     consisting of a noun chunk for the subject (containing I), a verb chunk for the relation (containing was clinging to), and a noun chunk for the object (containing
                        the window).
               
               When parsing longer sentences, we always include, in a separate column for each
                  triplet, what we call context terms. We define the context terms to
                  be all the related lexical chunks other than those included in the extracted
                  triplet. In the first triplet above (I went with
                  her), the contextual chunks are the following words: the door, the street,
                  the gate, my child, the snow. The context is especially important when we want to
                  understand an action embedded in a complex sentence or create network diagrams
                  from the triplets. As discussed in section 5, we have also developed a
                     fuller, chunk-based extraction method that enables us to capture longer object
                     phrases with higher accuracy. 
               
            
            
               3.2 Characterization: Action, Orientation, and Evaluation (AEO) Categories with
                  Subcategories
               One of our methods for characterizing semantic triplets is derived from Labov and
                  Waletzky’s  social-linguistic model of
                  narratives, where clauses are characterized by temporal organization (the order in
                  which the subject narrates events and actions in the story), evaluative
                  description (personal assessments made by the narrator), and contextual
                  orientation (usually information provided by the narrator that helps orient the
                  listener). Statements of evaluation provide judgment about a person or situation,
                  while statements of orientation provide contextual or relational information.
                  Various scholars have developed tools or solved related problems using the Labov
                  model: For example, Swanson et al.  created a part
                  of speech (POS) based algorithm for clause type detection and labelling based on
                  this model; and Saldias and Roy  used this model
                  to train a classifier to analyze and compare spoken personal narratives. Although
                  these applications to characterizing narratives focus on the clause level, the
                  Labov model is also applicable to our research because triplets are derived from
                  clauses and need to retain semantic information.
               Not unlike the use of text mining to study literary styles
                  , we use our text mining methods to
                  classify triplets by similar types of speech in order to discover relationships
                  between different types of expressions of agency in oral histories. We divide
                  descriptions of agency into four sub-categories: active, passive, coercive, and
                  speculative speech. Active and passive speech are, respectively, actions done by
                  the subject of the triplet and actions done by others to the subject; coercive
                  speech may have an active structure but a passive meaning since it represents
                  something the subject was forced to do (sometimes without mentioning the person or
                  group responsible for the coercion); and, lastly, speculative speech, often
                  expressed through modal verbs, represents an uncertain or imaginary action, or a
                  statement of possibility, desire, ability, or futurity. While these categories are
                  not perfect or definitive, they help to identify the general kinds of speech
                  describing actions. We summarize and provide examples for the two-level AEO
                  characterization system in Table 1.
                
               
                  Two-level AEO Characterization System with Examples
                  
                     Categories
                     Examples
                  
                  
                     Agency
                     Active
                     I removed the yellow patch.
                  
                  
                     Passive
                     I was shipped to Auschwitz.
                  
                  
                     Coercive
                     My father had to leave his home.
                  
                  
                     Speculative
                     They could consummate the terrible deed.
                  
                  
                     Evaluation
                     I am not ashamed.
                  
                  
                     Orientation
                     I remembered a Christian woman.
                  
               
               The Triplets AEO Algorithm implements the above process as a basic
                  characterization system. In SpaCy, the algorithm takes tokens consisting of the
                  Relation Verb Chunks, 
                     R
                  , and Object Noun Chunks, 
                     O
                  . For each token in both 
                     R
                   and 
                     O
                  , there is retrievable syntactic information including (but not limited
                  to) a part of speech (POS) tag, a dependency tag, and the lemma form of the word.
                  We then put together this lexicon- and rule-based mechanism as shown in Appendix
                  I, Algorithm 1.
            
            
               3.3 Characterization: Perpetrators, Victims, and Others (PVO) Categories
               The tripartite approach to characterizing victims, perpetrators, and bystanders
                  has been around for decades in Holocaust historiography . While not absolute or unproblematic, we strive to disambiguate subjects and
                  objects in triplets when they are identified as people or groups. To do so, we
                  first used the Entity Recognition pre-trained models in SpaCy to determine the
                  category of a NOUN (people, organizations, geographic locations, and so forth).
                  We, then, manually classified the detectable entities, where possible, into victim
                  and perpetrator groups. For example, the phrases the German Army,
                  the SS, or the Gestapo are detected as organizations and marked as
                  Perpetrator, whereas the interviewee (I and we) as well as familial
                  units (parents, grandparents, sister, brother, and so forth) are marked as Victim.
                  Pronouns, however, were not disambiguated. This classification method will always
                  be incomplete, as many subjects and objects do not unequivocally belong to the
                  victim or perpetrator group. The gray zone contains bystanders,
                  aid-providers, implicated subjects, and people who moved across categories
                  and do not easily fit the binary (; ). These and other such subjects and objects are also
                  extracted but not categorized, as they demand human scrutiny of context and,
                  indeed, prompt further questions and future research about the range of agents in
                  an oral history. For the ones that are certain, we created lists of victim and
                  perpetrator lemmas, which provided the base forms of the entity words in the
                  triplets.
            
         

            4 Results and Applications
            
               Distribution of Semantic Triplet Categories in Four Testimonies
               
               Four pie charts, one per testimony, showing the distribution of AEO
                  categories of triplets in each testimony. The pie charts are labeled, left to
                  right, as Boder_Bassfreund(with 576 triplets), Boder_Kovitzka(with 522 triplets),
                  Shoah_Bass(with 1188 triplets), and Shoah_Jacoby(with 1084 triplets). The
                  categories listed are Active_Speech, Passive_Speech, Speculative_Speech,
                  Coercive_Speech, Evaluation, and Orientation. In each pie chart, Active_Speech
                  triplets are the largest category, followed by Orientation triplets.
            

            In Figure 3, we show statistical summaries of the triplets in each of the four
               testimonies. The triplets were algorithmically generated from the transcripts,
               assigned categories by speech type, and evaluated for accuracy. The size of each pie
               chart is scaled to the number of triplets extracted for each testimony. Boder’s
               interviews are shorter than the Shoah Foundation interviews (and, of course, end in
               1946, rather than the 1990s). Due to the large number of triplets, we needed to
               develop ways to categorize and cluster the results. This entailed categorizing the
               triplets into six types of speech, assigning Victim and Perpetrator identities to
               certain subjects and objects, and experimenting with using a Wordnet-based
               characterization of the objects to cluster them by lemma and categories. The
                  process of assigning victim and perpetrator identities is very
                  incomplete due to the need to disambiguate pronouns (they,
                  he,
                  she) as well as account for proper names.  For our initial version
               of the triplet extraction process, 6.5% of the triplets were manually corrected due
               to incorrect or incomplete subjects, verb relations, or objects. In addition, about
               14% were manually removed from the original output because the triplet did not make
               sense grammatically or was misidentified as a triplet. The challenges and
               shortcomings of the triplet extraction process are discussed in section 5.2. To
               better analyze the triplets and their characterization, we created an interactive
               Triplets Dashboard, shown in Figure 4, which brings together the corrected triplets
               output, an object lemmas bubble plot, and multiple other filters. 
            As a finding aid, the dashboard helps us query and sort the triplets by interview,
               subject, object, speech type, and more. In the dashboard, a search for semantic
               triplets can be initiated on any term, category, or type of speech both within a
               given testimony or across a group of testimonies. In the screenshot, we see the
               triplets around Bassfreund’s description of his deportation from Berlin to his
               selection for forced labor in Auschwitz. They evidence a wide-range of speech acts,
               including active speech about other people’s agency (they gave
                  us six slices and they placed a can), passive
               speech (we were put on trains and we were driven out of the cars), coercive speech (we
                  had to sign affidavits and we have to leave
                  Germany), speculative speech (I shall never forget
                  those screams), evaluation (it was
                  uncomfortable and the screams were terrible),
               and orientation (I have forgotten something and the people had a premonition). Looking further at the
               contextual information for the coerced action of being forced to sign affidavits, for
               example, we see the following terms: our disloyalty,
               Germany,
               account, and hostility. The
               original sentence can be seen on the far right of the triplet output, as translated
               by Boder: Before being sent away, we had to sign affidavits that
                  we have to leave Germany on account of our disloyalty and hostility to
                  Germany. The German original also shows both passive and coerced
                  speech: Bevor wir abtransportiert wurden, mussten wir
                     unterschreiben, dass wir wegen staatspolitischer und feindlicher Umtriebe
                     Deutschland verlassen müssen.
                  
               
            
            
               Semantic Triplets Dashboard in Tableau (with simplified objects and
                  context terms). Selection from Boder’s interview with Jürgen Bassfreund
               
               A breakdown of an interview selection in the Semantic Triplets Dashboard.
                  the top section consists of extracted triplets in a table, ordered by sentence
                  number. The bottom Section is spearated into a word cloud labeled Choose Object
                  Lemmas, and menus for selecting Triplet Componenets, Interview Ranges, and
                  Triplets Categories.
            
            Another way triplets can be used is to identify instances of different types of
               speech within a testimony. For example, leading up to and following his description
               of being deported to Auschwitz, we can visualize all the passive and coercive
               statements made by Bassfreund in which I or we is the subject. As shown
               in Figure 5, there are over 50 such instances of passive and coercive speech
               described in this section of his interview with Boder (about ten type-written pages).
               Bassfreund emphasizes, with precise language, what was done to him and the Jewish
               community by the Nazis (we were surrounded, taken, moved, driven out, loaded on, led
               to, rubbed with, shoved into, sent into, transferred to) as well as what was
               specifically done to him (I was forcibly taken, assigned, sent, transferred).
                  Examples in the original German, which all follow the semantic pattern of passive
                  speech in the English translations, include: Plötzlich waren
                     wir umringt von der Leibstandarte, und wurden dann mit Füßen getreten und in
                     Autos verladen; Und dann kamen wieder Autos und
                     wieder wurden wir von der Leibstandarte zu einem ganz entlegenen Bahnhof in
                     Berlin gebracht und wurden dort einwagoniert; wir
                     wurden aus diesen Wagons herausgetrieben; wir
                     wurden mit Petroleum eingerieben.
                  
               
            
            
               Selection of Bassfreund’s Passive and Coercive Speech (Boder interview), with
                     we and I as subject, respectively
               
                Two branching circle-shaped diagrams of sentences from Boder's interview of
                  Bassfreund, where we and I from the center of two separate branched
                  diagrams. Radiating out from the centers are blue arrows labeled with verb chunks.
                  The blue arrows point to corresponding noun chunks. For example, one sentence
                  reads: we (center, subject) / were shoved into (blue arrow) / barracks
                  (object noun chunk). 
            
            We can now show our approach to semantic triplets extends and deepens topical
               indexing by pairing the triplets with the human-created indexing terms. As developed
               by both Boder and the Shoah Foundation, we see a significant continuity in terms of
               topics and themes (places, time periods, people, conditions, and events) used to
               index the testimonies. For instance, on pages 292-293 of Bassfreund’s testimony in
                  Topical Autobiographies, Boder indexed the testimony
               with the following terms: bathing, clothing, hair cutting and shaving, professional
               criminals, confiscations, punishments, and tattoos. Similarly, in segment 25 of Bass’
               testimony, we see the following indexing terms from the Shoah Foundation: Auschwitz I
               (Poland: Concentration Camp), camp forced labor, camp latrines, camp living
               conditions, camp selections, Poland 1941 (June 21) - 1945 (May 7), prisoner hair
               cutting forced labor, transfer from Auschwitz III-Monowitz (Poland: Concentration
               Camp), and transfer to Auschwitz I (Poland: Concentration Camp). While these topics
               certainly give us guidance for finding the overarching places, dates, conditions in
               captivity, movement, and forced labor, the indexing is not at the level of sentences
               or clauses and, therefore, we do not really know what Bassfreund/Bass did or what was
               done to him. As we see in Figure 6, we produce a corresponding network of just a few
               of the triplets derived from these specific parts of his testimonies. The
               interrelated set of triplets provide information about un-indexed subjects and agents
               (both victims and perpetrators), un-indexed actions (written on, picked up by, worked
               in, filled, sent), and un-indexed objects (the formation, their stomach, a truck, the
               crematories, human hair, mattresses, packages, and a mountain). Altogether, they
               point us toward ways of using the extracted semantic triplets to read, mark-up, and
               index testimonies by including microhistorical accounts of actions by both victims
               and perpetrators. 
            
               Selected Examples of Triplets related to Indexing Categories in Two
                  Testimonies. (a) Bassfreund (interviewed by Boder) (b) Bass (interviewed by the
                  Shoah Foundation)
               
                two sets of sentence diagram featuring the same subject node/ relation
                  arrow/object node layout as Figure 5. In these there are more subject nodes than
                  the two in Figure 5, but fewer sentences overall.
            
            In the next section, we discuss some of the applications of the triplets to
               identifying acts of resistance, detecting unindexed stories, and analyzing larger
               semantic networks.
            
               4.1 Microhistorical Acts of Resistance
               While large-scale acts of resistance (such as the Warsaw Ghetto uprising or the
                  Sonderkommando rebellion in Auschwitz) are rightly known, there has been
                  comparatively less appreciation of the range of everyday, seemingly ordinary acts
                  of resistance by individuals. One historian who is working at the vanguard of this
                  reappraisal of Jewish agency is Wolf Gruner, who has delved into numerous police
                  and municipal archives in Germany to uncover the wide-range of acts of defiance,
                  opposition, and protest by Jews living in Nazi Germany (; ). In his studies of microhistories, he has unearthed thousands of examples of Jews
                  mounting both formal and informal protest, ranging from the filing of petitions
                  and government complaints to outright acts of defiance, such as sitting on benches
                  marked Aryan only or refusing to use the forced middle name of
                     Israel or Sara, to physical and armed resistance against Nazi
                  officials . For our purposes here, we are interested
                  in using our computational method of identifying networks of semantic triplets to
                  find underappreciated or largely unknown acts of everyday resistance within
                  Holocaust testimonial narratives. Our argument is that triplets point to a
                  wide-range of small-scale actions that would otherwise go unremarked, since they
                  do not, generally speaking, rise to the level of what might be indexed as acts
                     of resistance. Oftentimes, these actions are not even considered to be
                     indexable content, and thus they are extremely difficult to locate.
               
                  4.1.1 Example 1: Anna Kovitzka
                  Interviewed by Boder in 1946, Anna Kovitzka’s story is particularly poignant,
                     as she describes the violent separation and loss of her family and, in
                     particular, her efforts to save her baby girl who was born in the Grodno
                     ghetto. With her husband, she managed to escape the ghetto in the hopes of
                     finding someone to care for her child. Shortly after giving up the child to a
                     Christian woman who promised to protect her, Kovitzka was deported to
                     Auschwitz. The child, unfortunately, did not survive as the Christian woman was
                     denounced for trying to protect a Jewish baby. Examining the indexing terms
                     used by Boder to mark-up her testimony, we see a wide-range of themes and
                     topics, including: geographic locations (Wiesbaden, Kielce, Grodno, Slonim,
                     Lvov, and Auschwitz), living conditions and objects (epidemics, starvation,
                     thirst, illness, sleeping accommodations, and clothing), people (children,
                     Gestapo, Prisoners-of-War, family, and Gypsies), and events (looting,
                     childbirth, burials, flight, killings, escapes, work, bathing, rebellion, and
                     appells or roll calls in camps). The last group of events certainly raises
                     questions about actions, but without further analysis, we cannot know who was
                     looting, escaping, working, rebelling, or even giving birth to a child.
                     Moreover, without delving into the testimony, we cannot uncover specific
                     vectors of agency (such as who did what, how did they do it, and to whom).
                  By examining the semantic triplets around the topical indexing term
                        escapes, we can illuminate the specific agency described by
                     Kovitzka in this part of her testimony (Table 2). The triplets indicate the
                     actions of Kovitzka and her husband to escape the ghetto in order to save their
                     child: went over the wires, set up a chair,
                     raised the wire, went
                        out on the street, removed the yellow
                     patch, and, finally, went down the street. In each
                     case, we see active speech describing a set of actions that occurred in the
                     context of escaping the ghetto, even after she reports that sixteen Jews were
                     killed at the gate in a first attempt to escape. While this section of the text
                     is indexed by Boder as escapes,
                     curfew,
                     fences, and yellow star, the actual acts of escaping
                     the ghetto through the wires, removing the yellow Star of David, and going down
                     the street represent acts of resistance and agency that can be successfully
                     detected and added to the index through computational text analysis attuned to
                     semantic triplets.
                  
                     Anna Kovitzka Triplets (around escapes)
                     
                        Subjects
                        Relations
                        Objects
                        Context and Coreference
                     
                     
                        Sixteen Jews
                        fell at
                        the gate
                        first attempt
                     
                     
                        I
                        went over
                        the wires
                        second attempt, my man, me, the child, her
                     
                     
                        my man
                        handed
                        the child
                        I, the wires, the second attempt, me, I, her
                     
                     
                        My man
                        set up
                        a chair
                        me
                     
                     
                        He
                        raised
                        one wire
                        Coreference: He = my man
                     
                     
                        He
                        handed
                        the child
                        me, Coreference: He = my man
                     
                     
                        I
                        went out in
                        the street
                        
                     
                     
                        I
                        removed
                        the yellow patch
                        
                     
                     
                        I
                        went down
                        the street
                        
                     
                  
                  Using the dashboard to search on the object child in Kovitzka’s
                     testimony reveals a number of triplets that show her attempts to save her child
                     and, ultimately, the child’s fate: I must save my
                        child,
                     My man handed the child,
                     she has taken my child,
                     she had picked up the child,
                     I don’t have my child,
                     she kept the child,
                     she loved the child,
                     my child was lying on the snow, and they buried the child. The tragedy of Kovitzka’s loss
                     of her child forms the traumatic core of her testimony and, yet, there is
                     barely any indication of this from the indexing terms. The creation of a
                     semantic network around the term child would help us locate and
                     appreciate these critical actions and thus begin to index the testimony attuned
                     to expressions of agency (Figure 7).
                  
                     Building a semantic network from triplets related to the term
                           child in Anna Kovitzka’s testimony
                     
                     A node-and-arrow diagram, similar to Figure 5 and 6, showing the
                        triplets gathered in the dashboard search for child.
                  
               
               
                  4.1.2 Example 2: Erika Jacoby
                  After being deported to Auschwitz and separated from her grandparents on the
                     arrival ramp, Jacoby and her mother are selected for the slave labor camp.
                     Their heads are shaven; they are deloused for lice; and they are given meager
                     clothes. Most of Jacoby’s testimony, then, focuses on everyday life in
                     Auschwitz, including forced labor, sleeping conditions, food rations, violence,
                     and abuse. While the associated triplets bear witness to her struggle for
                     survival, our indexing of agency in Jacoby’s testimony also included the
                     following groups of triplets. As shown in Table 3, after one passive
                     construction, we see five successive, active constructions and one triplet
                     characterized as orientation (considered as information to the
                     interviewer).
                  
                     Erika Jacoby Triplets
                     
                        Subjects
                        Relations
                        Objects
                        AEO Category
                     
                     
                        We
                        were
                        taken to a bath
                        Agency (Passive Speech)
                     
                     
                        we
                        were going by
                        a German officer’s area
                        Agency (Active Speech)
                     
                     
                        I
                        saw
                        a swimming pool
                        Agency (Active Speech)
                     
                     
                        I
                        jumped out of
                        the line
                        Agency (Active Speech)
                     
                     
                        I
                        dove into
                        the swimming pool
                        Agency (Active Speech)
                     
                     
                        I
                        swam across
                        the pool
                        Agency (Active Speech)
                     
                     
                        They
                        didn’t shoot
                        me
                        Orientation
                     
                  
                  This utterly astonishing action is not marked up or identified in any way
                     through the Shoah Foundation’s topical indexing. In fact, there is no word
                     search that will find this part of her testimony. Jacoby relays the story in
                     just a dozen sentences, comprising about 50 seconds of her two-hour testimony.
                     And yet it is a stunning act of defiance, risk, and agency. 
                  Here is the portion of the testimony with a little bit of context to set up the
                     scene and reflect on its meaning:
                  We stayed six weeks in Auschwitz. We had many, many
                        interesting events that happened to us in Auschwitz. I just want to tell you
                        one that was very important. And I don’t think I have time to describe
                        Auschwitz. And I’m sure that it’s well known. But we were– one, one day, we
                        were taken to a bath. We were taken to a bath about once a week or once
                        every other week. And as we were marching, we were go– we were going by a
                        German officer’s area. And I saw a swimming pool. And I jumped out of the
                        line, and I dove into the swimming pool. And I swam across the pool, and I
                        got back. And they didn’t shoot me, and I survived. But of course, my mother
                        almost died. I mean, it was such an irr– irresponsible act from my part. But
                        I was young, and I, I needed to be alive. And I did that.
                  Indeed, there were two pools on the grounds of Auschwitz: one for
                     prisoners and one for SS officers, near blocks 7 and 8. They were built as
                     reservoirs to store water rather than be used for recreational swimming. Today,
                     a sign clarifies the remains of the structure: Fire
                        brigade reservoir built in the form of a swimming pool, probably in early
                        1944. When Jacoby arrived in Auschwitz in the summer of 1944, the
                     pool would have been complete. The Shoah Foundation manually tagged these
                     segments of Jacoby’s testimony with the following keywords: camp intake
                        procedures, camp prisoner marking, camp family
                        interactions, loved ones’ contacts, prisoner
                        external contact, and a single person tag, her mother, Malvina
                     Salamonovits. Judging by these tags, one might expect her discussion to focus
                     on procedural elements of the camp, perhaps coupled with how she and her mother
                     survived together. There is nothing in the indexing that would indicate jumping
                     out line, diving into the pool, and swimming across. While we can certainly
                     read or hear Jacoby talking about this experience if we happened to land on
                     this part of her testimony, it remains an unindexed action, which
                     otherwise submerges a significant act of resistance and agency. Through the
                     computational extraction of triplets, we can index, hone in on, and appreciate
                     this defiant act.
                  After Auschwitz is liberated by the Soviet army, Jacoby relays that she and her
                     mother left the camp in search of food and safety from sexual assaults by
                     Russian soldiers. Over the next three and a half minutes (1:18-1:21), she
                     describes a set of actions that helped her and her mother survive. She also
                     tells of acts of revenge and anger committed by her 16-year-old self. Two of
                     the three segments are tagged by the Shoah Foundation as food
                        acquisition and looting (the third is not tagged at
                     all). These topical terms convey little about the agency involved and the kinds
                     of actions that a listener may want to search for and find in her testimony. In
                     Table 4, we reproduce the full set of 23 semantic triplets that our methodology
                     identified over these three minutes. All forms of agency are included as well
                     as all subjects and objects. The we subject refers to Erika and her
                     mother.
                  While food acquisition and looting are indexing terms
                     that signal the overall set of content, these terms tell us nothing specific
                     about what Erika and her mother did in the days after liberation; they tell us
                     nothing about the vectors of agency and reasons for their actions; and they
                     tell us none of the details of the actions conveyed in her testimony. And
                     perhaps more pointedly, the indexing terms tend to obscure more than they
                     reveal: Far from abstract topics, food acquisition involved the
                     specific act of stealing and eating a pig (a non-kosher act of desperation for
                     survival), while looting was connected to Jacoby’s immediate
                     post-War actions, which reflect personal anger, acts of revenge, and the
                     longing for a normal life. The objects she takes from a home are symbols of
                     family life, domesticity, and normalcy: a white tablecloth, an apron, and a
                     little silver cup. Her act of looting is to take these everyday,
                     material objects from somebody’s home, the first possessions that she acquires
                     after liberation from Auschwitz.
                  
                     Erika Jacoby Triplets (1:18-1:21)
                     
                        Subjects
                        Relations
                        Objects
                        Segments
                     
                     
                        we
                        got out of
                        the camp
                        1:18
                     
                     
                        we
                        went into
                        town
                        1:18
                     
                     
                        we
                        looked for
                        a house
                        1:18
                     
                     
                        we
                        found
                        a very beautiful home
                        1:18
                     
                     
                        we
                        occupied
                        it
                        1:18
                     
                     
                        we
                        couldn’t lock
                        the door
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        we
                        barricade
                        it
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        they
                        broke into
                        the stores
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        I
                        shoved
                        a lot
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        we
                        had
                        a canvas bag
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        we
                        passed by
                        a butcher store
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        I
                        took off
                        half a pig
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        I
                        carried
                        it
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        my mother
                        saw
                        it
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        she
                        cooked
                        the pig
                        1:19
                     
                     
                        we
                        ate
                        it
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        we
                        got
                        sick
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        I
                        was trying to find
                        a way
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        We
                        stayed in
                        this town
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        I
                        want to mention to
                        you
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        I
                        didn’t bring
                        it
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        I
                        have
                        a memento
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        I
                        broke into
                        a house
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        I
                        had
                        so much anger
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        I
                        expressed
                        that anger
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        I
                        went into
                        that house
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        I
                        broke
                        the piano
                        1:20
                     
                     
                        many people
                        went into
                        homes
                        1:21
                     
                     
                        I
                        did not want
                        anything
                        1:21
                     
                     
                        I
                        took from
                        the house
                        1:21
                     
                     
                        I
                        took
                        a white tablecloth
                        1:21
                     
                     
                        I
                        took
                        an apron
                        1:21
                     
                     
                        I
                        took
                        a little silver cup
                        1:21
                     
                     
                        it
                        had
                        the initials
                        1:21
                     
                     
                        I
                        kept
                        it
                        1:21
                     
                     
                        I
                        longed to establish
                        a normal life
                        1:21
                     
                  
               
            
         

            5 Discussion, Limitations, and New Work
            Although our process of extracting and characterizing triplets creates new paratexts
               that enhance our interpretation and ability to index testimonies by descriptions of
               agency, there are a number of limitations and shortcomings. The major issue is that
                  semantic triplets – strictly speaking as subjects, verb relations, and
               objects – can oversimplify narrative expressivity when truncated, extracted, or
               decontextualized. Below, we will identify and discuss a number of limitations as well
               as discuss how our newer, meticulous triplet extraction process (version 2.0)
               addresses some of those problems. 
            
               5.1 Considering Coreferences: Pronoun Disambiguation and Entity Linking
               As is evident in many of the triplets, pronouns often exist in subjects and
                  objects, and they are sometimes ambiguous. For example, there are multiple
                  references to he,
                  she,
                  they, or them where the pronoun could refer to a perpetrator in one
                  line but a victim in the following. Thus, a coreferencing solution for the
                  triplets needs to disambiguate pronouns or, at the very least, link triplets
                  together such that the coreference can be clearly identified. We experimented with
                  using NeuralCoref, a coreference resolution python package which annotates and
                  resolves coreference clusters using a neural network . However, this pre-trained language model is based
                  on out-of-domain text data, and it is only effective about half the time, which is
                  not precise enough for our needs. 
               Thus, we are working on creating our own model of coreferencing for use in
                  Holocaust and genocide testimonies. This close-domain model was initially trained
                  by annotating testimonies using BRAT, a web-based annotation tool that allows
                  customized labels for entities and coreferences . Inspired by the annotation process of entities and coreferences in an English
                  literature dataset, we will use a customized set of entity types, including named
                  people, groups, communities, as well as other regular named-entities like
                  organizations and geo-political entities . Our hope
                  is that the training model, derived from a diverse set of annotated Holocaust
                  testimonies, will help us disambiguate pronouns throughout a corpus. 
            
            
               5.2 Revisiting the Chunk Method: A More Meticulous Triplet Extraction
                  Process 
               Our chunk-based triplets extraction method is certainly not flawless. One
                  challenge is that important expressions that are not triplets are simply not found
                  (for instance, we were separated). Another challenge
                  is how to capture fuller object phrases and distinguish direct and indirect
                  objects. In this version, we capture both, and usually the direct object is part
                  of the triplet and the indirect object is part of the contextual information; in
                  the more meticulous version, we capture fuller object phrases by extracting
                  from the context as much as possible. Although the objects tend to be
                  longer, they are more complete and integrate the contextual elements within the
                  object phrase itself. This newer version results in both more triplets being
                  extracted and higher accuracy. The details of the meticulous version,
                     including the rules and sample data, are available in the Github repository:
                        https://github.com/lizhouf/semantic_triplets
                  
               
               An ongoing challenge, however, concerns certain sentences with dependent,
                  relative, or conditional clauses, which are not always captured completely or may
                  be broken apart in the course of the chunk method. This problem can be seen with
                     if, then statements or ones that begin with a form of negation. For
                  example, this sentence spoken by Bassfreund, is turned into three triplets: And it was already night and the SS opened the doors and said if
                     we throw out the dead bodies we shall get some food. Getting food from the SS is dependent upon the
                  victims being forced to throw out dead bodies from the train. Although the
                  triplets are captured individually, maintaining the specific contingency of the
                  actions and understanding the reasons for them requires human review and
                  interpretation.
               While network analysis may give rise to new narrative orderings that allow us to
                  see relationships across a testimony or corpus, we also preserve the narrative
                  sequence of the triplets in our extraction process since the context for a triplet
                  certainly matters both within an individual sentence and between sentences. For
                  instance, when Bass says: Well, you could tell. These guys
                     were very rough and very bad. They used to beat you up, and scream, and holler,
                     and push you. And hit you with a– a rubber– piece of rubber there. It looked
                     like a rubber hose. Our triplet extraction
                  method maintains the contiguity between the description of the men (former
                  criminals who the Nazis put in place as supervisors in camps) so that the last
                  triplet (it looked like a rubber hose) continues to
                  make sense within this context. Sequential groupings are one way to maintain
                  narrative continuity. 
               Another basic challenge that we face is extracting triplets from fragmented,
                  vernacular speech, which the process often has trouble parsing. Survivors
                  sometimes switch from first-person narration to second or third-person; sometimes
                  the sentences contain incomplete thoughts, repetitions, or stuttering; sometimes
                  the transcribed sentence lacks regular punctuation; and sometimes survivors quote
                  the speech of others directly or indirectly. The triplet extraction process has no
                  way of telling if a triplet refers to the quoted or attributed speech of someone
                  else. For example, Anna Kovitzka says: Once my man said:
                        I can’t make peace with them. Our child must be saved even if we two
                        shall die.
                   While two triplets are extracted (I can’t make peace with them and our
                     child must be saved), the triplets are not attributed to her husband
                  because the phrase once my man said is not part of
                  either triplet. 
               To take another example: In his interview with Boder, Bassfreund says: We were rubbed with kerosene
                   with respect to the delousing process in
                  Auschwitz. That triplet is easily found; however, in his later interview with the
                  Shoah Foundation, he says: And then they did some – used some
                     kind of delousing agent, they poured all over us. No triplets were
                  found in the first version of our process, as the sentence is spoken with breaks
                  that less clearly connect the subject (they) to the verbs and objects. To
                  address this, our meticulous version of triplet extraction is based on a
                  set of finer-defined, semantic rules to extract noun and verb chunks. To make
                  chunks include more contextual information and complete grammatical structures, we
                  add a layer in between the sentence and chunk levels, which we call the segment
                     level, for chunk-boundary decision making, as shown in Figure 8. Even
                  though the sentence is not grammatically correct, the new extraction method is
                  able to find the triplets in this sentence, while the previous approach was not.
                  And although some objects and object phrases become longer than expected, we can
                  now extract a more complete context for the objects of a triplet. We are also
                  experimenting with categorizing object phrases based on semantic features like
                  word lemmas, WordNet synsets, and dependency parsing, which will create more
                  filters for large scale triplets retrieval.
               
                  Example of the Three-level Chunk-based Triplets Extraction Method
                  
                  Sentence diagram showing the three-level extraction method. The first
                     level, called Sentence, separates the sentence into parts of speech. The second
                     level, called Segments, marks the start of the sentence, the end of the
                     sentence, and punctuation within the sentence. the third level, called chunks,
                     identifies the subjects, relations and objects, now ready to be extracted as
                     triplets. 
               
            
            
               5.3 Other Improvements and Potential Applications
               Based on the indexing and analysis of agency in the four example testimonies
                  discussed here, we have applied our meticulous method to over a thousand
                  Holocaust testimonies. The output creates a new paratext of triplets for each
                  interview and provides a set of additional metadata that can be queried, indexed,
                  and overlaid on existing metadata. The triplets are intended to function as
                  finding aids to supplement the original text by providing a new set of metadata
                  attuned to articulations of agency. One of the promising directions is to query
                     shared experiences (such as reports of and responses to discrimination)
                  across a corpus using the semantic triplets. What, for example, did hundreds of
                  different witnesses say about their memories of discrimination during the 1930s
                  and early 40s and how did they describe their individual reactions? How many other
                  people remember removing the yellow star from their clothes and what did they say
                  they did next? 
               Going forward, we hope to create a better finding aid and scaled-up visualization
                  tool, perhaps through an indexing dashboard supported by a triplets database.
                  Researchers can then query and visualize through the same interface to find
                  semantic triplets and generate associated networks. This interactive dashboard
                  could combine the flexibility of curation in the Triplets Dashboard in Tableau
                  with a Neo4j Network Visualization Dashboard. At the same time, we are continuing
                  to explore how searching for agency within a narrative can complement
                  standard thematic and topical searches through network clustering and category
                  clustering of triplets. 
            
         

            6 Conclusion
            Semantic triplets are a text immanent way to computationally identify and index
               descriptions of agency within oral histories. While conventional indexing is
               important for finding overarching themes and topics, it relies on the creation of a
               secondary scaffolding for searching within the testimonies, almost always attuned to
               named entities, topics, and general themes. Indexing semantic triplets, on the other
               hand, is primarily an algorithmic approach to identify specific expressions of agency
               and their lexical context from transcripts. As such, we are able to link and analyze
               multiple vectors of action and attune our reading and listening to networks of
               agents, relations, objects, and contexts. Our approach always relies on and is
               derived from the interviewee’s spoken (and transcribed) language. In this regard, it
               is a kind of algorithmic close reading built on a paratext derived from the
               original transcript. Although distant reading remains a powerful approach for
               statistically summarizing the content of a corpus, digital humanities scholars have
               also warned against the seduction of delegating observation and delegating
                  interpretation to machines . In
               many ways, semantic triplets use some of the algorithmic tools of distant reading
               (large-scale text analysis attuned to patterns, classifications, and clusters) to
               enable humans to undertake close readings and perform interpretative queries. It is
               up to us to figure out the meaning or significance of any description of agency in
               the context of an oral history or corpus.
            In this sense, our approach is also quite different from current machine learning
               methods for information extraction systems. Although seemingly unpopular these days
               from a natural language processing perspective, a fully rule-based and easily
               interpretable system works well for our purposes of triplets extraction and analysis.
               We can describe the algorithms we use based on conditional statements and clear rules
               for additional human curation and correction. Computational indexing of agency shifts
               the scale of analysis to individual mentions of agency and interconnected actions,
               helping us read and listen to testimonies in ways that deepen our understanding of
               what people report they did and what was done to them. 
         

            7 Acknowledgements
            The research presented here owes a significant debt of gratitude to the USC Shoah
               Foundation, particularly Stephen Smith, Samuel Gustman, Martha Stroud, Claudia
               Wiedeman, and Crispin Brooks. All of the analyses presented in this paper were
               performed at UCLA under the direction of Todd Presner. The co-authors, Lizhou Fan and
               Todd Presner, are grateful to UCLA team members Anna Bonazzi, Rachel Deblinger, Kyle
               Rosen, Michelle Lee, and Wanxin Xie. We also thank Anne Knowles, David Shepard,
               Anthony Caldwell, Wolf Gruner, and Zoe Borovsky for their generous support and
               feedback over the years.
         

            Appendix
            
               Triplets AEO Algorithm, as an Example of High Interpretability
               
            
         
