Title:  Curating Electronic Literature as Critical and Scholarly
                    Practice
Volume:  008
Issue:  4
Date:  20 December 2014
Abstract:  
                Exhibits focusing specifically on Electronic Literature have been mounted at
                    galleries, libraries, universities, convention spaces, and parks and other
                    outside venues. The Electronic Literature Organization’s 2012 Media Art Show,
                    for example, hosted exhibits in five different locations in Morgantown,
                    including a community arts center, local gallery, the university library, a
                    department’s conference room, and the city’s amphitheater, while the MLA 2012
                    and 2013 exhibits were held at the Washington State and Hynes convention
                    centers, respectively. The Library of Congress, the most important repository of
                    books in the U.S., hosted Electronic Literature & Its
                        Emerging Forms in April 2013 while Illuminations gallery at
                    University of Ireland Maymooth featured an exhibit of electronic literature in
                    March 2014. This range of venues suggests a flexibility and appeal of electronic
                    literature that is both scalable and broad. With these qualities in mind, this
                    article outlines the various exhibits of electronic literature that the author
                    has curated in order to highlight the two main challenges facing all scholars
                    curating digital –– that is, the challenge of availability and the challenge of
                    presentation.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                
                    
                
                Beginning with the Visionary Landscapes Media Art
                        Show held in conjunction with the Electronic Literature
                    Organization’s (ELO) 2008 conference, I have undertaken alone, or in
                    collaboration with others, nine exhibits of electronic literature held in
                    galleries, libraries, art centers, and academic settings. The aim of these
                    endeavors has been to explore curating as a mode of critical and scholarly
                    practice as well as to raise awareness of the art form within academe and beyond
                    into the public sphere. While my curatorial practice generated from training in
                    media art, I have carried it through into the humanities where curation now
                    figures as one of four 
                        fundamental activities at the core of Digital
                            Humanities
                        
                    . Curation, described by the authors of Digital_Humanities, as the selection and
                        organization of materials in an interpretative framework, argument or
                        exhibit, allows for 
                        artifacts [to] be seen being shaped by and shaping
                            complex networks of influence, production, dissemination, and reception,
                            animated by multilayered debates and historical forces
                        
                    . 
                Electronic literature is a challenging art form to curate. It is described as 
                        born digital works
                        
                     that may involve visual, sonic, kinetic and kinesthetic modalities, and
                    possess, to varying degrees, literariness. The common denominator of all works
                    of electronic literature is that it is computational. This means that it
                    generally develops in concert with the technology at hand. For example,
                    commercially available works in the U.S., like Judy Malloy’s Uncle Roger, became available in the late 1980s on
                    floppy disks. As CD technology later became prevalent, works published on floppy
                    disks migrated to CDs, like Shelley Jackson’s Patchwork
                        Girl, while new works, like Megan Heywood’s Of
                        Day, Of Night, were developed especially for this new technology.
                    The rise of the browser gave birth to net-based works, like Dan Waber’s Strings, that were freely available to audiences with
                    access to the internet. With each new technology came the danger of rendering
                    the works produced with the previous technology obsolete. Even works produced
                    for the web with Flash software as recently at 2007 are in danger of becoming
                    inaccessible as mobile devices overtake the desktop market. This situation has
                    brought to the forefront two overarching questions relating to curating works of
                    electronic literature: First, in this age of ubiquitous computing where
                        net-based electronic literature is available on the web and, so,
                            anytime –– and now with wireless technology,
                            anywhere –– how can a curator make exhibits mounted in
                        brick and mortar exhibit space vital? Second, in light of rapidly
                        changing technology where platforms and programs are rendered obsolete
                        within mere years, what is the best way for a curator to present electronic
                        literary works produced on systems that have been rendered obsolete? The
                    former question suggests, what I call, a challenge of
                        availability; the second, the challenge of
                        presentation. This essay answers these two questions and presents
                    a detailed description of exhibits I have undertaken, focusing on the way in
                    which they helped to glean new knowledge about the art form as objects of study
                    and expand electronic literature within academe and beyond.
            

                The Challenge of Availability
                The challenge of availability for curating net-based electronic literature lies
                    in the fact that it involves digital objects whose natural habitat is the
                    digital space of the web. Exhibits I have curated, for example, offer works that
                    are linked from the artist’s own site or some sort of online archive or
                    database. One can just as easily access them from the comfort of one’s own home
                    or office without even needing to visit a museum, gallery, or library to
                    experience them. Yet because of the unique presentation and interpretation that
                    a curated exhibit can offer, viewers can enhance their understanding of
                    electronic literature when they experience it in conjunction with other
                    exhibited work and in community with other viewers. In fact, those of us who
                    grew up playing video games are primed to interact with digital objects in the
                    presence of others in physical space. This experience can be extended beyond
                    gaming into other forms of interaction with digital objects, like works of
                    electronic literature exhibited a gallery or library. This line of argument
                    follows that of Vince Dziekan, Curator of Leonardo
                        Electronic Almanac, who argues that curators can combine stag[ed] virtual experiences with 
                        events that bring values, beliefs . . . into the public
                            domain
                        
                    . He arrives at his view through Mieke Bal’s notion of multimediality  and André Malraux ‘s 
                        museums without walls
                        
                    , predicting that 
                        contemporary [venues] of the future will exhibit the
                            virtual and the real alongside one another, crossing and overlapping
                            each one’s boundaries, creating an amazing visual and interactive
                            experience within and without walls
                        
                    . Multimediality, in this context, implies a shift from exhibit venues as 
                        an arena for contemplation of the unique artwork and
                            its aesthetic immediacy to staging virtual experiences
                        
                     while the museum without walls suggests that
                        the primary value of artworks . . . no longer reside[s]
                        in them as physical objects. They can be regarded as moments of art rather than works of art . 
                In The Tate Handbook, Iwona Blazwick and Simon
                    Wilson build on the idea that much is gained when approaching art as a system
                    that involves a synergistic relationship among the works, the space, visitors,
                    and curator. As they tell us, [w]orks of art are rarely
                        encountered in isolation but rather are
                        experienced in relation to each other and articulated by the architectonics
                        of a building and the unconscious choreography of other people (qtd.
                    in ). Synthesizing these ideas, Dziekan
                    argues for a dialectical approach to curating that 
                        move[s] away from what might be termed as a broadcast
                            model of distribution (entailing a one-way communication approach) by
                            introducing degrees of openness (access, participation) and feedback
                            (exchanges, transactions). . . . This shift entails ideological choices
                            that challenge the [museum’s, gallery’s, etc.] ability to respond to a
                            changing mandate, from one founded on its presentation role to that of
                            providing an infrastructure for aesthetic experience.
                        
                     In effect, Dziekan envisions a black box
                    associated with performance and action rather than a white
                        cube associated with emptiness and neutrality . For him, multimedial exhibits are designed
                    to be experiential, participatory, and interactive, a space for 
                        developing critically and creatively upon the
                            dialectical relationship between virtuality and the art of
                            exhibition
                        
                    . Seen in this light, multimedial design offers an approach to curating
                    that provides a strong foundation for exhibiting digital native objects that are
                    readily accessible online like net-based electronic literature. 
                I began thinking about the challenge of availability in 2009 when designing the
                    curatorial plan for the exhibit, mediartZ: Art as
                        Experiential, Art as Participatory, Art as Electronic. For example,
                    one of the works I selected for exhibit, This Is Being
                        Sexy by Doug Gast, is a web project that includes digital prints
                    that interrogates the connection between object and
                        symbol (Gast, This Is Being Sexy),
                    using the notion of what being sexy means to each of us as the
                    basis for exploration. The work encouraged visitors to send in photos of
                    themselves that would, then, be printed out and added to the exhibit. Along with
                    participatory works like Gast’s, I also hosted events that aimed to extend the
                    conversation about the art through curator’s and artists’ talks during the run
                    of the show. 
                
                    
                
                I followed a similar strategy at another exhibit, Electronic
                        Literature & Its Emerging Forms, held at the Library of
                    Congress, where my co-curator Kathi Inman Berens and I programmed artists’
                    readings in the exhibit space during the lunch hour and hosted a keynote and
                    panel discussions at the closing of the show. We also encouraged audience
                    participation and interaction at the various stations we had designed for the
                    exhibit. At a Creation Station, for example, visitors could produce concrete
                    poetry on an old typewriter, an activity that helped to emphasize the concrete
                    poetry they had viewed at the Context Station. All of these elements served to
                    build experiential, participatory, and interactive components of an exhibit
                    whose electronic literary works were found online and, so, were readily
                    available beyond the walls of the Library of Congress. 
            

                The Challenge of Presentation
                My second question focuses on obsolescence and the challenges it poses for
                    presenting works in exhibits –– what I refer to as the challenge of
                        presentation.
                Christiane Paul addresses this issue for media art in her seminal essay, The Myth of Immateriality. Here she reminds us that 
                        the digital is embedded in various layers of commercial
                            systems and technological industry that continuously define standards
                            for the materialities of any kind of hardware components
                        
                     and suggests that the constant upgrades of hardware and software may be
                    addressed, in varying degrees of practicalities, by collecting technologies
                    (hardware and software) for the purpose of display, emulating code on newer
                    systems, and migrating works to the next version . We can extrapolate much from her ideas but need to be aware of
                    the unique aspect of electronic literature as it has emerged with its own
                    theories and methods. Paul’s view that the lowest common
                        denominator for defining new media art is 
                        its computability
                        
                     bears attention in that it signals a difference in aesthetics between
                    media art and electronic literature and explains why she values one strategy
                    (emulators) over others (collecting and migration). Unlike media art where
                        media is anchored in the tradition of cinema and
                        art is associated with terminologies found in fine art
                    and performance, electronic literature generates from a wide variety of
                    disciplines and practices, such as creative writing and media art, but also
                    Digital Humanities, which itself is described as a 
                        mode of scholarship and institutional units for
                            collaborative, transdisciplinary, and computationally engaged research,
                            teaching, and dissemination
                        
                    . Additionally, electronic literature embraces the technological origins
                    of both coding and writing technologies, declaring this heritage in its genres’
                    naming convention, such as hypertext fiction or kinetic poetry.
                    Computability –– functions made manifest by characters expressed in written code
                    and which drives the words, images, video, animation, sounds, etc., of the work
                        is the point –– is the common denominator
                    connecting hypertext fiction with flash poetry, generative poetry with
                    interactive fiction. 
                
                    
                
                So, what is the best way to present electronic literary works
                    produced on systems that have been rendered obsolete? To answer this question, I
                    turn to Judy Malloy’s database narrative, Uncle
                        Roger, begun in 1986 and published on the ArtCom Electronic Network located in the WELL (Whole Earth ‘Lectric Link) in 1987. It was contemporary with the
                    Apple IIE and was, in fact, produced on this model. Version 1.0 was originally
                    written in BASIC and delivered as a serial novel comprised of 100 lexias over
                    the network. The version that was eventually sold commercially through the
                        ArtCom catalog, however, was Version 2.0. It
                    was made up of three 5 ¼ floppy disks on which Judy organized the material from
                    100 lexias of the previous version into three parts: A
                        Party at Woodside,
                    The Blue Notebook, and Terminals. Version 2.0 made it possible for readers to navigate the
                    story by selecting and typing keywords on the command line. Each combination
                    would result in a lexia or series of lexias relating to the keywords typed.
                    Typing David followed by Jenny in the next query, for example,
                    brings up episodes about the relationship between these two people: David’s
                    messy apartment that Jenny recalls, the picture of David’s former lover that
                    Jenny tears into tiny pieces and places back into his wallet.
                
                    
                
                Malloy sold Version 2.0 from her home as a hand-made artist package. As far as
                    she knows, only three copies of the complete work exists, two that she donated
                    to Duke University along with other materials that now comprise the Judy Malloy
                    Collection and one divided, at the moment, between Malloy and me. Recognizing
                    that people do not generally keep Apple IIe computers lying around their homes
                    and offices, Malloy produced a web version in 2012, referred to as Version 3.0, that runs on contemporary
                        computers. A more complete history of Uncle Roger can be found at Judy
                        Malloy’s Authoring Software, http://www.well.com/user/jmalloy/uncleroger/uncle_readme.html.
                    However, for me to present the Version 2.0 at the Pathfinders exhibit at the Modern Language Association conference
                    in Chicago, IL in January 2014, I was required to ask Malloy to lend me the
                    floppy I was missing (Terminals) and, then, ship my
                    Apple IIE to Chicago in order to show the work. Having access to Uncle Roger online sounds like a better solution to
                    the problem of shipping a vintage computer across the U.S. and risking losing a
                    rare work of electronic literature in the mail, but let’s step back for a moment
                    and think about the qualities of the work that may be lost if I blithely present
                    Version 2.0 on any Apple IIE or Version 3.0 on a contemporary computer without
                    thinking critically in advance about my choices. 
                
                    Uncle Roger centers on the semi-conductor chip
                    industry of Silicon Valley of the 1980s, a time in which floppy disks and Apple
                    IIE computers with its black screen and green dot matrix type were familiar
                    technologies. This particular computer is one of the most robust that Apple ever
                    produced, lasting 11 years on the market. When Malloy began posting Uncle Roger on the WELL, the computer was only three
                    years old. In fact, Malloy wrote Uncle Roger on a
                    version of the Apple IIE that constrained her lines to 50 characters, resulting
                    in a narrative poem and Malloy finding herself a narrative poet . Later iterations of the computer cause the lines to
                    wrap in ways Malloy did not plan for them to, but Version 3.0 running on a
                    contemporary computer keeps the line lengths in tact. What is lost in moving to
                    the newer version, however, is the look and feel of the period –– the cultural
                    context of the work itself. On the circa 1988 Apple monitor, the aesthetic of
                    computer and story design meet seamlessly, the time-stamp of the work’s
                    technology making sense in the context of the material presence of the computer.
                    Thus, in showing Uncle Roger at the Pathfinders exhibit at the MLA where over 5000
                    literary scholars convene, I needed to be aware that I was doing more than
                    showing content of a work –– I was actually providing a context for
                    understanding and interpreting it. 
                Additionally, as curator I am taxed with caring about (curare literary means to care) the unique features of Uncle Roger, such as its interactivity and ability to
                    compel audience participation. In fact, the work may very well be one of the
                    first social media narratives, presaging twitterature and other familiar
                    contemporary forms today. With Version 1.0 Malloy posted one to two lexias every
                    day, in serial style, to friends in her network, who then responded by chatting
                    with her about the story and riffing off to other topics. Great stuff, Judy, one reader wrote on December 2, the ideas and the content are both up to ridiculously high
                        standards. Thanks for the fresh air. Another: 
                        What jacket are you wearing?
                        
                    . This means that readers of both Versions 2.0 and 3.0 are missing a
                    crucial feature of the work found in Version 1.0.
                
                    
                
                Translation theory holds that translation is ultimately a betrayal of the text by
                    the translator . Tautologically speaking,
                    the best we can do to bring a work to a reader is just our best . So, to exhibit Malloy’s work, I did indeed
                    ship my Apple IIE computer to Chicago since that particular computer wraps the
                    text properly and provides a better cultural context for the work than showing
                    the web version on the Mac Minis or iMacs I generally use for exhibits. I also
                    showed the videos from Malloy’s interviews that talk about the development of
                    the work and, so, situate it in context to its cultural legacy. 
            

                Background on the Exhibits
                 Because this essay also aims to raise awareness of curating as a form of
                    scholarship, I next provide a detailed look at the various exhibits of
                    electronic literature I have curated over the last six years, starting with the
                    2008 Electronic Literature Media Arts Show, Visionary
                        Landscapes.
                
                
                    Visionary Landscapes
                
                 Co-curated with John Barber, Visionary Landscapes 
                    took place from May 29 to June 1 in Vancouver, WA and was organized in
                    conjunction with the Electronic Literature Organization conference, which Barber
                    and I also chaired for the organization. A juried show, it consisted of three
                    different venues: North Bank Artists Gallery located in downtown Vancouver
                    featured electronic literature exhibits by 17 artists or artist teams;
                    the Fireside Room at Clark College featured net art and videos by, again, 17
                    artists or teams; the Firstenberg Student Commons at the host university ––
                    Washington State University Vancouver (WSUV) –– featured early works of
                    electronic literature created by 18 different artists and produced prior to the
                    introduction of the internet browser. An invited show, this third exhibit
                    utilized vintage computers and media that were either part of my personal
                    collection or lent to me by colleagues. For the two juried shows, we received
                    entries from 120 artists, of which the judges selected 34. 
                
                    
                
                The choice of venues was purposeful. The gallery, normally used to showcase fine
                    art, provided the opportunity to present electronic literature as both visual
                    and sonic art forms. Until our show, North Bank had never featured media art of
                    any kind. Its location downtown, with good foot traffic, made the work
                    accessible to a public unfamiliar with electronic literature. The Clark College
                    and WSUV meeting rooms, usually home to students and faculty congregating
                    between classes, placed electronic literature squarely in an informal academic
                    setting. The WSUV exhibit, with its vintage Macintosh computers and docents
                    standing ready to educate visitors about the work, especially, received much
                    attention and served as the catalyst for the article about the conference and
                    exhibit that ran on the front page of the weekend section of the Columbian newspaper. 
                 Another important aspect of the three exhibits was the robust collateral
                    materials that accompanied them. The exhibit’s website provided information
                    about the artists’ works and venues. Designed by local artist, Jeanette Altmann
                    and coded by Barber, the website offered a good account of the event, from the
                    artists to the works and continues to serve as the exhibit’s archival site now
                    indexed in both the Electronic Literature Organization’s Directory and ELMCIP’s Knowledge Base.
                    We also developed a catalog for the early electronic literature exhibit that
                    documented the types of computers platforms on which the works were showcased as
                    a way of helping visitors to the exhibit to understand the material aspect of
                    the practice underlying the art. The desire to promote electronic literature to
                    a new audience also led to opening the exhibit to media artists and art forms
                    that were new and emergent. In that vein, we accepted and showcased, along with
                    animated narratives, flash poetry, hypertext fiction and the like, sound and
                    video installations, twitterature, and VJ/DJ performances.
                    The fact that we referred to the exhibit on the website and conference materials
                    as the media art show encapsulates this strategy. 
                
                    mediartZ
                
                
                    
                
                A year later, in 2009, interested in the impact of the online presence of art,
                    art catalogs, and exhibits, I mounted mediartZ: Art as
                        Experiential, Art as Participatory, Art as Electronic, which I
                    discussed previously in this essay. An invited show held at North Bank from
                    October 2-31, mediartZ featured 10 media and
                    electronic literature artists whose video, animated narratives, sound work, and
                    net art found online or whose interactive live performances appeared as
                    documentation on the web. Interactive work and live performances were also part
                    of the exhibit. As such, the exhibit made the argument that in this era where
                    the art we choose to curate can already be accessed online, what makes an
                    exhibit of media art and electronic literature compelling is the way the curator
                    designs the exhibit . In that regard, the show
                    included live performances, audience participation through social media and
                    other technologies, artists’ talks, and lectures, to name a few strategies. The
                    kick off party of 450 people brought in one of the largest audiences for any
                    event at the gallery. 
                This was the first exhibit in which I applied curatorial approaches commonly
                    associated with fine art shows to an exhibit that highlighted electronic
                    literature and media art. Unlike Visionary
                        Landscapes where I placed computers on tables and made chairs
                    available for reading work, mediartz featured computers on pedestals normally used to hold
                    works of sculpture. I provided my first curatorial statement in association with
                    an exhibit and published it in the catalog I produced for the show. These
                    elements were intended to connect electronic literature to media art but more
                    importantly to promote both as art forms to a new audience, one who may not have
                    readily viewed them as art.
                
                    Electronic Literature
                
                
                    
                
                A year and a half later, I co-curated, with Lori Emerson and Kathi Inman Berens,
                        Electronic Literature at the Modern Language
                    Association 2012 convention. The show was a large undertaking that aimed to make
                    a statement about literature in the 21st century, a time in which computing
                    devices and electronic media had become both ubiquitous and well-integrated into
                    the fabric of contemporary culture. Envisioned as an invited show, it ran for
                    three days in the Washington State Convention Center in downtown Seattle, WA
                    where the 5000+ members of the MLA converged for their annual meeting. The
                    exhibit featured: 
                        160 works by artists who create literary works involving
                            various forms and combinations of digital media, such as video,
                            animation, sound, virtual environments, and multimedia installations,
                            for desktop computers, mobile devices, and live performance. The works
                            presented at this exhibit have been carefully selected by the curators
                            because they represent a cross-section of born digital —
                            that is, works created on and meaningfully experience through a
                            computing device — from countries like Brazil, Canada, Australia,
                            Sweden, the UK, the US, and Spain, and highlight literary art produced
                            from the late 1980s to the present. Thus, the exhibit aims to provide
                            humanities scholars with the opportunity to experience, first-hand, this
                            emergent form of literature, one that we see as an important form of
                            expression in, as Jay David Bolter calls it, this late age of print.
                        
                     Named Electronic Literature in order to
                    introduce the term to a potentially new audience, the exhibit coincided with the
                    20-year anniversary of the first session held at the MLA on the topic of
                    electronic literature, a panel, entitled Hypertext,
                        Hypermedia: Defining a Fictional Form, that featured Terry Harpold,
                    Michael Joyce, Carolyn Guyer, Judy Malloy, and Stuart Moulthrop. 
                Emerson, Inman Berens, and I set four goals for the exhibit:
                
                    Introduce scholars to a broad cross-section of born digital literary
                        writing, both historic and current
                    Provide scholarship and resources to scholars for the purpose of further
                        study of Electronic Literature
                    Encourage those interested in the creative arts to produce Electronic
                        Literature
                    Promote Electronic Literature in a manner that may encourage younger
                        generations to engage with reading literary works
                
                The exhibit was, for me, the response to my own call to action issued in the
                    article, published in ebr in 2008, Electronic Literature: Where Is It?, in which I
                    challenge scholars to bring elit to the classroom, to help
                        promote it in the contemporary literary scene, and support artists who
                        produce it so that it can foster and bolster literary sensibilities and
                        literacies of future generations
                    . But formulating an exhibit that would, indeed,
                    reach these goals, especially at the MLA where the notion of an exhibit of
                    literary art was new and many of the attendees had never before experienced
                    electronic literature, required a thoughtful strategy. We curators were,
                    therefore, tasked with educating an audience of literary scholars, from
                    classicists to contemporary literary theorists, about electronic literature and
                    with providing ready access to the various works and scholarship surrounding
                    electronic literature so that there were few, if any, impediments to including
                    it in classroom teaching and research activities. This meant we had to provide a
                    robust website, with whole pages devoted to Scholarship,
                    Resources, and the Works themselves, as well as curatorial statements that provided
                    insights into the curatorial design and the scholarship surrounding the
                    works.
                
                    
                
                Additionally, the new audience for whom we were designing the exhibit required us
                    to rethink the language we used for describing and organizing the show. In
                    structuring the exhibit, for example, we combined concepts found in fine art
                    with those common to Digital Humanities scholars, whom we viewed as our mostly
                    likely primary audience. This approach resulted in the works being divided into
                    the three categories we named Works on Desktop,
                    Mobile-Geolocative Works, and Readings and Performances. Moreover, instead of grouping works
                    within these categories by genres common to electronic literature (e.g.
                    hypertext poetry, interactive, fiction, generative text), we organized them on
                    Computer Stations called, for example, Experiments with
                        Form,
                    Multimodal Narratives,
                    Multimodal Poetry and Literary
                        Games. The Computer Stations were comprised of gallery pedestals
                    that were meant to signal to visitors that they had entered into an art space. A
                    large poster providing the list of works found on each computer station was
                    placed in close proximity to its corresponding station. Trained undergraduate
                    docents were on hand to meet visitors and assist them with the computers and/or
                    the literary works. A gallery count, a common practice at art galleries, was
                    kept to track visitors. Members of Invisible
                        Seattle, an artists’ collective active in Seattle during the 1980s
                    and that produced in 1983 the 
                        first crowdsourced novel
                        
                    , attended the exhibit and provided the original costume for one of the
                    docents to wear. This performance, in keeping with the spirit of the collective,
                    brought a lot of attention and excitement to the exhibit. We also held an
                    evening of readings and performances by 10 artists or teams of artists at the
                    local literary center, Hugo House. 
                A report, published later at Authoring Software, was
                    generated to document the impact of our exhibit on scholarship and the field. In
                    it we logged 503 visitors to the exhibit site and an additional 107 at the Hugo
                    House event. Over the course of two months before and after the show, over 1600
                    visitors came to the website from 21 different countries. An additional 1000
                    people visited the curators’ individual pages or the Readings and Performances announcement page. The reach of our
                    social media campaign netted over 40,000 Friends of Fans. The event also was
                    referenced in five publications, including Kairos
                    and Digital Humanities Now. As we curators were
                    able to show in our Impact Report, the exhibit had
                    a significant impact on raising awareness of electronic literature among
                    literary scholars.
                
                    Electrifying Literature: Affordances and
                        Constraints
                
                I followed up the MLA exhibit with a juried show, once again, for the Electronic
                    Literature Organization. This show, entitled Electrifying
                        Literature: Affordances and Constraints, ran from June 20-23 in
                    Morgantown, VW in conjunction with the 2012 Electronic Literature Organization
                    conference. Co-curated with the conference chair Sandy Baldwin, the exhibit took
                    a cue from Windows into Art, a fine and media art
                    exhibit I co-curated in 2009 with Vancouver artist Karen Madsen that took place
                    in downtown Vancouver in seven different locations. I envisioned the ELO exhibit
                    also distributed across the city in both public and academic spaces. Electrifying Literature, however, was quite larger
                    than Windows into Art, with 55 artists (and or
                    teams) distributed well over a mile along High Street and University Avenue
                    instead of 16 artists (or teams) distributed over a few blocks. 
                        
                    The sites –– the Monongalia Arts Center (MAC), the Arts Monongahela
                    Gallery, the WVU Downtown Library, WVU’s Colson Hall, & the Hazel Ruby
                    McQuain Amphitheater –– included a mix of indoor and outdoor space, public and
                    academic settings, and private and community art centers. Baldwin and I also
                    expanded the scope of the exhibit to include sonic art, experimental or
                    conceptual multimedia works, and locative works. Organizing the show in this way
                    allowed us to promote electronic literature beyond the ELO conference audience
                    in order to grow the organization and build support for education, particularly
                    for higher education and media art.  Placing art at two downtown galleries and
                    the public amphitheater were attempts to reach this goal.
                
                    
                
                The curatorial design aimed to match each venue to the art and, then, place the
                    art within an appropriate, or specific, space inside the venue. For example, at
                    the gallery and art center, we used pedestals for the computer stations, while
                    at Colson Hall, home of the English Department, we placed computer stations on
                    tables and provided chairs for sitting down and studying the works. In terms of
                    site-specificity, we placed Jim Bizzocchi’s ambient video in the MAC at the turn
                    of the marble staircase leading to the second floor –– a space that allowed the
                    delicate sound of the water trickling over rocks found in his video to echo and
                    draw visitors’ attention as they entered the building. At the library we
                    installed Three Rails Live, a video created by
                    Scott Rettberg, Nick Montfort, and Roderick Coover at the bottom level of an
                    atrium space that carried sound up the stairwell but not into the study areas. 
                 An exhibit website produced in advance of the event provided conference
                    attendees with detailed information about the artists, works, venues, as well as
                    with a site map and a curatorial statement outlining the vision for the exhibit.
                    Five trained undergraduate docents I brought with me and the five graduate
                    docents studying under Baldwin provided assistance to both exhibit visitors and
                    conference attendees. The exhibit also introduced a series of retrospectives,
                    the first ever offered at an ELO conference, featuring prominent artists whose
                    work has inspired others. Honored in this way were Alan Bigelow, J. R.
                    Carpenter, M.D. Coverley, Judy Malloy, and Jason Nelson. 
                
                    Avenues of Access: An Exhibit & Online Archive of New
                            Born Digital Literature
                
                The MLA invited Inman Berens, Emerson, and I back to curate an exhibit for its
                    2013 convention taking place from January 3-5. Emerson was unable to join us,
                    but Inman Berens and I, along with six undergraduate docents traveled to Boston,
                    MA to mount the show. This one, entitled Avenues of Access:
                        An Exhibit & Online Archive of New Born Digital
                        Literature, was intended to differ from the previous MLA exhibit.
                        
                        
                    Playing off the theme of access stated in the MLA’s convention
                    title and having already established the previous year electronic literature as
                    an artifact for exploration by humanities scholars, Inman Berens and I aimed at
                    providing more opportunity for in-depth study of electronic literature. So,
                    rather than 160 works organized into 10 categories, as found in the previous
                    exhibit, we offered 30 organized into five. And instead of mounting computers on
                    pedestals, we placed them on large, round tables with accompanying chairs on
                    which to sit and comfortably study. 
                 Also available was a special Antecedent Station
                    that showcased Ian Bogost’s literary game, A Slow
                        Year, and the book, 10 Print
                        Chr$(205.5+Rnd(1)); : Goto 10, written by Nick Montfort and nine
                    other scholars. Visitors were invited play Bogost’s game on an Atari Video
                    Computing System and run the book’s titular command themselves on a Commodore
                    computer. A Creation Station also made it possible
                    for visitors to construct their own poems with a JavaScript Poetry Generator. An
                    evening of readings and performances were held for the second year, this time at
                    Emerson College. Eight artists as well as authors of 10
                        PRINT performed for an audience of 200 people in the Bordy Theatre. 
                
                    The Impact Report for the 2013 exhibit documents a
                    growing interest in electronic literature and an understanding of its potential
                    for creating new knowledge: 14 scholarly references, 12 reviews of works on
                        I ♥ E-Poetry, four reviews of the exhibit,
                    itself, in journals in the U.S. and Europe, and 10 essays and presentations by
                    the curators. Our findings also revealed that visitors purposefully sought the
                    exhibit out, expecting it to be offered at the convention and that when they
                    came, they lingered for upwards of an hour, even two,
                        immersing themselves in the various generic stations and talking with
                        curators and other scholars about connections between their own research and
                        the exhibited e-lit. We found that the natural
                        affinity between e-literature and digital humanities manifested itself in
                        conversations that . . . spark[ed] scholarly collaboration on
                        projects, speaking invitations and publications and discovered that 
                        young scholars [were thinking about revising] their
                            courses of study and dissertation plans to account for electronic works
                            they encounter[ed] at MLA e-lit exhibits
                        
                    .Following the exhibit, I received an invitation to give a public lecture
                    about curating electronic literature for the Digital
                        Cultures series hosted at Bowling Green State University the
                    following May, reaching yet another audience for electronic literature. 
                
                    Electronic Literature & Its Emerging Forms
                
                
                    
                
                Probably the most challenging exhibit I have ever mounted was Electronic Literature & Its Emerging Forms for the
                    Library of Congress, held from April 3-5, 2013. Co-curated with Inman Berens and
                    held in the magnificent Jefferson Building at the library, the exhibit ––
                    featuring a long bank of tables stacked with books from the library’s vast
                    holdings comprising a Context Station, five
                    computer stations featuring 27 works of electronic literature, and a second long
                    bank of tables comprising the Creation Station, daily artists readings, a rare
                    book exhibit, a keynote, and panel presentations –– also had one of the shortest
                    runs of any show I had ever done: only 15 hours. As expected from an exhibit
                    held at such a popular tourist site in Washington D.C., it also saw the most
                    traffic of any other exhibit I had curated: over 750 on-site and 5000 online
                    visitors, all within a few short hours. It was also the first show I had ever
                    mounted at a public library, and since it happened to be the most important
                    library in the U.S., the exhibit was designed to make the biggest splash
                    possible for electronic literature, its art and scholarship. No costs were
                    spared, and no holes were barred to achieve this big goal. 
                 But it was also intended to achieve another, more subtle, goal –– that is, to
                    establish electronic literature as Literature,
                    without any modifiers attached to its name. As I wrote in my curatorial
                    statement about the exhibit, it was designed to: build on scholarship by Eduardo
                    Kac and C. T. Funkhouser to 
                        make the argument –– one expressed experientially rather
                            than in written form –– that electronic literature is a natural
                            outgrowth of literary experimentation and human expression with roots in
                            print literary forms and, so, constitutes an organic form generating
                            from the dynamic human spirit that is evolving, will continue to evolve
                            through time and medium.  No matter the medium –– orality, writing,
                            print, electronic, mobile –– give an artist something, anything, to
                            create with –– air, animal skin, paper, computer screen –– and she or he
                            will find a way to use it for making art.  This impulse is, after all, a
                            feature of our humanity.
                        
                    
                
                 The overarching conceptual framework underpinning the exhibit centered,
                    therefore, on the experimental nature of electronic literature and its
                    connection to print literature, in general. There were five impulses toward
                    experimentation reflected in the stations: from concrete to kinetic, from cut up
                    to broken up, from pong to literary games, from the Great American Novel to
                    multimodal narratives, and from artists’ books to electronic art. 
                 The curatorial design I produced served to visualize this point. The exhibit was
                    laid out into three main sections. Print books and other analog materials from
                    the library’s collections were displayed on the Context
                        Station located on the left hand side of the room. 
                        
                    The works of electronic literature were displayed on five Electronic Literature Stations arranged down the
                    middle of the room. Finally, writing supplies and other media were made
                    available for hands-on experiences on Creation
                        Stations, or maker stations, found on the right hand side of the
                    room.  This layout encouraged a visitor, for example, to explore a concrete poem
                    by ee cummings found in a book at the Context Station, walk across the aisle to
                    the Electronic Literature Station directly across
                    from it and see Dan Waber’s kinetic poem, Strings
                    and, then, walk across the aisle to the Creation
                        Station where a typewriter and paper (with shapes already provided
                    for filling in with text) were available for making his or her own concrete
                    poem. Once again, I brought trained undergraduate docents with me to greet
                    visitors and assist them with the computers and works and to help with
                    monitoring the room and the media. 
                 The exhibit was reviewed at I ♥ E-Poetry and by
                        The Huffington Post and referenced in eight
                    essays by scholars in the U.S. and Europe. As mentioned, over 750 visitors came
                    to the exhibit during its 15-hour run, with an additional 55 people attending
                    the keynote by Stuart Moulthrop and panel presentations by Nick Montfort, Matt
                    Kirschenbaum, Inman Berens and me that took place on Friday afternoon following
                    the exhibit’s closing. During the two months surrounding the show, the exhibit
                    averaged a weekly reach of close to 2500 visitors at its Facebook page. It was
                    featured in three Library of Congress publications, and the website remains
                    archived at the library. 
                
                    Exploring the Electronic Literary Landscape of the Pacific
                        Northwest
                
                
                    
                
                I followed the Library of Congress exhibit two months later with a small show for
                    the Digital Humanities Summer Institute (DHSI), at Victoria, Canada, that was
                    open for one night only on June 6. Exploring the Electronic Literary Landscape
                    of the Pacific Northwest, co-curated with time-based media artist Brenda Grell,
                    consisted of nine works by six artists, all of whom were born and/or currently
                    working in the Pacific Northwest. This was the second DHSI I had attended, and
                    in the year between my experience in 2012 and 2013 the event had grown to 400
                    participants. Occurring alongside DHSI was the Federation for the Humanities and
                    Social Sciences’ “Congress,” which brought in hundreds more scholars to the
                    campus. So, our visitor base drew from a large number of people working in the
                    area of the humanities and Digital Humanities, many of whom had come
                    specifically to network with colleagues and learn more about digital
                    technologies needed for undertaking their research. Although some of these
                    scholars overlapped with those who frequent MLA conventions, the addition of the
                    Congress expanded the audience for electronic literature.
                 Held at the opening night reception for DHSI, the exhibit, for reasons stated
                    previously, garnered much traffic. In fact, in its short two-hour run, it saw
                    twice as many visitors as the MLA 2013 exhibit did in three days. The trained
                    undergraduate docents Grell and I brought with us proved a necessity and a
                    valuable resource. They helped field questions and assisted the hundreds of
                    visitors who crowded into the hallway that served as our exhibit space. The
                    event resulted in an invitation to Hamilton College, to give a workshop in the
                    spring 2014 about how to teach electronic literature, as well as an invitation
                    to teach a week-long course on the topic of electronic literature at DHSI 2014. 
                
                    Pathfinders: 25 Years of Experimental Literary Art
                

                
                    
                
                The final exhibit I discuss is Pathfinders: 25 Years of
                        Experimental Literary Art that took place at the MLA 2014 convention
                    from January 9-11 , 2014. Co-curated with Stuart Moulthrop, the exhibit
                    generated directly out of our research project, 
                        Pathfinders: Documenting the Experience of Early Digital Literature.
                    The Pathfinders exhibit featured the work
                    of the pioneering experimental literary artists of the late 1980s and early
                    1990s whose work Moulthrop and I preserved in the Pathfinders project. The exhibit also highlighted innovative
                    contemporary artists experimenting today with computing technologies for
                    literary production. In sum, the exhibit made the argument that literature is
                    not relegated to paper and ink, but transcends all mediums and is expressed
                    through technologies available on hand . 
                
                    
                
                The show was laid out into two main sections. The first presented three of the
                    four early works of digital literature that comprise the current preservation
                    efforts of the Pathfinders project: John McDaid’s
                        Uncle Buddy’s Phantom Funhouse, Judy Malloy’s
                        Uncle Roger: The Blue Notebook, and Shelley
                    Jackson’s Patchwork Girl. These works were made
                    available at the exhibit on the computers on which the works were originally
                    experienced by readers at the time of their publication. The computers are part
                    of my personal collection from the Electronic Literature Lab, the site where the
                        Pathfinders research took place. Also
                    highlighted in this section was the raw video footage of the artists’ traversals
                    that our research team produced for the Pathfinders
                    project. The second section of the exhibit, entitled Current Directions, featured contemporary electronic
                    literature artists who have produced narratives, poetry, drama, and essays via
                    physical computing technologies, augmented reality, social media, mobile media
                    and other innovative approaches. The exhibit was devised to illustrate that just
                    as hypertext authoring systems like Storyspace and Hypercard were seen as new
                    technologies that allowed for highly experimental writing in the 1980s to early 1990s , these contemporary technologies also lend themselves
                    to compelling experimental literary art. The idea of experimental literary art found in the title intentionally moved
                    electronic literature squarely into literature with no qualifiers needed to
                    explain the absence of print and the presence of the computer medium.
            

                Conclusion

                
                    
                
                The work I have been doing for these last six years to promote electronic
                    literature through curating works has involved reading and studying, designing
                    and building, writing and thinking, organizing and structuring, innovating and
                    inventing, judging and assessing, and negotiating and coercing. I have created
                    my own media archaeology lab, replete with 54 vintage computers dating back to
                    1983, for experimenting with producing, preserving, and curating electronic
                    literature. I am involved in preservation activities, like the Pathfinders project , to discover methods of maintaining
                    electronic literature through time. I have devoted time and energy to developing
                    best practices unique to electronic literature curating, and I have mentored
                    others –– like scholars Kathi Inman Berens and Lori Emerson, not to mention the
                    many undergraduate students who have taken my course on the topic of curating or
                    work with me in my small gallery in downtown Vancouver –– so that they can learn
                    to undertake this work, as well. The critical and scholarly practice that make
                    up this kind of work involve a deep knowledge of the field as well as a wide
                    array of methods, many of which I have invented. Like the authors of Digital_Humanities, I see these two activities as
                    research. 
            

                Acknowledgments
                 The author wants to acknowledge the support of the National Endowment for the
                    Humanities for its support of the Pathfinders project, which made it possible to
                    gain access to information to Judy Malloy’s work, without which much of this
                    paper could not have been written. 
            
