Title:  Finding and Interpreting Arguments: An Important
                    Challenge for Humanities Computing and Scholarly Practice
Volume:  013
Issue:  4
Date:  14 December 2019
Abstract:  
                Skillful identification and interpretation of arguments is a cornerstone of
                    learning, scholarly activity and thoughtful civic engagement. These are
                    difficult skills for people to learn, and they are beyond the reach of current
                    computational methods from artificial intelligence and machine learning, despite
                    hype suggesting the contrary. In previous work, we have attempted to build
                    systems that scaffold these skills in people. In this paper we reflect on the
                    difficulties posed by this work, and we argue that it is a serious challenge
                    which ought to be taken up within the digital humanities and related efforts to
                    computationally support scholarly practice. Network analysis, bibliometrics, and
                    stylometrics, essentially leave out the fundamental humanistic skill of
                    charitable argument interpretation because they touch very little on the
                        meanings embedded in texts. We present a problematisation of
                    the design space for potential tool development, as a result of insights about
                    the nature and form of arguments in historical texts gained from our attempt to
                    locate and map the arguments in one corner of the Hathi Trust digital
                    library.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Prologue: From Distant Reading to Close Reading
                We speak, for example, of an
                            angry wasp. This sentence appears in the first edition of
                    Margaret Floy Washburn’s textbook The Animal Mind: An
                        Introduction to Comparative Psychology, published in 1908. It occurs as
                    part of an argument she presents against the anthropomorphic idea that we humans
                    can use our introspection of anger to understand the emotions of organisms so
                    physiologically and anatomically different from us. One suspects that Washburn,
                    whose story deserves more space than we can give it here, was intimately
                    familiar with anger. She was the first woman to earn a PhD in psychology in the
                    United States — albeit not from Columbia University, where she wanted to study.
                    Columbia were unwilling to set the precedent of admitting a woman for doctoral
                    studies. Instead she received her degree from Cornell University, where she was
                    accepted to the Sage School of Philosophy under the mentorship of Edward B.
                    Titchener, the pioneering psychologist who pursued a combined introspective and
                    experimental approach to the human mind. Washburn’s textbook would go through
                    four editions, spaced roughly a decade apart, spanning one of the most
                    consequential periods for psychology in its protracted separation from
                    philosophy as a new experimental discipline. After World War II, Washburn’s book
                    faded from view. We discovered it in the digital haystack of the Hathi Trust
                    with the assistance of computational methods we deployed to help us locate
                    argumentative needles such as the sentence leading this paragraph, the kind of
                    process one of the present authors describes elsewhere as guided serendipity
                        .
                Our goal in this essay is to urge more attention in the digital and computational
                    humanities to the important scholarly practice of interpreting arguments. We
                    describe what we learned from our attempt to take an argument–centered approach
                    to humanistic enquiry in a big digital repository. We acknowledge that the
                    methods and approach we adopted represents an initial attempt to explore a
                    complex digital humanities problem, and can be improved upon, as one of our main
                    aims is to draw attention to this problem and spur further work in this area. We
                    believe we have provided a road map to guide future work — or, at least, an
                    analogue to one of those early maps of the world drawn by explorers, no doubt
                    distorting the major land masses, but better than nothing. If not dragons, wasps
                    lie here, and although much of the work described here involved good
                    old-fashioned human interpretation, our discovery of Washburn’s textbook and the
                        angry wasps therein can be credited to the power of the computational
                    methods we used to locate arguments about the anthropomorphic attribution of
                    mental qualities such as anger to nonhuman animals.
                Some of our work has been previously outlined in other publications that focused
                    on our multi-level computational approach  and a
                    technical investigation of the challenges of automated argument extraction . Here, for the first time, we provide more detail
                    about the human component of argument identification, extraction and
                    representation scaffolded by the use of topic models to find relevant content.
                    Through a two-stage, topic-modeling process, we drilled
                    down from a book-level model of a large corpus (too large to read in a decade) a
                    page-level model of a smaller subcorpus (still representing at least a year’s
                    reading). This allowed us to select a few dozen pages from six books containing
                    arguments that were mapped in detail within a few weeks by a team member with no
                    prior expertise in psychology or the history & philosophy of science. The
                    argument maps produced by this step of human interpretation allowed us to
                    identify statements that could be fed back into a third level of topic modeling,
                    drilling down to the level of sentences in a single book. In this way we were
                    able to discover other relevant arguments within the same text, including the
                    one about angry wasps and another about the cognitive powers of
                    spiders.
                Automated argument extraction, also known as argument mining, has significant
                    challenges and remains a holy grail of artificial intelligence research (e.g.,
                    see Mochales and Moens, 2011; ACL, 2018). Our approach contributes only minimally
                    to solving that problem  and, in fact, we doubt it
                    is truly solvable with existing methods. Nevertheless, we propose that the
                    digital humanities should invest more effort in developing argument-centered
                    approaches to computational text analysis. We could be provocative and say that
                    stylometrics and bibliometrics are the low-hanging fruit of digital humanities,
                    and it is time for the digital humanities to take up challenges that may be
                    harder, but which have more real-world impact. The skill of interpreting
                    arguments is a cornerstone of education, scholarship, and civic life. Arguments
                    are fundamental to human meaning making and to the maintenance, and reform of
                    social norms. Even if the field of artificial intelligence is a long way from
                    being able to properly interpret arguments in context, humanities scholars can
                    use tools that are not so far out of reach to assist in their analysis and
                    interpretation of the arguments that structure discourse in both academic and
                    public domains. Interpreting arguments as they appear in historical documents
                    brings them alive, allowing scholars, students, and citizens to understand their
                    relevance for current issues. But before the arguments can be interpreted, they
                    must first be found. As we demonstrate in this paper, available computational
                    methods can strongly assist with that.
            

                Exploring Arguments in the Digital Sphere: Animal Minds as a Proxy
                    Domain
                We focused on the early 20th Century debate about animal minds because, in the
                    aftermath of Darwin’s revolutionary effect on biology, it was a particularly
                    fertile arena for historically important arguments that were still poised
                    between scientific and literary styles of writing, and also for the pragmatic
                    reason that it fitted our prior expertise in psychology, ethology, and
                    philosophy of cognitive science. The debate remains lively in academic circles
                    more than a century since Washburn published her book, and it is, of course,
                    important to the ongoing public debates about animal welfare and animal rights.
                    A close reading of Washburn’s text reveals to a modern reader a mixture of
                    familiar and unfamiliar arguments, many of which deserve revisiting today. Our
                    work also led us to five other texts (described below), which present a similar
                    mixture of the familiar and the unfamiliar. Anyone who engages closely with the
                    arguments in these books learns much about the trajectory that psychology in the
                    English-speaking world was on, and also comes to understand how current debates
                    about animal minds are dependent on the paths laid down these earlier
                    authors.
                The late 19th century and early 20th century was a period of significant
                    development for psychology that was characterised by important and competing
                    arguments. Experimental methods were on the rise, and psychologists, who had
                    often been housed in the same university department as the philosophers, were
                    professionalising, forming their own associations and journals, and their own
                    departments. Philosophy could be seen as retreating from the arguments based on
                    experimental evidence increasingly favored by psychologists, while psychologists
                    were wondering which of their received concepts and theories should be
                    jettisoned, and which could form the basis of further empirical investigation.
                    Such questions were particularly acute in animal comparative psychology. On the
                    one hand, Darwin’s theory of evolution exerted a strong pull towards the idea of
                    mental continuity between humans and animals. On the other hand, many Darwinians
                    were seemingly content with anecdotal evidence of animal intelligence to make
                    their case on analogical grounds to human behaviour, leading experimentally
                    inclined psychologists to reject such anecdotes and analogies as
                        anthropomorphic. Even as the disciplines of psychology and philosophy
                    were formally disassociating themselves, philosophical arguments about the
                        proper way to study animal psychology were becoming even more
                    prominent among the psychologists themselves.
                While comparative psychology in the immediate post-Darwin era was a particularly
                    fertile era for the interplay between philosophy and science, the domain we
                    selected is not special. It serves as a proxy for any domain where
                    interpretation remains open and debate inevitably ensues. The lessons learned
                    from our attempt to find and interpret text about anthropomorphism in
                    comparative psychology generalise to other domains. There is no substitute for
                    reading the relevant texts closely, but there is similarly no substitute for
                    computational distant reading of such a massive repository as the
                    Hathi Trust in order to select which texts are the best candidates for close
                    reading and extraction of their arguments.
                The skills involved in interpreting arguments are essential in supporting and
                    developing critical thinking and writing skills – even, and especially, where
                    digital media predominate (e.g., Wegerif, 2007;
                        Ravenscroft and McAlister, 2008; Ravenscroft 2010; Pilkington 2016). The volume and variety of
                    this digital sphere provides opportunities for thinking, learning and writing
                    within and across educational, professional and civic contexts. Across these
                    contexts the need to identify, understand, and critically compare arguments is
                    particularly important today to counteract a discourse in which accusations of
                    ‘fake news’ and appeals to emotion are used to promote simplistic,
                    insufficiently contextualised arguments and propositions, often overriding well
                    evidenced and supported positions on a subject. There is a pressing need to
                    support and promote scholarly practices focused on identifying, understanding
                    and comparing written arguments that can occur within texts in massive data or
                    document repositories.
                The availability of massive document collections transforms the scale and
                    complexity of the tasks of searching for and interpreting arguments, but these
                    collections hold out great potential for understanding the academic and broader
                    cultural contexts in which these arguments were historically and are presently
                    situated. A key inspiration for our approach was to help inexperienced scholars
                    simulate the way an experienced or expert scholar moves from macro-level views
                    of document collections to micro-level close reading and interpretation of the
                    key arguments in particular texts.
                Of course, there will always be ethical issues, linked to any sociological and
                    political framing around decisions about which digital collections to focus on.
                    For example, the extent to which these may or may not be not-for-profit and
                    available to the public. In our case, we worked with the HathiTrust collection,
                    because it is a consortium of mostly public state universities – spearheaded by
                    Michigan, Illinois, and Indiana – who retain ownership of the scanned content,
                    up to the limits of the applicable copyright laws, although Google supported
                    work to accelerate the scanning of these materials. The original
                    proof-of-concept tool-set that we are proposing and discussing in this article
                    is aimed at gaining insights, both conceptual and technological, about finding
                    and interpreting arguments in digital repositories of any kind in principle.
                    Therefore this work is aiming to be relatively generic in its positioning around
                    what repository to focus on, although for pragmatic reasons also, the HathiTrust
                    was particularly suitable because project members, and one co-author (Allen),
                    were working at Indiana University at the time of this project, which
                    facilitated the cooperation with the HathiTrust Research Center.
            

                Investigation by Design
                Our approach was also inspired by prior work on the methodology of Investigation by Design by one of the present authors
                        . This work was originally developed to
                    model and simulate collaborative argumentation practices 
                     leading to learning and conceptual development
                        
                    . A key idea behind this approach is that
                    technology which effectively enhances scholarship and learning practices should
                    balance existing practices with the technological possibilities for enhancing
                    that practice. In other words, we should not try to fundamentally disrupt the
                    way that people approach texts, but seek to amplify and enhance their processes
                    and practices so as to support more powerful learning and scholarly
                    interpretation across a wider variety of contexts. In our application the
                    existing practice consists of skimming texts for arguments followed by close
                    critical reading of them, and the technological enhancements are (1) topic
                    modelling to improve the searching and (2) argument mapping to improve the
                    identification, analysis and interpretation of the arguments. The semi-formal
                    nature of the mapping tool used in the second component forced us to reflect on
                    what is required of close critical reading during the analysis, construction and
                    representation processes. Furthermore, we believe the level at which we have
                    designed our approach satisfies what Edwards et al. (2007) refer to as below the level of the work,
                    i.e., a level where Neither the
                            exact implementation of standards, nor their integration into local
                            communities of practice, can ever be wholly anticipated
                         (see
                        also Edmond 2018).
                Consider the challenge facing learners and researchers confronted with massive,
                    digitised document collections that are not readily browsable in the way that
                    shelves of library books once were. For one thing, many of the books of interest
                    have been physically shifted to deep storage facilities and must be called up
                    one-by-one rather than whole shelves at a time. (In a
                        recent article, Jennifer Edmond (2018) laments the loss of serendipity this
                        entails.) For another, the digitised collection represented by the
                    HathiTrust Digital Library is an order of magnitude larger than any single
                    library collection, so what was one shelf may have become the digital equivalent
                    of ten. When browsing shelves of physical books, readers might pull a book off
                    the shelf, sample a few pages from the book, and decide whether to put it back
                    or to check it out of the library for closer reading. In the digital library,
                    that decision takes on a different character: on the one hand there is a sense
                    in which we don’t have to put anything back as we can carry out macroscopic
                    analyses of very large numbers of texts; on the other hand we must still make
                    selections for the closer readings that provide valuable insights that are
                    currently beyond the reach of algorithms.
                It is our view that a tool that links searching of massive document collections
                    to close critical reading of key arguments therein would have significant value
                    across educational contexts. It could make the practices of experienced scholars
                    more systematic, efficient and powerful. Perhaps more importantly, it could
                    empower and support less experienced learners to engage in systematic critical
                    thinking and reasoning linked to identifying and understanding arguments, which
                    is a well-attested challenge throughout education (e.g., see Ravenscroft et al., 2007; Andrews, 2009; Ravenscroft 2010). Although previous research has shown the value of
                    argument mapping to support greater sense making
                    and learning in general, this work has involved standalone mapping tools  that do not
                    link the maps to the larger textual and intellectual context in which they
                    arise.
                At the time we conducted the work upon which we base our discussion here, public
                    access to the HathiTrust Digital Library was restricted to the approximately
                    300,000 volumes outside copyright and in the public domain in the United States.
                    The HathiTrust now provides non-consumptive access to over 17 million volumes
                    (as of November 2019), increasing the challenge of identifying key texts from
                    unreadable quantities of text for the purpose of close reading and argument
                    extraction, making it even more important to develop techniques and tools such
                    as those we discuss here. A primary challenge at this scale concerns how to
                    identify and compare argumentation and arguments within and across texts, in a
                    way that is analogous to the way a scholar works, moving from a macro-level view
                    of texts to the close critical reading of particular arguments within and across
                    texts. This work (whose technical details are reported by McAlister et al. 2014 and Murdock et al. 2017) represented the first time
                    that topic modeling and argument mapping had been combined in a process that
                    allowed a scholar to identify pages within texts that should be fed into the
                    argument mapping task, both necessitating and supporting a close critical
                    reading of those texts by the individual engaged in the process. This work,
                    through ostensibly technical research combining Big Data searching and AI
                    techniques, included a broader exploration of the possibilities for integrating
                    science mapping and visualization, along with an initial attempt at argument
                    extraction . In this paper we provide a detailed
                    critical examination of the nature and form of arguments that were identified in
                    the texts, and we consider the centrality of the interpreter and the
                    interpretative processes in extracting these arguments given their historical
                    and cultural contexts. This critical examination supports our wider reflections
                    on the role of such technical methods in supporting the identification,
                    interpretation and comparison of important historical arguments. These
                    reflections provide the basis for our ‘bigger vision’ concerning the important
                    challenge of understanding arguments via the digital humanities, and the broader
                    implications for any field where identifying and interpreting digital arguments
                    is important, or vital.
            

                Searching and interpreting as a pedagogical practice: The challenge of
                    identifying, analysing and understanding arguments in texts
                Texts do not give up their meanings easily, and different branches of the
                    humanities bring different interpretative strategies to bear on the very same
                    texts. For instance, philosophy students and scholars seek to understand
                    conceptual frameworks and arguments that are typically not fully explicit in the
                    texts they study. History students and scholars studying the very same texts may
                    seek different kinds of clues to assist in their interpretations, such as facts
                    about the social and cultural milieu in which they were written, or the specific
                    contacts and experiences that led to particular acts of authorship. Literature
                    students and scholars may focus on narrative structure in those texts, and the
                    extent to which a given piece of work follows or flaunts literary
                    conventions.
                When the goal is also to exploit large datasets in support of traditional
                    humanities research and learning, it is necessary to answer the question of how
                    computational methods might help these kinds of students and scholars alike. For
                    instance, consider the history scholar or student who already knows the
                    biographical details of a 19th Century author, but wants to understand the
                    narrative or argumentative structure of specific passages in that author's work.
                    Scientometric methods such as the analysis of co-author and citation networks
                        , and text mining methods such as named entity
                    recognition  may provide hints about influences on a
                    given author, but unless these are linked to more powerful tools for textual
                    analysis and critical work, the role of these methods is limited to very early
                    stages of investigation for scholars pursuing disciplinary research within the
                    humanities. Likewise, while search engines may be useful for discovering and
                    retrieving individual documents and even key passages, they do not help with the
                    interpretative task of distinguishing between passages where an author is
                    accepting a particular concept, making a particular argument, or following a
                    particular convention, and passages where those concepts, arguments, and
                    conventions are being attacked or rejected.
                To serve scholars and their students well, it is necessary to develop techniques
                    for deeper analysis of the texts they care about. Sophisticated quantitative
                    analysis of the full contents of texts will be needed. But computational methods
                    alone will not suffice. Progress towards more effective use of massive text
                    repositories will require a combination of computational techniques, digital
                    curation by experts, and a better understanding of the way texts are critically
                    understood and used in scholarly practices. No single method alone holds the
                    key. Researchers and students need to be able to engage with the texts and
                    discuss them with peers. Students and interested amateurs can in turn benefit
                    from the discussions among experts if those can be adequately summarised and
                    represented. People participating in debates may benefit from being able quickly
                    to locate sources, both ancient and modern, that support or controvert their
                    positions. There are many open research questions here about the design of
                    effective systems that can serve scholars, and facilitate the representation of
                    their knowledge in ways that others, experts and non-experts alike, can make use
                    of in their critical engagement with the texts.
            

                From Massive Document Repositories to Argument Identification
                It is somewhat self-evident that massive document repositories offer access to an
                    unparalleled number of texts across historical and disciplinary dimensions,
                    opening up new possibilities for learning and scholarly activity. But, in
                    practice, with so much choice about what to read, how do we decide which texts
                    and parts of texts to focus on? And similarly, how can we focus on the key
                    arguments within these texts to support the close reading and understanding of
                    them? This is not just valuable in itself, it also counters the practice of
                    reading texts in a fast, superficial and uncritical way, which is the temptation
                    when we have access to such a massive quantity of text and information.
            

                Why topic modelling to locate arguments?
                Previous attempts at automated argument identification (e.g., Moens et al. 2007) have focused on key words and
                    phrases which may indicate the introduction of premises (for this reason,
                        in virtue of, etc.) or conclusions (hence, therefore,
                    etc.). However, given a) the enormous variety of such markers, b) the
                    historically shifting patterns of usage, and c) how many arguments are presented
                    without such markers, such approaches can have significant limitations. Even
                    when enhanced to use grammatical structure  they face
                    the additional weakness that that they do not capture the semantic content of
                    arguments.
                The set of documents accessible via the HathiTrust provide a robust test of our
                    approach, as particular difficulties of understanding arguments from this
                    historical era are: a) not all the content is congruent with the style of
                    scientific thought and writing that we have come to expect in the modern era
                    (e.g., the heavier reliance on anecdotal evidence in earlier times); b) the
                    language used even in scientific publications is indirect, and verbose compared
                    with its modern-day equivalent (e.g., there may be long digressions), and c)
                    what passes for acceptable argument may well have been different in that era
                    (e.g., the variety of rhetorical strategies). This problematisation contrasts
                    significantly with other formal approaches to argument modeling, that have
                    focused on articles with a modern, formulaic structure, e.g., in legal contexts
                         or in the context of modern scientific
                    articles 
                     where Introduction,
                        Results, Conclusions etc., are explicitly identified. The type of texts we
                    were interested in were historically and scientifically important, but written
                    in a common and more natural style, so we were deliberately giving ourselves a
                    hard problem, but one with high authenticity and relevance. The task of
                    understanding, identifying and mapping arguments in these more free
                        running social science or philosophical (and historical) texts could be
                    considered an order of magnitude more challenging than previous work into
                    argument mapping (e.g., Lawrence et al., 2012;
                        Kirschner et al., 2012).
                Most scholars are interested in arguments not simply for arguments’ sake, but
                    because of the underlying topics and issues that are addressed in those
                    arguments. Computational methods offer a variety of ways for capturing semantic
                    relations in text. Some, such as Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)  are good at capturing word-document relations,
                    others are good at capturing word-word relationships (e.g., Word2Vec). For
                    argument analysis, however, the right “chunks” for analysis are somewhere
                    between words and whole documents. We chose to explore LDA (Latent Dirichlet
                    Allocation) topic modelling  as a means to find
                    appropriately-sized, content-rich sections of text within books, which could
                    then be subjected to further scrutiny for argument analysis and mapping.
                        So, our assumption was that the parts of texts that were rich in a
                        particular topic would also be rich in the arguments that included that
                        topic, and that assumption would be tested through our design and its
                        application in the target domain.
                LDA topic modelling (LDA-TM) is by now a familiar technique in the digital
                    humanities. It uses machine learning to represent documents as mixtures of
                    “topics” and these are represented as probability distributions of the words in
                    the corpus on which the model is trained. The training process automatically
                    assigns probabilities to the topic-document and word-topic distributions in such
                    a way that a relatively small set of topics (set by the modeler via a
                    hyperparameter K) can account for the word distributions found in a
                    relatively much larger set of documents comprising the corpus. As such, then,
                    topic models accomplish a form of data compression, enabling common themes to be
                    identified within a large corpus. Appropriate selection of the hyperparameter
                        K for the number of topics depends on various factors including
                    the size of the corpus and the pragmatic goals of the scholars using the model.
                    As described in more detail below, we explored several different values of
                        K, and settled on a number of topics that served our goal of
                    identifying passages of interest for our argumentative analysis and
                    interpretation. Also described in more detail below is the process we followed
                    to select among and within the books. We made a number of design choices which
                    reflected our pragmatic aim of designing a prototype toolkit that could
                    demonstrate proof of concept, rather than pursuing a systematic investigation of
                    the space of all possible measures and methods.
                Going beyond the previous overview of our work by
                        Murdock et al. (2017), here we focus in more detail on the pedagogical
                    practice, through the link between the original drill-down topic
                    modelling work and the nature, form and structure of the many arguments
                    contained in these texts from the digital library. The detailed interpretation
                    of the texts leading to semi-formal representation of the found arguments allow
                    us, in this paper, to assess the importance and relevance of the discovered
                        arguments, and to problematise the design space. 
            

                Topic Modeling and Selection of Texts
                Automated selection from large volume sets is necessary because one cannot hope
                    to inspect by eye the whole collection. For example, although a standard keyword
                    search in the HathiTrust collection, using Darwin, comparative
                        psychology, anthropomorphism, and parsimony, reduced over
                    300,000 public domain works to a list of 1,315 volumes, this many books is on
                    the order of Charles Darwin’s entire personal library, accumulated and read over
                    several decades. To help us to decide what to read? we chose to adapt
                    topic modeling to our purposes. This technique is useful for information
                    retrieval because it allows a higher level of semantic abstraction than keyword
                    searching.
                LDA topic modelling (LDA-TM) was first introduced by Blei
                        et al., (2003), and it has been subsequently deployed in a variety of
                    applications 
                    
                    , including applications in the humanities . A key innovation of our approach is that we
                    adopted a multilevel approach to a scholarly workflow . We first applied LDA-TM to these 1,315 volumes treating each book as a
                    document. The results of this step of the topic modeling can be explored
                        at https://www.hypershelf.org/htrc1315/. All models were built using
                        the InPhO project’s Topic Explorer open source package  available for download at https://github.com/inpho/topic-explorer/README.md.  The
                    resulting topic model was scanned by a person who selected thresholds on the
                        topicsWe took a naïve approach to this, simply using the
                        proportions of the documents assigned by the model to the topics of
                        interest, and then choosing a threshold on the proportions that seemed to
                        the person making the choice to be sufficient to capture the books relevant
                        to comparative psychology (along with many irrelevant ones; i.e., we
                        preferred recall over precision at this stage). See Murdock et al., (2017) for details. to extract 86
                    volumes from the original 1,315, as those most closely related to our focus on
                    anthropomorphism and animal minds. Amongst other advantages, the topic models
                    allowed us to disambiguate discussions of anthropomorphism in the animal context
                    from uses of the term in the context of comparative religion, allowing us to
                    drill down efficiently to the most relevant materials. We then re-applied LDA-TM
                    to these 86 volumes treating every page as a document. A further step of
                    topic-model assisted selection rated books according to the number of pages
                    containing a high densityAt this stage we preferred precision over recall.
                        We again used a naïve approach, taking the mathematically expedient approach
                        of summing the proportions across all pages and choosing an arbitrary
                        threshold on the sums. Future work should explore more sophisticated
                        information theoretic measures of relevance.  of the topics we were
                    interested in. This yielded six books of central interest for our argument
                    analysis. It was notable that none of these texts appeared in the first ten
                    results of libraries standard keyword searching.
                The six volumes selected by the methods described above each discuss our chosen
                    topic of Animal Psychology:
                
                    The Animal Mind: A Text-Book of Comparative
                            Psychology by Margaret Floy Washburn, 1908
                    Comparative Studies: Psychology of Ants and of Higher
                            Animals by Eric Wasmann, 1905
                    The Principles of Heredity by G. Archdall Reid,
                        1906
                    General Biology by James G. Needham, 1910
                    The Nature & Development of Animal Intelligence
                        by Wesley Mills, 1898
                    Progress of Science in the Century by J. Arthur
                        Thomson, 1908
                
                
                    Selection of rated pages and argument maps
                    We decided to adopt the visual argument mapping approach for a number of
                        related reasons. Previous research has strongly supported the value of
                        argument mapping for: greater sense-making of
                        argumentative texts ; providing standardized
                        and comparable semi-formal and visual representations to support the
                        investigation and analysis of arguments generally ;
                        and, providing visual representations that could be rendered into a generic
                        computational format, the Argument Interchange Format (AIF), see Chesnevar et al. (2006), that can be
                        re-used and shared between applications. In our case, this meant that the
                        argument mapping approach that we adopted (see below) supported the close
                        critical reading of the text selections through an argument lens and
                        provided a standard representational scheme that could be applied across the
                        different texts, showing the found arguments in each. Once mapped,
                        these representations can be potentially re-used and shared in further
                        argument inquiry or tool development. Further details of the mapping tool
                        and process, and how it was used to interpret the texts and arguments that
                        are specific to our study are provided below.
                    The rating of pages according to their loading on topics of interest was
                        taken as an indicator of material worthy or argument analysis and mapping,
                        but these were not used to limit arguments that started before or ended
                        after the rated pages. Thus, each argument selected by the person doing the
                        mapping spanned rated pages, but may also have spanned unrated bordering
                        pages occasionally. Also, not all rated pages that dealt with the chosen
                        topic contained argument. Table 1 (below) shows
                        the Pages that were selected from each Volume, following our topic modelling approach, and
                        also the number of Maps for each Volume. This shows that the first three of the listed volumes,
                        according to our topic modelling returns were potentially argument
                            rich, with their arguments therein creating 15, 10 and 8 maps
                        respectively. For The Animal Mind, which contained
                        many more rated pages than listed in the table, we chose to limit our
                        analysis to 40 pages constituting the largest blocks of contiguous pages
                        containing pages with greater than 90% loading on the topics of
                        interest.
                    The latter three in the list were potentially less rich in argument, creating
                        2, 5 and 3 maps respectively. This difference indicates the variability in
                        writing style during this historical period, with some texts showing clearer
                        lines of argument than others. General Biology is a textbook that follows a
                        more didactic, less argumentative style, and differs from Washburn’s
                        psychology textbook, in that the there is a less controversial set of
                        accepted facts to present. The fifth text is based on predominantly
                        personal observation, so, it is a piece of anecdotal comparative psychology,
                        and not concerned with the methodological questions that lead to the
                        argumentative structure of Washburn’s book. The final text has fewer
                        arguments because it is a pop-science book and is more engaged in
                        telling a triumphal narrative of scientific progress, rather than dealing
                        with controversies in the field. It does have a section on animals that
                        emphasises the discoveries that seem to show how intelligent they are, so it
                        does not aim for the sort of complex analysis that is provided by Washburn.
                        So, considering these findings lends support to our assumption that the
                            topic rich texts according to our topic modeling method also
                        approximate the degree to which the content is argument rich.
                    
                        Page lists of analysed pages from selected volumes
                        
                            Volume
                            Maps
                            Pages
                        
                        
                            The Animal Mind
                            15
                            13-16, 16-21, 24-27, 28-31, 31-34, 58-64, 204-207,
                                288-294, total = 40 pages (original page numbering)
                        
                        
                            The Psychology of Ants
                            10
                            Preface, 15-19, 31-34, 48-53, 99-103, 108-112,
                                206-209, 209-214, total = 37 pages (renumbered; Original page
                                numbering masked by a bug.)
                        
                        
                            The Principles of
                                Heredity
                            8
                            374, 381, 382, 385, 386, 390, 394, 395, total 10 pages
                                (renumbered)
                        
                        
                            General Biology
                            2
                            434-435, 436 total = 3 pages (original page
                                numbering)
                        
                        
                            The Nature & Development of
                                    Animal Intelligence
                            5
                            16-18, 21-26, 30-32 total = 12 pages
                                (renumbered)
                        
                        
                            Progress of Science
                            3
                            479-484, total = 6 pages (renumbered)
                        
                    
                    The argument content was mapped using OVA+  an
                        application which links blocks of text using argument nodes. OVA+ (ova.arg-tech.org) provides a
                        drag-and-drop interface for analysing textual arguments that it is designed
                        to work in an online environment, running as a HTML5 canvas application in a
                        browser. This particular tool was chosen because it builds on the
                        established work in argument diagraming and mapping referred to above  and because it is also a widely used argument
                        mapping tool that also incorporates and generates the standardised Argument
                        Interchange Format (AIF) that has been used by many other projects in
                        computational argumentation . Using this tool
                        each argument is divided into propositions and marked up as a set of text
                        blocks. These text blocks containing propositions were linked to
                        propositions that they support, or undercut, to create an argument map, such
                        as the one below (e.g., Figure 1).
                    
                        Argument Map of Argument 3 (Arg3) of The Animal
                                Mind by Washburn (1908)
                        
                    
                
            

                Argument Interpretation: Identification, Analysis, and Mapping
                To identify the form and structure of the arguments contained in the selected
                    texts we adapted a generic approach for manual argument analysis described by Lawrence et al. (2014). Through
                    considering this work we developed a bespoke rubric that standardised and
                    described the interpretative process that linked the analysis of our
                        historical texts to the argument format of the mapping tool. This was
                    informed by the members of the team with expertise in the humanities, who were
                    familiar with the styles of writing about this topic for this historical period,
                    and the researcher who was performing the mapping process. This was important in
                    our case because, as mentioned earlier, the natural arguments contained
                    in these texts, demanded more sophisticated interpretation compared with other
                    applications where the arguments were more clearly defined. The full detail of
                    this interpretative rubric can be accessed online https://bit.ly/35CshTD. To summarise
                    it for the purposes of this paper:
                
                    Initial Reading: Read through the selected text to
                        get a broad-brush overview of the nature and meaning of the arguments in
                        play
                    Argument Identification: Mark beginnings and ends of
                        major argumentative chunks (could span multiple pages) from where
                        topic/conclusion is introduced to where it is concluded. This may be
                        informed by linguistic identifiers (e.g., because, therefore,
                            suggesting that etc.) where these are present
                    Argument Segmenting: For each paragraph, select zero
                        or more sentences or whole-clauses that best summarise the arguments in this
                        text. Unless they also contribute to arguments made by the author of the
                        text, do not select sentences or clauses from reports of arguments or other
                        non-argumentative materials, e.g., background information. (Mark zero if the
                        paragraph is entirely non-argumentative, e.g., descriptive or providing
                        background context.)
                    Structuring: Link the elements together with
                            relations that show the direction of reasoning, from
                        premise to conclusion, and whether premises are supporting or
                        counter-argument (attack) relations
                    Mapping: Transfer the highlighted sentences, text and
                        their relations to OVA+ and review and interpret for accuracy and
                        representativeness
                
                Through interpreting and mapping the identified arguments in these texts the
                    researcher produced the 47 OVA+ maps covering the selections from the six
                    volumes, which can be viewed onlineOnline link (http://bit.ly/1bwJwF9) to
                        volumeData on Google Drive (view only). Open volume folder, open the pass
                        subfolder, select a PNG image and see a Preview pane – click the blue OPEN
                        button. A new tab will open – click button 100% to zoom. Move around by
                        dragging the diagram., with the maps sequentially numbered and linked
                    to each volume. An example is included in Figure
                        1. It shows an argument from the first text, Argument 3 (Arg 3) from
                        The Animal Mind. The links drawn on the maps
                    between propositions are of two types – supporting and counter-supporting (links
                    labeled RA and CA respectively). Although OVA+ supports more link-types these
                    were not used in this study. Instead we paid particular attention to
                    interpreting the meaning and representing the sub-components of the
                    argumentative text. Conclusions must be supported by at least one premise. Often
                    the maps have sub-conclusions leading to main conclusions. Propositions that
                    expand or explain other propositions are seen as lending support to them. A link
                    connecting two propositions always links from one to another, with an arrow
                    showing direction, where a supporting premise links to (points to) a conclusion
                    or sub-conclusion.
                The argument map (Arg 3) above contains text taken from The
                        Animal Mind by Washburn (1908). The argument consists of 3
                    propositions (in the large boxes on the left) that support two related
                    conclusions (in the large boxes on the right). The RA boxes contained in the directional arrows demonstrates that the
                    propositions on the left (P1, P2, P3) support the conclusions on the right (P5,
                    P6), where the latter are also interconnected, as indicated through pointing to
                    a shared relation (an RA). In this example P2 and P3 combine to
                    support the conclusion P4. The close reading of the content of this argument
                    would emphasise Washburn’s sensitivity to the contrast between Descartes’ view
                    and that of his predecessor Montaigne, and her emphasis on his use of the
                    exquisite functioning of the behaviour of diverse species of animal as evidence
                    for a sophisticated view of the relationship between consciousness and thought
                    (one that is often obscured in current presentations of Descartes’ views on
                    animal minds) along with her sensitivity to the shifting meanings of these terms
                    over the centuries. How this particular argument fits into the more extensive
                    close reading of the arguments is covered in the next section.
                This approach was particularly appropriate for the volumes that we analysed,
                    where, in some cases, the same topic is pursued for a complete chapter and so
                    there are opportunities to map the extended argument. Given the way the
                    arguments were differentially expressed, with some text being more easily mapped
                    compared to others, the mapping process was quite sophisticated, yet followed
                    the standardised rubric to maintain consistency of interpretation.
                
                    Interpreting identified arguments to support better understanding and
                        learning
                    This deep identification, representation and interpretation process
                        linked to the subsequent argument maps, including careful reading of the
                        identified texts provided a double lens onto the arguments that
                        provided a stronger interpretative platform than if these methods had not
                        been applied. The identification, representation and mapping process was
                        performed by a researcher who was familiar with the basics of argument
                        mapping, who was neither a domain expert in comparative psychology nor
                        experienced with extracting arguments from this kind of textual
                            material.The depth of analysis we were seeking in this study would
                            not have been feasible with a multi-user study, hence we focused on the
                            pathway of one individual towards the process of extracting arguments as
                            scaffolded by the available technologies. Below we describe his
                        interpretations. In the descriptions below, for accuracy and evidence, we
                        refer to the argument maps that the descriptions refer to that are
                        accessible online (see footnote 4), as there isn’t the space to display them
                        in this article. The importance and level of scholarly merit and detail of
                        these argument interpretations is the test of our approach. In particular,
                        we were interested in whether a researcher who knew nothing about the domain
                        could be supported through sophisticated and deep reading of the arguments
                        when guided by the topic models and the argument mapping process. A sample
                        and summary of the subsequent close readings and argument descriptions of
                        the first two volumes, which generated the most maps (15 and 10
                        respectively), are given below for the purposes of this paper. And these
                        descriptions are then followed by a summary of the interpretations across
                        the texts to demonstrate how the arguments in the individual texts could be
                        considered collectively to improve the understanding of the topic (of Animal
                        Psychology) in general. The full close readings of the 47 Maps linked to the
                        six volumes is given in McAlister et al.
                            (2014).The descriptions below have been paraphrased and condensed
                        from the original, with material enclosed by square brackets representing
                        additional qualifying comments introduced by the present authors.
                    
                        Volume 1 analysis – The Animal Mind,
                            1908
                        [In this first edition of her textbook, destined for four editions]
                            Washburn sets the context for the debate on animal consciousness. She
                            meets the charge that animal psychology is necessarily anthropomorphic
                            straight away, and admits there is a problem (Arg1). She introduces
                            Montaigne’s arguments for animal intelligence based upon the similarity
                            of human and animal behaviours (Arg2) and follows with Descartes’s
                            opposing argument, that animals are clock-like machines, with no
                            capacity for thought (Arg3). Washburn next presents Darwin as arguing on
                            the basis of analogical claims, such as that animals reason because they
                            are seen to pause, deliberate and resolve.
                            She asserts that Darwin's aim of defending his theory of evolution in
                            face of ongoing controversy about the mental and moral gulf between man
                            and animals, means that his claims cannot be taken at face value (Arg4).
                            In contrast many physiologists argue that psychic interpretations are
                            less preferable than biological explanations of animal behaviour in
                            terms such as tropism [unconscious reaction to stimulation] (Arg5).
                        Washburn next summarises three main anti-mentalist camps or positions in
                            the field (Arg6). She criticises the physiologists, the first camp, for
                            ignoring or simplifying phenomena to fit a predetermined theory, and she
                            argues that their approach yields a reductio ad
                                absurdum when applied to human behaviour (Arg7). Washburn
                            outlines the arguments of ant expert Erich Wasmann [see next section],
                            representing the second camp. Wasmann’s definition of intelligence
                            explicitly excludes animals on the grounds that they act only on
                            instinct. He readily generalises from ants to all animals, stating that
                            ants are superior to other animals (Arg8). The third camp is represented
                            by Bethe [who belongs to an ultra-Cartesian group], holding that animals
                            lack even sensation. Washburn identifies an inconsistency between his
                            acknowledging that modifiability of behaviour is an indicator of
                            consciousness, while considering this improper if applied to animals. He
                            condemns all psychology as subjective and unknowable, and asserts that
                            only chemical and physiological processes should be the object of
                            scientific investigation (Arg9 and Arg10).
                        Washburn argues for a cautious approach to animal psychology,
                            acknowledging pitfalls and problems but seeking scientific methods to
                            overcome them (Arg11). She introduces Lloyd Morgan’s [famous] Canon
                            whereby the simplest level of psychic faculty for an animal should be
                            assumed that can fully explain the facts of a case. She argues that the
                            choice may not always be the right one, but at least it reduces
                            anthropomorphism by compensating for a known bias (Arg12). Washburn next
                            argues against Loeb’s suggestion that learning by
                                experience is a conclusive criterion for mind, but cautions
                            that absence of proof does not amount to disproof. She maintains that
                            rapid learning practically assures mind, but holds that great
                            uncertainty remains about consciousness in lower animals (Arg13 and
                            Arg14). Morphology and similarity of animals’ physiology to humans’ must
                            be taken into account in deciding if an animal is conscious or not, and
                            degrees of similarity indicate a gradation of consciousness, from lower
                            to higher animals, with no possibility of drawing a sharp line between
                            animals with and without consciousness (Arg15) .
                    
                    
                        Volume 2 analysis - Psychology of Ants, 1905
                        [Eric Wasmann was a Jesuit priest and naturalist, publicly renowned for
                            his books about the variety of amazing ant behaviours.] Wasmann’s
                            concept that “intelligence is a spiritual power” leads him to the claim
                            that if animals had this spiritual power “they would necessarily be
                            capable of language”. Animals don’t speak, so animals don’t have
                            intelligence (Arg1). He supports his views of ants by reference to
                            observations made by Aristotle, Stagirite, St Augustine, [and Wasmann’s
                            contemporary naturalist] Dubois-Reymond (Arg3). Wasmann denigrates
                            suggestions by ‘modern sociologists’ that ant “states” and human
                            republics can be equated, explaining that class differences arise from
                            ‘conditions of life’ or ‘intelligent’ free choice in Man, but ant castes
                            arise from organic laws of polymorphism [multiple body forms] (Arg4).
                            Wasmann asserts animal intelligence is really sensile cognition and
                            sensuous experience, but if higher animals are credited with
                            intelligence, it would be inconsistent to deny ants the same (Arg5). He
                            argues that ants achieve a more perfect level of social cooperation than
                            even the higher vertebrates, such as apes (Arg7).
                        Wasmann criticises Darwin for his anthropomorphic stance towards the
                            ‘silence and obedience’ of a group of baboons, which Wasmann
                            reinterprets as ‘fidelity and obedience’, and takes to imply
                            ‘reasonable, voluntary subjection to the demands of duty and authority’.
                            He argues that the more likely explanation is “the instinctive
                            association of certain sensile perceptions with certain sensile
                            impulses” (Arg6). This association removes the need to allow animals
                            thought; instead, instinct is a sufficient explanation (Arg10). The
                            author explains that instinct has two elements, ‘automatism’ of
                            behaviour (generally found in lower orders of animals) and ‘plasticity’
                            of behaviour (generally found in higher orders). Because the
                            architecture of ants’ nests varies from species to species even when the
                            physical attributes of the ants are highly similar, he argues that a
                            simple explanation of the variety of architecture linked to physical
                            attributes will not do; rather the decisive factor is the psychic
                            disposition of the ant species (Arg8). Wasmann maintains that while ants
                            ‘verge on heroic unselfishness’ towards their young, only ‘Man’ is
                            conscious of duty and the morals of parental love. Although he admits
                            that some aspects of motherly love in humans are instinctual, motherly
                            love cannot be attributed to animals because it is ‘spiritual’, based on
                            awareness of duty that is unique to humans (Arg9). 
                    
                    
                        Summary of interpretation of arguments across six volumes
                        The section above demonstrates a sophisticated close reading of a sample
                            of the arguments in the two selected texts, through incorporating the
                            mapping approach into the interpretation process. For example, the
                            comparison and contrast afforded by Washburn’s survey of the arguments
                            in the literature and her attempt to articulate a good scientific
                            methodology for comparative psychology. This contrasts with Wasmann’s
                            more polemical and theological approach to the perfection of behaviour
                            through instinct, which reveals that despite Darwin’s work, published
                            nearly 50 years earlier, much of the controversy revolves around whether
                            humans have a special, perhaps God-given position, separate from the
                            animal world.
                        A number of historically important themes emerged from the interpretation of the arguments in the
                                six volumes that are given in full in McAlister et al.,
                            (2014). These demonstrated the ability of our selection and
                            argument mapping methods to allow a reader, who was previously
                            unfamiliar with the scholarship in this area, to zero in on the relevant
                            passages and then acquire an understanding of the key themes, which is a
                            measure of the success of those methods. Although it was not a primary
                            goal of our project to produce new insights into the domain-specific
                            content, these would somewhat hopefully and inevitably emerge from the
                            close critical reading of the key arguments. So it is worth making some
                            concise, content-specific remarks here about two of the themes that
                            emerged from the six volumes, to demonstrate the potential value of the
                            proposed approach.
                        (i) Animal Flexibility. All the authors,
                            evolutionists and non-evolutionists alike, were willing to recognise
                            hitherto unacknowledged flexibility and variability in behaviour of
                            individual animals. They all identify the same extremes – excessive
                            anthropomorphism on the one hand, and the conception of animals as
                            automatic reflex machines on the other – but each claims the middle
                            ground for their quite different positions! Even Wasmann, the lone
                            anti-evolutionist in our sample, denies that individual ants are reflex
                            machines, claiming that the flexibility of individual ants is of a
                                psychic variety not mechanical automatism, although he attributes
                            this flexibility to instinct not
                            reason.
                        (ii) Developmental Approaches. Three of the
                            authors, Mills (1898), Reid (1906), and Needham (1910), explicitly advocate a
                            developmental approach to the study of animal mind, operating within the
                            framework of a strong nature-environment distinction (corresponding to
                            today’s nature-nurture distinction). They
                            make the case for comparative developmental studies, particularly
                            experimentally rearing animals in isolation.
                        Although the accounts (above) of the interpretation of the arguments are
                            relatively concise, they demonstrate a successful close
                                reading of the arguments located within the selected texts.
                            And while the themes discovered should be compared with scholarly
                            treatments of the same (e.g., Richards,
                                1987), nevertheless we believe that despite the variations in
                            language (vocabulary and style), the crisscrossing overlap among the
                            arguments discovered in these books indicates that our methods
                            identified pages that were thematically relevant to tracking the
                            scientific and philosophical debates about anthropomorphic attributions
                            to animals in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. This provides
                            confidence in our claim that the big-data analytic technique of topic
                            modeling, linked to argument mapping, can support close reading of texts
                            in a content-relevant, argument-guided way.
                    
                
            

                Discussion
                The approach described in this article offers an initial prototype of a design
                    for scholarly interaction with technology that begins with topic model-assisted
                    search of massive document repositories and leads to close critical reading of
                    the arguments in the texts therein. It has also produced important insights
                    about the way these arguments are rendered and interpreted by a person
                    new to such historical texts and work in the humanities. The automated content
                    selection and categorization work described in this article demonstrated the
                    feasibility and reliability of large-scale, fined-grained topic-based
                    categorization across a range of topics in science and philosophy using
                    documents defined at a variety of scales (whole books, book pages, and
                    individual sentences in books). Categorization and selection are essential
                    first-steps in the scholarly process of identifying further structures, such as
                    arguments, in large data sets. Although it might have been possible to construct
                    more sophisticated keyword searches using Boolean operators to identify the same
                    pages of interest for our analysis, this would have required painstaking trial
                    and error, whereas the topic modeling provided a relatively straightforward
                    semi-automatic approach to narrowing down. A number of insights emerged from
                    performing the human interpretation of texts that were delivered by our topic
                    modeling techniques and then mapped in argumentative terms through the
                    argument-mapping tool OVA+.
                Topic modeling was clearly successful in identifying the texts (chapters and
                    pages) that contained the ‘stuff’ of arguments linked to the keywords and topics
                    that were searched for, strongly supporting our assumption that we could
                    approximate topic rich texts as also being argument
                        rich. These could be sorted through rankings that allowed just the
                        topic rich texts to be the focus of further analysis. This is
                    very valuable in itself, as it allowed us to identify and extract 6 argument
                    rich texts from a big data text repository (HathiTrust). Secondly the (human) argument identification and
                    analysis produced 47 argument maps (in OVA+), that provided interpretations from
                    six volumes, that also showed how the type and degree of argument in historical
                    texts can be quite different, with the different texts producing different
                    amounts of argument maps (ranging from fifteen to two). So, the quantitative and
                    qualitative methodologies that we developed also enabled us to represent and
                    distinguish different levels of argument within texts in a broad-brush way. The
                    outcome is a set of powerful descriptive and comparative interpretations of
                    arguments within and across texts, and linked to particular authors (see McAlister et al., 2014 for a full
                        account).
                Furthermore, we were able to leverage the human-constructed argument maps against
                    a micro-level topic model trained on a single book with each sentence treated as
                    a document. Such an approach to Washburn’s The
                        Animal Mind  led us from sentences represented in the maps to
                    sentences in other parts of the book that were judged similar within the model
                    and despite being wholly disjoint in vocabulary, including the angry wasp. Close reading was essential to determine
                    why certain sentences were selected by this method. For example, the relevance
                    to anthropomorphism of the sentence, This, of course, does
                        not refer to the power to judge distance, was not immediately
                    evident. The context of this sentence in Washburn’s footnote on p.238 is as
                    follows: Porter observed that the distance at which
                            spiders of the genera Argiope and Epeira could
                            apparently see objects was increased six or eight times if the spider
                            was previously disturbed by shaking her web. This, of course, does not
                            refer to the power to judge distance.
                         [Italics in original.] Here,
                    then, we see Washburn cautioning the reader not to jump to a high-level
                    interpretation of the spider behaviour. The spiders may perceive objects at
                    various distances but they don’t judge it, where judgement is understood to be a
                    high-level cognitive capacity. This belongs to a more elaborate argument against
                    anthropomorphically over-interpreting the behavior of species remote from
                    humans.
                To summarise, here are five key points from this study:
                
                    We have demonstrated that topic modelling finds topic-rich text that is
                        also potentially argument rich and worthy of careful argumentative
                        analysis.
                    Mapping these topic-rich regions of historical texts using a computerised
                        mapping tool (OVA+) and a suitable rubric supports, and necessitates, close
                        critical reading of the arguments and the texts.
                    The argument mapping was often a complex process, needing interpretation
                        and sometimes gap filling by the mapper, but this was cognitively
                        valuable in supporting argument identification, representation and
                        understanding linked to close critical reading. Some types of argument,
                        e.g., historical arguments, are not simply latent and waiting for
                        identification and representation. Rather, the arguments come alive
                        through interpretation and the processes of mapping and then writing about
                        them.
                    The exercise of mapping the arguments required critical reading by the
                        non-expert. It manifestly contributed to his deeper understanding of the
                        arguments and their scientific and philosophical contexts than simply
                        reading the books alone without the scaffolding we provided. This is
                        evidenced by his accounts covering all the found arguments and the summary
                        and comparison of all of these (see also
                            McAlister et al., 2014).
                    Further development of this approach should accept points 1-4 above, and
                        emphasise support for the process of understanding, representing and
                        refining argument representations and related conceptualizations. This means
                        those who design such tools should focus more on the cognitive processes of
                        actively reconstructing arguments from complex texts, rather than assuming
                        that arguments might simply be identified and extracted from a
                        frame provided by grammatical and terminological markers of
                        arguments.
                
            

                Critique and Further Work
                Our emphasis on investigating and testing the feasibility of our computational
                    tools to support existing scholarly practices of identifying and understanding
                    arguments in digitised texts has meant that thus far we have deliberately
                    prioritised validating technical possibilities over systematic empirical testing
                    with different texts and/or different scholars. This suggests the need for
                    further research that would incorporate technical and empirical strands into the
                    development of the human-computer interaction.
                The technical implications are that the next tool-set, should more closely
                    connect the topic modelling to the argument mapping. Robust tools for topic
                    modeling already exist in the form of MALLET
                     and the InPhO Topic
                        Explorer
                    . The latter is also well integrated with the HathiTrust Digital Library so that now even
                    copyrighted materials may be modeled (http://inpho.github.io/topic-explorer/htrc.html). However, these
                    tools need to be better integrated with tools for visually structuring argument
                    maps such as OVA+ so that the scholarly work potentially enhanced by these tools
                    becomes more seamless. The system should scaffold the interpretation process
                    from identified texts to argument mapping, as this reasoning and
                    re-representation process is cognitively valuable in achieving better
                    understanding of arguments. Similarly, once the text is identified and the
                    related maps are produced, other scaffolding or visualization techniques could
                    assist coordinating between these two related representations of argument, and
                    among the different representations produced by learners having diverse
                    interests and goals. In this respect, further work could draw upon the large
                    body of work into the use of external representations for learning .
                Once a more integrated and user-friendly version of the toolkit is developed, it
                    would support more systematic empirical investigation of the interaction between
                    user and machine. Our hypotheses are that compared to unassisted argument
                    identification and understanding, this approach would: find the argumentative
                    parts of relevant texts much faster and with greater accuracy; scaffold deeper
                    understanding; and, provide flexible and permanent representations that could be
                    reflected upon, extended and re-used. Further and more generally, future work
                    will accept the need to move towards an environment for constructing and
                    developing representations of argument rather than simply mapping them.
                The above appears a sensible conceptualization for future work, because through
                    implementing our methods it became apparent that arguments were rarely neatly
                    and clearly structured and defined explicitly in the texts. The historical
                    distance to these texts, and the shift in academic writing styles over the past
                    century served to make the task of extracting the arguments even
                    more challenging. Indeed, rather than being set structures transmitted through
                    the texts, instead these arguments came alive through the practice of
                    interpreting, understanding and (re)constructing them. This raises the
                    questions, Do arguments actually exist in clearly defined forms within
                        (certain) texts? Or, do arguments only take form when readers focus on
                        understanding them? When today’s reader encounters the seemingly verbose
                    yet strangely enthymematic nature of yesterday’s arguments, what can we learn
                    about the interaction between readers and texts, and about the minds of the
                    authors and their original readers?
                While these questions are too big to be answered by our original study, their
                    potential validity as important questions are, we argue, supported. The notion
                    that textual arguments are constructed through human interpretation is also
                    supported by the observation that argument structure is notoriously difficult
                    for people, even after training, to determine (see Oppenheimer & Zalta 2011, 2017 and Garbacz
                        2012 for an interesting example of disagreement among experts about
                    how to formalise Anselm’s famous ontological argument in way that
                    is adequate for computational validation). Of course, this should come as no
                    surprise when even textbooks of argument analysis disagree with one another on
                    the simplest of real-world examples. Yet the goal of using texts to construct
                    arguments that satisfy disciplinary canons of interpretation of those texts
                    defines an important scholarly activity. The abstraction provided by such
                    efforts provides a regulative ideal that aids comprehension of difficult texts,
                    and the representation of these abstractions in artifacts such as argument maps
                    provides concrete targets for collaborative meaning making and deeper
                    discussions about alternative interpretations of complex texts. The skill of
                    generating such maps and interrogating their meanings is a legitimate aspect of
                    mental agility and perspective taking, supporting a more sophisticated view of
                    knowledge. The development of these skills, and the tools that support them, is
                    essential for informed citizenship, particularly in our contemporary social
                    media milieu.
                Design investigations such as the one we have described here must remain mindful
                    of the reconstructive nature of argument extraction.Although we have
                        argued that ‘extraction’ is the wrong metaphor, we recognise that the term
                        ‘argument extraction’ is likely to continue to be used for the actual
                        constructive, interpretative process involved. Similarly, we continue to
                        talk of the sun coming up even though we know it is really just coming into
                        view with the Earth’s rotation. Despite the claims of some A.I.
                    proponents, computer scientists seem a long way from being able to design
                    algorithms that match the interpretive skills and subtlety of human readers.
                    Nevertheless, we believe we have supplied one proof of the concept that machine
                    learning applied to big data sets can support this essential aspect of human
                    scholarship by supplying tools for both discovery and representation of specific
                    arguments in a specific content domain. And if we now return to the broad
                    context of critical reading and writing in which our research is placed, we
                    argue that we have made significant technical and conceptual steps in moving
                    towards tools that could enhance and empower this process for learners and
                    scholars alike. This is particularly important in our contemporary digital
                    landscape, where there is arguably an increasing need within the academy and
                    without, to identify and understand reasoned and evidenced argument, to combat,
                    for example, just simply agreeing or disagreeing, or
                    liking, or not, simple emotive propositions and arguments.
                In the application of digital tools to the humanities, we must also be mindful
                    that high-sounding rhetoric about civic engagement, the democratization of
                    scholarship, etc., can be undermined by the facts surrounding the choice of
                    sources and limitations of access to the materials analysed. In our case,
                    because of the association between HathiTrust and Google Books, some may worry
                    (incorrectly in our estimation) that, despite its origins and continuation in
                    publicly-funded universities, the HathiTrust nevertheless represents the sort of
                    corporatisation of higher education that some find undesirable. Whereas we
                    accept that there will always be challenging issues concerning which
                    repositories to focus on, from a scholarly practice perspective our position is
                    clear. We want to improve and democratize the scholarly practice of finding and
                    interpreting arguments, so that argumentative and critical meaning making is
                    potentially more inclusive, in addition to supporting deeper inquiry for those
                    who are already engaging in such practice.
            

                Conclusions
                The research described in this article tackled a complex problem of how to
                    investigate and design a technological platform that empowers and supports, or
                        scaffolds, humanistic practices guiding a non-expert to perform
                    the kind of search, argument identification, and interpretation of an
                    experienced or expert scholar. We investigated this within our approach through
                    using ‘drill-down’ topic modelling to move from macro-level views of a big data
                    document repository, through identifying the main areas of interest in specific
                    texts, then subjecting these areas to close critical reading through semi-formal
                    argument identification, analysis and interpretation. We were also able to show
                    how, with the argument analyses in hand, a further drill down to topic models at
                    the sentence level of individual books could help identify content that had not
                    been originally selected. This investigation has also provided insights into the
                    nature, form and structure of arguments in historical texts, and how these
                    features can be difficult to neatly isolate and also be variable, and require
                    the human to fit the pieces together. This work provides an important
                    problematisation of the design space for future tool development that should
                    arguably focus, not on automatically extracting arguments, but instead focus on
                    how to better interrogate, manipulate and understand them: a practice that has
                    increasing importance and relevance within and without the academy.
                Edmond notes that the digital tools currently available to humanists, focused as
                    they are on text, do not fully reflect the much broader information gathering
                    practices of humanists, which, in her phrase, remain stubbornly multimodal
                        . She argues that a certain kind of
                    productive distraction, following leads where they may, is essential to
                    scholarly creativity in the humanities. With respect to staying ensconced in the
                    world of (digitised) text we are guilty as charged, unfortunately unimodal. The
                    digital library is our easily-accessed tree, even if we would push digital
                    humanist towards higher-hanging fruit. But we would argue that the approach we
                    have outlined addresses some of the problems she outlines that arise from
                    changes in the way libraries are organised in this era of digitised texts and
                    catalogues. While we agree that remote
                        storage and electronic catalogues diminish the likelihood for
                        serendipity for reasons we already mention, we believe we have
                    outlined a digital research environment for argument-based analysis in which
                    serendipity arises. Following the traces provided by topic models led to
                    sampling a few books in more detail, and then to the wasps, spiders, and amoebae
                    that occupied the thoughts of comparative psychologists a century ago: creatures
                    that have all re-emerged in the 21st century in discussions of non-human forms
                    of cognition. The selections were assisted but not forced, allowing the
                    individual scholar to follow whatever leads looked promising in light of
                    whatever background information the scholar has gleaned from other sources.
                    Guided serendipity resulted, and thus the angry wasp was found.
            

                Acknowledgements
                The research reported in this article derives from a project that was funded by
                    the 2011 International Digging into Data Challenge. The project, entitled Digging by Debating: Linking Massive Data Sets to Specific
                        Arguments, was co-funded in the UK by Jisc, the Economic and Social
                    Research Council (ESRC), and the Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC),
                    and in the US by the National Endowment for Humanities (NEH); the project title
                    serves as the UK grant ID and the NEH grant ID is HJ-50092-12. The authors would
                    like to acknowledge the work and intellectual contributions of the other co-PIs
                    to this project, the Digging by Debating team — Katy Börner, David Bourget, and
                    Chris Reed — and the various contributions of the staff and students who worked
                    on the project: John Lawrence, Robert Light, Simon McAlister, Jaimie Murdock,
                    Jun Otsuka, Robert Rose, and Doori Rose (listed alphabetically). David Bourget
                    and Colin Allen jointly developed the text-to-OVA+ argument mapping rubric with
                    feedback from Simon McAlister. We are particularly grateful to Simon for his
                    work on carrying out the argument mapping process itself. We are grateful, too,
                    for the comments by an anonymous referee, who encouraged us to think more
                    broadly about the political and ethical contexts of our work.
            
