Title:  Minimizing Computing Maximizes Labor
Volume:  016
Issue:  2
Date:  25 June 2022
Abstract:  
            
            This paper focuses on the practical realities of implementing the most common minimal computing methods for web development. It addresses the amount of technically-oriented detail-work required to configure the complex set of components that underpin widely-used platforms for static site generation. When going minimal requires a great deal of technical labor, what implications does that have for its adoption by scholars without ongoing technical support, or the money or connections to delegate that work? What is the added emotional labor for technical collaborators who are only allowed to consult with scholars, when they attempt to coach scholars through implementing a minimal computing site on their own? What opportunities are lost when a web development methodology cannot reasonably be taught in a hands-on way in a short workshop? After describing these challenges, this paper proposes that an infrastructural intervention — encompassing everything from writing better documentation, tutorials, and templates, to developing interfaces that mediate between users and technical complexity — is necessary to realize the potential of minimal computing as a framework for sustainable websites.
         
Full Body Text: 

         Introduction 
         The conversation within the broad international digital humanities community around
            minimal computing has raised important questions about resource creation and access in
            contexts where Internet connectivity cannot be taken for granted and about the sustainability
            of digital humanities projects that scholars create. Minimal computing has served as an
            umbrella for discussions about hardware (labor conditions and environmental impact of
            manufacturing modern devices), networking (use of local area networks), and offline
            availability of resources. Arguably its greatest practical impact on digital humanities
            as praxis has been through advocacy for static HTML as a medium for digital humanities
            projects and websites.
         This paper focuses on the practical realities of implementing the most common minimal
            computing methods for web development. It addresses the amount of technically-oriented
            detail-work required to configure the complex set of components that underpin
            widely-used platforms for static site generation. When going minimal requires a great
            deal of technical labor, what implications does that have for its adoption by scholars
            without ongoing technical support or the money or connections to delegate that work?
            What is the added emotional labor for technical collaborators who are only allowed to
            consult with scholars, when they attempt to coach scholars through implementing a
            minimal computing site on their own? What opportunities are lost when a web development
            methodology cannot reasonably be taught in a hands-on way in a short workshop? After
            describing these challenges, this paper proposes that an infrastructural intervention —
            encompassing everything from writing better documentation, tutorials, and templates, to
            developing interfaces that mediate between users and technical complexity — is necessary
            to realize the potential of minimal computing as a framework for sustainable
            websites.

         Website as a Long-term Commitment
         The most widely-used methods of developing web-based digital humanities projects have
            brought with them major drawbacks around upkeep and maintenance. The trend of visually
            elaborate, interactive, Flash-based websites was short-lived but resulted in a set of
            digital humanities projects rendered inaccessible and unusable as soon as Flash stopped
            being widely supported. See  for a discussion of how one digital
               gaming community has dealt with long-term sustainability and access issues with
               Flash. While individual database-driven content management systems (CMS) have
            waxed and waned, CMS have been widely used for building web-based digital humanities
            projects for over 15 years. From a user perspective, they offer many advantages,
            typically including graphic user interface-based (GUI) website configuration and
            customization options, a content editing interface that resembles a web form or word
            processor authoring environment, and the ability to easily extend the website’s
            functionality through plug-ins, which similarly provide user interface-based (UI)
            configuration. 
         The ease with which a user can get a CMS installed and running, particularly with the
            help of one-click installers offered by most commercial web-hosting services, belies
            the long-term challenges the user will likely encounter around maintenance and upkeep.
            Any website that relies on executable code in order to display content is at risk of
            that code being subverted in favor of others’ agendas. While individual projects may be
            targeted specifically for their subject matter (e.g., projects relating to Tibetan
            language and culture have become targets for Chinese cyberwarfare activities), more
            commonly, digital humanities projects fall victim to hackers probing sites running a CMS
            with known security vulnerabilities  . If those responsible for
            maintaining a site have not been prompt in applying software patches as soon as they are
            released, the consequences can be quite severe. Many days or weeks of technical work can
            be required to restore a site to a previous working state (assuming backups were made)
            and secure it against future incursions . The
            work of recovering a CMS-based site that has been hacked is not trivial: if the
               scholar In this paper, scholar is used to refer to an individual whose
               primary contribution to a digital humanities project relates to their subject-area
               expertise, in contrast to technical collaborator whose contribution involves
               significant technical work. These terms are meant to relate only the person’s role
               within the project’s division of labor, recognizing that the technical collaborator
               may themselves have the expertise of a scholar, and may even play the scholar role
               opposite a different technical collaborator in a different project context.
               Projects implemented by a single person who wears the scholar and technical
               collaborator hats with equal ease also exist but are not under discussion
               here. is not comfortable with restoring MySQL backups and looking for
            malicious code changes and files, the task will likely fall to someone in their
            professional network, such as IT, library support staff, or a more technically-proficient
            colleague. Having a project website temporarily taken offline is a source of some
            embarrassment, but less-technical PIs who delegate the recovery work are largely
            insulated from the labor and stress involved in the process. This is, fundamentally, the
            trade-off at the heart of a decision to build a digital humanities project using a CMS:
               someone will be made responsible for the ongoing burden of
            patching and updating (and, when necessary, recovering) the entirety of the technical
            stack underpinning the project, in exchange for less-technical members of the project
            team being able to work in a relatively familiar, comfortable environment.
         It is not surprising then that enthusiasm for building websites using minimal computing
            is likely to come from more-technical members of the digital humanities community, who
            have personally paid the maintenance costs in exchange for their colleagues’ ease of use
            . A project put on the web as static HTML cannot be compromised or hijacked
            through the numerous, complex vectors of attack to which database-driven CMS sites are vulnerable.
            Even if the server credentials are compromised and the static HTML files are removed or
            defaced, restoring the site is a much simpler process. Static sites have other
            advantages that are likely to be visible to digital humanities practitioners in IT and
            library roles. For example, it is easy to make a static site available, with its full
            functionality, in an offline environment. Contrast, for instance, the work
               involved in putting a set of static HTML files and associated images onto a USB drive
               and the site configuration changes, link changes, and archiving efforts that go into
               doing the same for a Drupal site, as described in . Likewise,
            static sites are much easier to preserve in their entirety for long-term archiving. 
         The questionable longevity of web-based projects is a common concern, particularly for
            scholars who are accustomed to thinking of their scholarship through the lens of
            monographs and articles, given the centuries of library- and publisher-based
            infrastructure built to support long-term access to scholarship published in those
            genres . Established scholars who begin engaging with digital
            humanities later in their career frequently model a digital humanities project after a
            book: a sizable undertaking that one can cleanly finish, with the
            result available for others to reference in perpetuity. A turn towards minimal computing
            as the default platform for developing web-based projects would seem to serve the
            interests of both less-technical scholars who want to ensure ongoing access to their
            digital work and technical partners or support staff, whose capacity for new
            undertakings diminishes with each project that requires ongoing maintenance. In
            practice, however, minimal computing web development poses a technical barrier high
            enough to necessitate both technical support and affective labor, even for scholars with
            enough baseline technical proficiency to be comfortable working independently in a CMS
            environment .

         The Making of Static
         For a certain generation of scholar-technologists, static HTML evokes memories of
            writing HTML by hand or with the assistance of GUI-based software such as Dreamweaver.
            Dreamweaver and similar software provided a framework for template files that generated
            repeated page elements (header, footer, sidebar), along with options for using a
            What-You-See-Is-What-You-Get (WYSIWYG) interface with buttons for styling and
            formatting text to construct the site and author content. The workflows that underpin
            recent efforts under the umbrella of minimal computing typically involve static site
            generator software configured using plain-text files, content authoring using Markdown,
            layout using template files with a combination of HTML and Liquid, design typically with
            SASS, with generation of the final HTML done via the command line, then transferred to a
            hosting environment using Git. This is a vastly different workflow than using the
            Dreamweaver WYSIWYG interface (which broadly resembled the modern WYSIWYG UI) for
            formatting text, hand-coding some HTML in the associated Dreamweaver integrated
            developer environment, and adding inline styles or referencing one or two CSS files for
            styling. 
         To use the most common minimal computing workflow, based on the Jekyll static site
            generation software, the scholar would need to install the Ruby programming language,
            along with a number of Ruby gems using the command line, then install Jekyll.The
               Jekyll Quickstart page  provides a breezy overview, with
               a link to a similarly brief Prerequisites page
               for readers struggling to
               install Ruby, RubyGems, GCC, and/or Make. There is a more detailed tutorial in the
               GitHub Pages documentation.
            Next, they would need to figure out what changes need to be made to the _config.yml file
            (without breaking it altogether with a stray space character), and start authoring
            content in Markdown — potentially while modifying the front matter variables and writing
            additional Liquid and HTML to use those variables in the templates. Making any layout or
            design changes involves figuring out where these changes have to go within numerous
            possible SASS files. Finally, the scholar would need to generate the output HTML using
            the command line, and determine which errors and warnings need to be addressed in order
            for the site to function and which can be safely ignored. This workflow is daunting even
            for the type of digital humanities practitioner who is not in a developer role as such
            but frequently handles other kinds of web development tasks and basic coding, along with
            project and program management (e.g., roles commonly found in library digital scholarship
            centers). Basic command-line usage, Markdown, CSS (if not SASS), and HTML are likely to
            be in the skill set of people in these positions, but the documentation for Jekyll and
            the Liquid templating language is sparse and lacking in detailed examples that someone
            new to the framework could draw upon while building their proficiency with these tools.
            Like with a CMS, Jekyll functionality can be augmented through the use of plug-ins —
            although the number of plug-ins supported by GitHub Pages, a common, free static-site
            hosting environment, is limited. While workarounds for the plugin restrictions exist,
            they impede a straightforward GitHub-based code management and site publication
            workflow. But even when plug-ins address basic functionality, shortcomings in a technical
            staff’s proficiency with Liquid make it difficult to implement design change requests
            or minor modifications to the design and layout of the site. Very specific design
            preferences are common in digital humanities projects managed by a minimally-technical
            principal investigator and implemented by people in other roles. While there are
            thousands of free Jekyll themes available, there is very little standardization in how
            they are implemented, and a solid grasp of Liquid templates is essential for any
            extensive modification.

         Minimal Computing in Digital Humanities Workshops
         The sheer number of components that go into setting up a Jekyll site, each of them
            unfamiliar to people with minimal prior technical experience, make it a poor choice for
            the 2- or 3-day digital humanities workshops for beginners that are commonly run during
            the summer or at the beginning or end of terms. The 2019 Slavic DH workshop at
            Princeton, for example, brought together scholars in Slavic languages and literatures
            from the US and Europe interested in digital humanities, with particular attention to
            precarious scholars and those without a local digital humanities community. The four-day
            event included two days of hands-on technical training in building exhibits of visual
            resources. For Andrew Janco and me, the co-instructors of the technical components, our
            first choice was to teach Wax, a Jekyll-based system for building exhibits. However,
            even a preliminary attempt to break down the process of creating a Wax site into
            discrete lessons that could fit into the schedule for participants made it clear that,
            realistically, we would be facing irate colleagues if we took this approach. For a
            minimally-technical audience, we would spend all of the first day walking them through
            and troubleshooting what might seem to them like arcane, extremely technical steps,
            before they saw anything that even vaguely resembled their own research materials in a
            web browser. It was a recipe for them to walk away concluding that digital humanities
            was too hard for them, that even something as simple as putting together a digital
            exhibit was impossibly complex. 
         If one of the goals of the past decade in digital humanities has been to make these
            tools and methods available to work based on materials outside the white, Western,
            patriarchal and usually Anglophone canon, done by people outside of well-funded research
            institutions, does the procedural complexity of minimal computing risk undermining those
            gains? What is the value of a technical approach that offers long-term sustainability,
            if the work that it would sustain is never built due to insurmountable technical
            obstacles? In response to these concerns, we ran the workshop using Omeka Classic, and
            participants were able to start assembling their items and exhibits and customizing
            their site design, using a graphical user interface, on the first day. A number of
            participants successfully continued their projects independently after the workshop was
            over.
         An examination of the agenda for digital humanities workshops that have focused on minimal computing suggests that our decision to abandon Wax as
            a platform for a beginners’ workshop may not have been caused by deficits in our
            pedagogical capabilities or imagination. Short workshops (less than a week) that
            include Jekyll-based web development use it as an illustrative example. This includes making a case for reconcil[ing] cultural analytics
            and research architectures with struggles for justice  , using demos of
            existing minimal computing work as a starting point for developing a research agenda , or arguing for minimal computing as a way to improve reproducibility in the
            humanities . Hands-on workshops for Jekyll are much rarer, particularly
            workshops targeted towards beginners. Jekyll was listed as one of the options (along
            with hardware like Raspberry Pi, which takes another perspective on minimal) for the
            week-long DH @ Guelph Summer Workshops in 2017. Keystone DH 2017 also included a
            practical, if not hands-on, workshop on Jekyll for collaboration , but the framing suggests the intended audience was people in technical support
            roles.

         Human Labor Underwrites Minimal Computing
         Bridging the gap between the website that scholars want to be able to build and what
            they can easily do with Jekyll requires an intervention that combines technical
            expertise and emotional labor, in a ratio proportional to how much of the work a scholar
            must do independently. In the simplest case, a technical collaborator can give a scholar
            a template (such as the CSV file underpinning item generation in Wax) and walk them
            through how to fill it out correctly. The scholar then returns the template with the
            content filled in, and the technical collaborator does the rest of the work: correcting
            any inconsistencies in the data, cleaning any disallowed characters, installing and
            configuring Jekyll, and importing the data from the template. Configuring the site
            design to the scholar’s satisfaction may require a few iterations, but all together,
            creating a Jekyll site using this approach will likely take less than a week of the
            technical collaborator’s time. Note that this time estimate is only for the
               initial creation of the site. Subsequent changes and updates are inevitable, and each
               requires the technical collaborator to interrupt their current project to make time
               for this work. A single change for a single project may not have a huge time demand
               associated with it, but the accumulation of these requests for multiple projects can
               pose a significant barrier to undertaking new work. Recent approaches to digital
               humanities project management have worked to constrain this .
            However, this level of hands-on development work on a scholar’s project may be
            outside the purview of the technical collaborator’s job. For example, when the technical
            collaborator is based in a library or IT unit, a common means of preventing demand from
            overwhelming the small number of technical staff is to limit their engagement with
            projects to consultation, unless their time is explicitly written into a project grant
            . Reimagining the Jekyll web development workflow
            so that it fits into a series of consultations involves a shift from primarily
            technical labor that can be dispatched efficiently to primarily emotional labor that is
            much more complex and demanding to manage. Paige Morgan describes this kind of activity
            in a library context: 
         The people I work with are still substantially teaching themselves to get un-stuck,
            though I provide some specific problem-solving techniques. In these contexts, the
            emotional labor I perform for scholars as a digital humanities librarian is partly about
            offering confidence that they can learn that skill, even if it feels strikingly
            different from their existing abilities. It’s also about transparently disclosing some
            of the potential obstacles they might face, and which are hard for newcomers to imagine
            in advance. My goal is to underscore that obstacles, like bugs, are par for the course;
            and also, to give people a sense of what digital work involves so that they can decide
            whether it’s something that they want to pursue. I’m not interested in being an
            evangelist. 
         In the case of minimal computing consultation, it is difficult to avoid an undercurrent
            of evangelism. A model where the scholar passes off their project to a technical
            collaborator can make the use of minimal computing tools a guaranteed outcome, but an
            approach where the scholar does the work themselves requires ongoing coaching,
            consoling, and reassurance with each step, each error message, and each roadblock,
            whether it’s dependency conflicts, SASS challenges, variables behaving in surprising
            ways, or struggles with complex formatting in Markdown. There is a point at which the
            scholar can work independently on the project, barring any new functionality requests or
            divergent data, but until the scholar reaches that plateau, there remains a real
            possibility that the scholar will one day ask a colleague how they built their website,
            and adopt that tool like WordPress instead, or simply write off their digital project —
            if not digital humanities more broadly — as a frustrating time sink. Unless the scholar
            has invested so much time in configuring Jekyll and importing their data that they can’t
            possibly imagine starting over (even along an easier route), there is a risk that the
            scholar will stop scheduling follow-up meetings and replying to emails, only to
            re-emerge a year or two later seeking help with fixing their hacked WordPress site. Even when a project is successfully implemented, an ongoing sense of
            technical unease on the scholar’s part can stand in the way of their ongoing engagement
            and contribution to the project. Despite buy-in from the Scholars’ Lab community on a
            Jekyll-based site relaunch , ongoing uneasiness with the interface has
            reduced the number of website contributions by community members who have run into
            technical difficulties in the past and who feel like they should understand the
            technology after reading the documentation but continue to struggle with making it work
            .
         There are development approaches besides all-or-nothing. In some cases, even under a
            strict consultation only model, a technical collaborator will simply take care of
            part of the work for a scholar, rationalizing that it would take less time and work
            better for everyone than trying to talk the scholar through doing the steps themselves.
            But this kind of shadow labor has pernicious long-term implications for the project.
            Under a model where the technical collaborator is responsible for most or all the
            technical work, they are likewise responsible for the technical maintenance and updates
            (from which minimal computing workflows are not wholly immune).
            Having a technical collaborator take care of part of the project
            creates a gap: the scholar walks away without understanding how that part of their
            project works, only relieved that it does work. This kind of
            hands-on help is usually undertaken with the intention of it being a one-time
            occurrence, but without the knowledge to manage that piece of the project or anyone else
            to turn to, the scholar will inevitably return seeking more help. Even more emotional
            labor is required to navigate those relationships and reassert boundaries after having
            stepped over the line once. While this scenario is hardly unique to projects that use
            minimal computing methods, the complexity and opacity of the technical components
            underpinning those technologies make it more likely for this kind of scenario to arise. 

         Articulating the Problem
         Minimal computing is offered as a solution to multiple problems, both distinct and
            overlapping . The environmental costs of server farms and the e-waste
            produced by continually upgrading computational hardware are one set of issues. Building
            a website using minimal computing methods may be part of a principled stand against the
            environmental costs of the digital world, but the ecological differences between a static
            website and a database-driven CMS are dwarfed by the impact of other personal decisions,
            which are themselves dwarfed by the impact of decisions made by governments and large
            corporations. Accounting for the additional time and effort that goes into learning how
            to build a minimal website
            rather than using a database-driven CMS, one could have a greater environmental impact
            by simply building a WordPress website and dedicating time to environmental activism
            instead of debugging Jekyll.
         
         If the primary concern is a techno-aesthetic experiment, stripping down common tools and
            processes to the minimum of what we actually need , then minimal computing
            is a highly suitable set of tools with which to prototype. Similarly, minimal computing
            can be one response to a sense of unease with the way that web authoring and publishing
            interfaces can alienate creators from the technical components underpinning their work.
            In the context of collaboration, it is important that this sense of unease be shared if
            it is used to justify the use of minimal computing methods. A technical collaborator who
            cites concern about a scholar’s alienation from their digital tools as the primary
            justification for imposing a complex minimal computing workflow runs the risk of being
            written off as an ideologue. While it is true that the individual skills that go into
            building a Jekyll site are reusable in other contexts, in contrast to the tool-specific
            knowledge that comes from working within a CMS , it is not unreasonable to
            argue that all those skills should not be a prerequisite for publishing one’s
            scholarship online.
         If the primary concern is doing digital humanities work that can be made available to
            people who don’t have access to high-speed Internet, reliable connectivity, or
            high-performance hardware, this requires a different lens. Some kinds of graphically
            intensive virtual reality and augmented reality digital humanities work is out of
            consideration. Desktop software that is crucially dependent on cloud computing for
            computationally intensive processing (e.g. Transkribus for handwritten text recognition)
            should be ruled out. But even if we exclude anything involving specialized peripherals
            or high-end hardware, along with any software that needs to be installed to run, we are
            left with so much more than static HTML websites. WordPress, for instance, can be set up
            in a self-contained way on a USB stick or hard drive, which could be loaded full of
            digitized texts and images. Offline, WordPress even offers certain advantages, such
               as reducing the relevance of security updates. Online hackers cannot exploit
               vulnerabilities they cannot access. Voyant Server, a GUI-based suite for text
            exploration and analysis, can similarly be run without Internet access or cutting-edge
            hardware. Portable versions of Python and Jupyter Lab make it possible to do more
            complex and customized forms of computational text analysis without local installation
            or internet connectivity. Language models can be trained using more robust computational
            resources and included for use in offline environments. Depending on the number of texts
            in question, even medium-scale computational text analysis is feasible with a modest
            laptop.
         Creating web-based resources that do not require ongoing upkeep to remain functional —
            ideally, while minimizing custom code that itself can be a maintenance liability — is a
            holy grail of digital humanities  . The
            prospect of spending a great deal of time building a website that will likely decay to
            the point of being unusable in five or ten years is appalling, particularly when
            compared to the expected longevity of physical books stored in a library. While some
            updates to the static site generation software itself may be needed if a scholar wishes
            to continue updating their site, the static HTML websites generated by such software are
            likely to be viewable as originally intended, even a decade or more later. An interest
            in preserving digital work in its original form may be the issue that drives scholars
            towards compromises on bells and whistles of website design, indirectly getting to the
            technical-aesthetic question of What is the least amount that we need? through the
            framing, What is the most we can do that can still be preserved? Technical
            collaborators could successfully advocate for simplifying the design and number of
            infrastructural components of a website in the name of preservation . The bare-bones authoring and finicky site configuration experiences
            offered by current minimal computing web tools is harder to justify. The goal of
            preservation is served by the creation of a static HTML website, and configuration
            stored in plain-text files rather than a database, but no added virtue is accrued
            through manual human authoring of those files or content originally authored using
            Markdown. Using static website generation software like Jekyll is already a compromise
            that brings with it dependencies, version conflicts, and added configuration hassle, in
            exchange for being able to do some things more easily than doing the equivalent with
            hand-written HTML. To enable more scholars to take advantage of the sustainability
            benefits of minimal computing websites, without passing a large amount of technical
            and/or emotional labor onto technical collaborators, it is time to prioritize
            infrastructural interventions that lower the barriers to minimal computing.

         Maximizing Infrastructure for Minimal Computing
         Digital humanities initiatives that have self-identified as infrastructure (including
            Project Bamboo and DARIAH) have a reputation for being large, expensive endeavors that
            struggle to articulate their goals, let alone accomplishments, in a way that scholars
            can identify the value they bring . A broader conceptualization of
            infrastructure is needed here, to encompass work that does not exclusively, or even
            primarily, serve the scholarship-driven goals of a specific project, but supports and
            enables the work of an arbitrary number of groups.
         Infrastructure need not be primarily technical. Descriptions and flowcharts about where
            minimal computing approaches make more or less sense would be extremely valuable to help
            steer scholars to a suitable technical path. Step-by-step tutorials, particularly ones
            written without any assumption of prior technical knowledge, can make a tremendous
            difference in facilitating scholars’ independent use of minimal computing practices. The
               Programming Historian tutorial, Building a Static Website
                  with Jekyll and GitHub Pages , is one of the few examples of this kind
            of resource for Jekyll, and it is a vast improvement over general-purpose Jekyll
            documentation with its detail and clarity. 
         Another highly scalable form of infrastructure is detailed documentation, ideally using
            discipline-relevant examples. The official Jekyll documentation is notable for its
            brevity. It largely depends on pointers to the documentation for Liquid, which is
            heavily shaped by e-commerce examples on account of its original creators: Shopify. Translating examples
            between domains is a skill that requires practice and experience, and it is demanding to
            ask scholars to both absorb a new syntax and imagine how it would apply in their project
            when given only examples based on digital shopping carts. Basic Jekyll and Liquid
            documentation designed for an intrepid but beginner digital humanities audience, using
            typical forms of scholarly projects as the basis for examples (as in ), would be very useful.
         Ed (https://elotroalex.github.io/ed/) and Wax (https://minicomp.github.io/wax/) are
            themes with additional built-in functionality to make it easier to build an online
            edition and exhibit, respectively. They represent another kind of infrastructure for
            doing minimal computing projects, but are both critically lacking in detailed
            documentation for how to customize them for use with one's own data. It is unclear which
            configuration options must be modified for a new project, which
            settings must be left alone, and in what circumstances one might
            want to make other modifications to the code. These projects, along with Jekyll plug-ins,
            multilingual configurations  , and other themes and
            snippets, would benefit tremendously not only from individual documentation, but also
            from write-ups in the style of Miriam Posner’s How Did They Make That? blog posts
            , breaking down and explaining the configuration used by sites that combine
            these features in different ways.
         Finally, there is a need for better technology to reduce the friction that many users
            experience when building minimal computing websites. There are multiple places where the
            kinds of small errors that humans are prone to — like putting the wrong number of spaces
            before a value in a _config.yml file, or incorrectly formatting the file name of a blog
            post to omit the date, or failing to escape one of the many characters that cause
            problems in Jekyll configuration files or front matter — can lead to frustrating and
            unexpected systemic failure. A graphical interface for authoring posts and managing site
            configuration, such as that offered by Netlify CMS, For an example of a deployment
               of Netlify CMS in a digital humanities context, see 
               https://shakespeare-vr.library.cmu.edu/. would ensure greater consistency
            around those formatting quirks that Jekyll is sensitive to and could offer a more
            comfortable WYSIWYG environment. A system comparable to WordPress in terms of the
            affordances it provides users for authoring and configuration, but with the
            data-handling and templating capabilities of Jekyll, along with Jekyll’s static output
            and sustainability benefits, would be a compelling option for digital humanities web
            development. Multiple such solutions exist, both as commercial software-as-a-service
            offerings and a variety of open source projects, but additional work is needed to adapt
            the code to the particular needs of less-technical digital humanists (e.g., integration
            with Ed. and Wax-specific configuration settings).

         Conclusion
         The minimal computing movement offers relief to digital humanities developers weighed
            down by the ongoing hassle of managing and updating WordPress and other CMS sites whose
            bloated underpinnings, riddled with security holes, offer insufficient value for the
            cost of their upkeep. Implementing a scholar’s project using static site generation
            software such as Jekyll can vastly simplify both development and maintenance. However,
            for scholars who do not have access to a technical collaborator who can take care of the
            multiple distinct technical components, very precisely configured, that are required to
            create a Jekyll website, the calculus is more complicated. A WordPress site is more
            likely to offer a familiar interface, Recent trends in WordPress UI/UX, both in
               the CMS core with the Gutenberg editor as well as more elaborate plug-ins such as
               the Divi Builder, have begun to upend the familiarity of the traditional WordPress
               interface. and the ease of a one-click installer makes the complexity of
            Jekyll a much harder sell. Prioritizing minimal computing — whether for environmental,
            techno-aesthetic, or sustainability reasons — risks leaving behind scholars who lack the
            technical expertise or ongoing support to manage multiple facets of technical web
            development. 
         The sustainability and preservation benefits of minimal computing web development are
            significant, but for these benefits to be realized — particularly by scholars outside of
            well-funded research institutions with technical developers on staff and by scholars who
            are not comfortable reading technical prose in English — the digital humanities
            community needs to engage with building infrastructure to support that work. There are
            major deficiencies in current documentation, tutorials, and examples for minimal
            computing web development in digital humanities. Remedying these deficiencies requires
            clarity in writing, more than deep technical expertise. Scholars with a small amount of
            hard-won experience with Jekyll could have an impact by documenting their own processes
            — although this too requires labor without a corresponding immediate payoff for one’s
            own work. Building graphical interfaces that provide a more familiar authoring
            environment while offering an error-resistant means of configuring Jekyll sites would
            require non-trivial technical development, even starting from existing open source code.
            We will know we have built enough scaffolding when minimal computing web development can
            be taught to technical novices in one- or two-day workshops, with participants walking
            away comfortable with their ability to continue working independently on their projects.
            Until then, minimal web development, with all its associated benefits, is a luxury
            available to those with technical expertise, or the necessary money or connections to
            absorb the additional labor that this approach requires.
