Title:  Crafting in
                    Games
Volume:  011
Issue:  4
Date:  12 December 2017
Abstract:  
                
                This paper analyzes the design space for crafting systems within games. A
                    crafting system is the collection of game mechanics which enable a player to
                    create virtual objects within a game, with examples ranging from making a
                    pickaxe or placing blocks in Minecraft, to
                    combining ingredients to create items in World of
                        Warcraft, or designing a city in SimCity. Within both game design and game journalism there is no
                    systematic understanding of what crafting means in games — rather, the term is
                    used in an informal I’ll know it when I see it way, with
                    different ideas of what constitutes crafting becoming
                    conventional for different game genres. We aim to create a more systematic
                    analysis and language for virtual crafting, using a design space approach where
                    we identify seven features of crafting systems; any given crafting system is
                    understood in terms of the degree and manner in which it exemplifies these
                    features. The features we identify are: recipe definition (how well-defined are
                    the player steps for creating a virtual object), fidelity of action (how
                    detailed is the player-performed enactment of crafting), completion constraints
                    (how is creation constrained by virtual resources),
                    variable outcome (how much can the result vary when the player performs the same
                    crafting actions), system recognition of outcome (to what degree do other game
                    systems understand and take account of what a player has
                    made), player expressiveness (how big is the creative space provided to the
                    player), and progression (how do the possibilities of crafting change over
                    time). We apply these dimensions to the analysis of 64 crafting systems across
                    47 example games. This more systematic analysis of the crafting system design
                    space provides a deeper understanding of how games function as a creative and
                    artistic medium for players, and provides a language and framework enabling
                    scholars, critics and developers to more deeply understand existing crafting
                    systems as well as unexplored opportunities for future crafting systems.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Crafting in games affords a unique kind of interactive experience, only possible
                    in playable media, and made increasingly rich with the complex computational
                    modeling of videogames While videogames and other computational media
                        enable different kinds of systems modeling and moment-to-moment interaction
                        patterns, crafting also appears in physical and tabletop games. These are
                        equally applicable to our model of crafting systems. . It enables
                    players to create items and structures without the cost, effort, and destructive
                    modification of raw materials in the real world. It provides spaces of playful
                    experimentation and creative expression, wherein ordinary people can design and
                    create whole buildings, cities, geographies, machines, rocketships, gardens, and
                    creatures, without a difficult-to-acquire formal education, specialized
                    knowledge, or extraordinary resources. Games provide a context of playfulness
                    that removes the inhibiting pressure to make something perfect or to fulfill a
                    practical purpose. Crafting in games often supports creativity as intrinsically
                    pleasurable, rather than as a commodified, extrinsically-motivated way to
                    accomplish tasks, much like the casual creators genre identified by Compton and
                    Mateas . It also means that people can create things
                    that would be altogether impossible in the real world. These creations then
                    exist in the context of a game world; what players craft in a game becomes part
                    of the game, taking on a new life, whether becoming part of a graphically
                    modeled, physically simulated landscape, or an item that the player-character
                    can use, wear, trade, or consume. This is all to say that crafting in games,
                    while sharing much in common with real-world crafting or digitally augmented
                        crafting Digitally augmented crafting refers to traditional,
                        non-virtual crafting aided by digital tools (e.g., software for designing
                        knitting patterns)., is also made significantly different by its
                    context in playable systems. 
                Crafting is a creative and pleasurable alternative gaming experience — thus often
                    speaking to different audiences than playable media centered around combat
                    systems or resource management. While players can be creative and express
                    themselves through game actions that do not involve creating , creativity that results in the existence of
                    something new supports a creative pleasure not obtainable otherwise. SimCity, The Sims, and
                        Minecraft, while vastly different in subject
                    matter (urban planning, house design and decoration, and block placement,
                    respectively), are all underwritten by player creation in virtual worlds, and
                    have all been highly influential, popular-culture phenomena in their times. Much
                    of their connected successes are in the novel experiences they enable, all
                    primarily driven by crafting. These pioneering, crafting-focused games have
                    transformed the playable media landscape, inspiring entirely new genres of
                    simulation and open-world, sandbox games 
                    . A new, more diverse audience of players has also been
                    drawn to these experiences, noteworthy in the field’s straight, white,
                    male-dominated history and tenacious reputation 
                    . SimCity and The Sims drew mainstream media headlines for their
                    equal gender appeal 
                    , and Minecraft has
                    been deployed in diverse classrooms for experimental creation-based learning
                        . 
                Making, creating, building — the language typically used to describe these
                    experiences — are vague descriptions for the complex fields of creativity and
                    design. We need to build a finer critical vocabulary around these systems to
                    more effectively discuss them. Additionally, crafting systems are often deeply
                    integrated into other game systems and mechanics, or operations of the game:
                    working as the production side to a rich in-game economy, or as vehicles for
                    player or game progression. Understanding the kinds of play crafting affords the
                    player, or where a crafting system could fit into a larger game’s context, is
                    currently under-explored in game studies.
                To build this understanding, we construct a taxonomy of crafting in games.
                    Taxonomies are a common tool in game studies, often used to discuss either types
                    of players  or games and simulations themselves . We take the latter, game-centric approach.
                    Taxonomies create a shared vocabulary around complicated concepts to allow a
                    deeper and better-organized study of those concepts, which is the aim of this
                    article.
                When a player performs actions similar to those of a real-life crafter, or goes
                    about creating a virtual object using the mechanics, the system of those
                    mechanics may be colloquially known as a crafting system by the game’s designers
                    and/or players. Crafting is advertised as a feature of
                    games from World of Warcraft to Minecraft (and is even included in some of their
                    names). However, games implement their crafting vastly
                    differently; in World of Warcraft, crafting is
                    highly abstracted, conducted through menus, and linked into a vast player
                    economy of items, goods and services. Crafting in Minecraft is far closer to playing with LEGOs, as Minecraft structures are built by players placing
                    virtual blocks on one another. These creations range from giant masterpieces to
                    bare-bones boxes that let players survive the dangerous night. This type of
                        Minecraft crafting is quite different even from
                    several other crafting systems within Minecraft
                    where players use a dedicated set of crafting menus to instantaneously create
                    and place objects into the player’s inventory. A third contrasting example would
                    be Kittens Game, a text-only browser idle
                        Idle games are a recent genre of games without much game studies research.
                        See  and  for more
                        details., or incremental, game which includes evolving recipes
                        It requires progressively more ingredients to craft an item in Kittens Game every time that item is
                        crafted. and large-scale automation. A quick look at these three
                    games shows three very different forms of design and creation within game
                    crafting systems. 
                With these diverse examples in mind, we might roughly say that crafting in games
                    is the thoughtful manipulation of materials by the player to create something
                    else within the context of the game. 
                We aim to break down the above, very broad definition and focus on seven
                    different facets of crafting systems in games: Recipe Definition, Fidelity of
                    Action, Completion Constraints, Variable Outcome, Recognition of Outcome, Player
                    Expressiveness, and Progression. 
                
                    A radial graph showing all seven dimensions of crafting systems as well as
                        an example system: House Decoration from Animal
                            Crossing. The dimensions are: Recipe Definition, Fidelity of
                        Action, Completion Constraints, Variable Outcome, Recognition of Outcome,
                        Player Expressiveness, and Progression. All 47 games analyzed for this paper
                        and for the accompanying visualization were given scores on each
                        dimension.
                    
                
                To generate these dimensions, we started by carefully reviewing a selection of
                    games that have clear instances of player creation. We looked at the games
                    themselves, as well as secondary literature around these games. Because crafting
                    is tied strongly to the real world, we also reviewed literature around
                    non-virtual crafting. Our taxonomy is built from concepts that have been
                    identified in other games studies work, as well as important concepts in the
                    study of real-world crafting.
                After this initial review, we struggled to relate the many and often disparate
                    features of crafting in games. We could not find a
                        canonical crafting game, nor did we find it effective
                    to try to describe a set of categories that neatly discretizes the space into
                    mutually-exclusive groups of games or crafting systems. We instead identified
                    core attributes of crafting which different crafting systems had to varying
                    degrees. The attributes were orthogonal and nonhierarchical; having one
                    attribute didn’t require or preclude a game from having any other. Drawing
                    inspiration from past work in game studies by Jesper Juul, we created a
                    seven-dimensional model of crafting systems that described meaningful mechanical
                    differences within the games . This inclusive taxonomy
                    approach, involving placing terms at an intersection of orthogonal, scalar
                    dimensions, has proven illuminating and influential in game studies and is
                    further discussed below. After we first drafted our dimensions, largely inspired
                    by our survey of prototypical crafting games and literature on real-world
                    crafting, we set about formally encoding specific games in the taxonomy
                    one-by-one (or assigning values for them on each dimension). This process
                    revealed some ambiguities and redundancy in the taxonomy, which we then fixed.
                    We refined our taxonomy in this way over the course of about three months,
                    adding to our set of sample games, discussing and plotting them on the
                    dimensions, editing — and sometimes removing — dimensions, and repeating the
                    plotting process over again for all games collected thus far. We stopped when we
                    no longer needed to refine the taxonomy to adequately capture new sample games,
                    and when our set of sample games was sufficiently large and diverse, even
                    capturing edge-case crafting systems. A full report of every crafting system we
                    evaluated, their rankings on each dimension, and a brief description with
                    justifications accompanies this document as a stand-alone visualization website,
                    which can be found here: users.soe.ucsc.edu/~agrow/craftsystems Back-up hosting for this
                        visualization can be found at: http://www.creweltech.com/craftsystems/ and https://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~agrow/craftsystems/. Github
                    access to the visualization website, minus the additional gifs, can also be
                    found here: github.com/agrow/craftsystems.
                This paper examines the role of crafting systems in games and analyzes seven
                    design dimensions of crafting mechanics. First, we’ll examine some related work
                    to give a perspective on various frameworks in use in game studies, and then
                    take a brief historical tour of real-life crafting and design literature. Then
                    we’ll break down each crafting dimension in detail, going over what the
                    dimension scores represent and giving some illustrative example games at
                    different positions along the dimension. Next, we will mention important
                    external forces involved with a crafting system, such as social play and player
                    communities, and how those forces interact with the design dimensions. Finally,
                    we’ll wrap up the taxonomy and invite future discussion on the topic.
            

                Related Work & Background Concepts
                
                    Game Studies
                    The work presented in this paper falls under the realm of game studies. As
                        previously mentioned, the core organizational method we use stems from
                        Jesper Juul and previous work on taxonomies as applied to game studies.
                    
                        Taxonomies in Game Studies
                        Taxonomies are a common tool in game studies as the medium has rapidly
                            been expanding. Ellington, along with his co-authors , breaks games up into three pure types
                            (pure games, pure simulations, and pure case studies), and four hybrids
                            (simulation games, simulated case studies, games used as case studies,
                            and simulation games used as case studies). 
                        Callois uses a two-dimensional system to classify games . The first one is built around four
                            categories: Agon, Alea, Mimicry and Ilinx. Agon refers competition and
                            balance, with all players having an equal chance of success. Alea refers
                            to luck, with players having little control over the game’s outcome.
                            Mimicry is about pretending to be someone else, and Ilinx refers to the
                            feeling of vertigo and attempting to disrupt normal sensory patterns.
                            Callois’ second dimension is focused on the rule base: Piada, freedom
                            for improvisation, is opposed to Ludus, rules and conventions.
                        Shubik also breaks apart free-form games and rigid rule-based games, but
                            additionally considers how the game teaches concepts to the player . Klabbers builds a taxonomy of games by
                            combining concepts from social systems theory with a semiotic theory of
                            gaming, dividing agents in game into actors, rules and resources, each
                            with their own syntax, semantics and pragmatics .
                        Taxonomies have also been brought to bear to try to understand the people
                            that play games, instead of games themselves. Bartle breaks players into
                            four types: achievers, socializers, explorers and killers . These four types sit across two axes:
                            whether players prefer action or interaction (the first) with other
                            players or the game world (the second). Similarly, Yee also talks about
                            player motivations in online games . Yee breaks
                            down player motivations into three primary categories (achievement,
                            social and immersion) and ten subcategories. In a meta-analysis, Smith
                            et. al. present a taxonomy of player modeling approaches, such as
                            examining whether the player model is general or specific, or
                            categorizes based on human reactions or game actions .
                        This list is by no means exhaustive, but gives an idea of how taxonomies
                            are often used in games studies: to talk about games as a whole and
                            players of particular kinds of games. In only a few cases, we can see
                            categorizations of design approaches that can be similar to a taxonomy,
                            such as Lewis’ collection of motivational design strategies . Individual game systems are less likely to be
                            the focus of a taxonomy, and we focus on one particular game system:
                            crafting.
                    
                    
                        Dimensions of Games
                        In the book Half Real, Juul evaluates seven
                            definitions of games and synthesizes a single
                            definition that he terms 
                                the classic game model
                                
                            . This definition is intended to apply to all
                                traditionally constructed games from different
                            cultures and across the 5,000-year history of games. In order to
                            accomplish this, Juul surveyed game definitions to extract concepts
                            necessary to all games: 
                                [A] good definition should describe these three
                                    things: (1) the system set up by the rules of the game, (2) the
                                    relation between the game and the player of the game, and (3)
                                    the relation between the game and the rest of the world.
                                
                            After synthesizing seven different scholars’ previous definitions
                            of games , Juul derives six common
                            features to compose his own definitional framework: fixed rules,
                            variable outcome, valorization of outcome, player effort, player
                            attachment to outcome, and negotiable consequences . Juul uses these features as measuring
                            sticks to determine how game-like an experience is. A game
                            has all of these features, while experiences like gambling or open-ended
                            simulations are borderline cases, and even looser experiences like
                            storytelling or free-form play are simply not games. Some features are
                            binary, such has alternative ending in an experience counting as not
                            having a fixed outcome. However, whether that uncertainty is based on
                            skill, luck, or how impactful it is on the experience of the outcome may
                            be lost.
                        Those experiences that are too far off of the canonical game to count as
                            a game still have a place on Juul’s model. Readers can argue that
                            free-form play should count as a borderline case because free-form play
                            can spontaneously contain many of these game features. In making that
                            argument, readers such as  and  are using Juul’s features and critical
                            language to dissect and analyze games regardless of where they
                            ultimately land on the graph. Juul admits that his model 
                                is no longer all there is to games
                                
                            . We understand that our model is also not all there is to
                            crafting systems. However, Juul understands his model is an abstract
                            tool, 
                                an abstract platform upon which games are
                                    built, a platform that games use in different ways
                                
                            . We see our work, following Juul in outlining dimensions, as a
                            new foundational and abstract tool by which to examine crafting in
                            games.
                        Unfortunately, we lack solid definitions of craft systems as this paper
                            refers to them.  and  refer to crafting as
                            reference to the colloquial category of crafting professions/skills/jobs
                            in MMOs, and  is a patent for a
                                Crafting system in a virtual environment that
                            attempts to define their use of crafting systems
                            with the following: 
                                Provided herein is a crafting system that allows
                                    users or players of a website to create their own “unique”
                                    virtual items for use on the site. With the crafting systems,
                                    players can collect materials from within a virtual social
                                    environment to customize items, which the player can use to
                                    express their individuality. Crafting can include materials such
                                    as, but not limited to, textiles and related finishes, edible
                                    materials, paint, as well as clay, stones and other earthen and
                                    organic materials to create pottery. Crafted items include but
                                    are not limited to clothing, shoes, accessories, jewelry, food,
                                    beverages, dishes, ceramics, paintings or other forms of artwork
                                    and designs and furniture.
                                
                             This broad definition, while attempting to enumerate some
                            materials and end products, describes the patent’s crafting system, not
                            crafting systems in general, nor crafting systems within games. Without
                            clear definitions of crafting systems suitable for game studies, we
                            surveyed a broad spectrum of games, including explicit and implicit
                            crafting systems, to find our dimensions of a crafting system: Recipe
                            Definition, Fidelity of Action, Completion Constraints, Variable
                            Outcome, Recognition of Outcome, Player Expressiveness, and Progression
                            (see Figure 1). These dimensions will be fully developed in the core of
                            the paper, Definition and Dimensions of Crafting in Games, following our
                            examination of real-world crafting as a basis for the cultural
                            understanding of crafting systems in games. 
                    
                
                
                    The Evolution of Crafts
                    Operationalized and systemic representations of crafting, like those found in
                        games, are necessarily in dialog with cultural conceptions of real-world
                        crafting, which is a contested subject in and of itself. To better
                            understand what would cause a developer to declare a system a crafting
                            system, or to build an implied crafting-like system, we examined how
                            crafting formed and exists today in the real world. 
                    Paul Greenhalgh separates the history and characteristics of craft history
                        into three threads: decorative art, the
                        vernacular, and the politics of work
                        . These attributes cover the split
                        between art and craft, public opinion of handmade goods over time, and the
                        connection of crafts to mercantilism and the economy, all of which have
                        affected crafting representations in games.
                    
                        Decorative vs. High Art
                        In the West, roughly since the Renaissance when Academies were being
                            created, the five fine arts of painting, sculpture, architecture, music,
                            and poetry became privileged over other artistic professions . Other arts, which Greenhalgh calls
                                decorative arts, were considered by some to be too
                            functional or made of too-cheap materials for the designation of fine
                            art . Games often use the signifiers
                            of high art, usually easels, paint brushes, or tubes of paint, to
                            unequivocally represent creative or artistic endeavours, such as The Sims (see Figure 2). The modern resurgence
                            of DIY (Do-It-Yourself) culture and the indie (independent) craft
                            movement celebrate all forms of art high, low, and undiscovered . The wide variety of crafting systems this
                            paper discusses aligns with the indie view and includes high art,
                            decorative art, and creative skills that may have no real-world
                            equivalent.
                        
                            The icon for the “Artistic” skill in Sims
                                    III is a paintbrush, and is often raised when characters
                                paint on in-game easels.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        The Vernacular
                        After the privileging of high art, the vernacular surrounding the
                            decorative arts of rural pre-industrial country craftsmen was
                            unfavorable until the late 19th century, when it took on the perception
                            of being unpolluted and
                                authentic when compared to mass-produced goods
                                . The common opinion of handmade
                            items has oscillated between these favorable and unfavorable views for
                            the last century. In Handmade Nation,
                            Andrew Wanger speaks of the 60’s and 70’s hippy
                                counterculture, how 80’s and 90’s artists distanced
                            themselves from hippies by focusing on galleries and museums, and today
                            we have another DIY resurgence .
                            Debbie Stoller in Stitch ‘n Bitch traces a
                            more nuanced history of knitting in particular: how each generation
                            either snubs the silly domestic work or takes up
                            the needles through necessity or pride, such as in times of economic
                            hardship or war . Some alternative
                            terms we have heard refer to this DIY resurgence include maker practice
                            or maker movement, hacker culture, and appropriation of handicrafts .
                        Craftivists, practitioners of a specific subculture of the maker
                            movement, create crafts as a means of political self-expression, such as
                            graffitiing with yarn, or yarn bombing, in the
                            effort to reclaim cold public spaces . Some
                            games such as Jet Set Radio, a
                            rollerblading action game about tagging graffiti and evading
                            authorities, attempt to faithfully model transgressive behaviors. We
                            would consider transgressive crafts within games as within the scope of
                            this paper. The practice of taking Grandma’s
                            crafts — traditionally feminine crafts, such as scrapbooking,
                            knitting, sewing, and other textile crafts, used to convey
                                deceivingly harmless messages reinforcing
                            gender, religious, political, or familial identity or ideology — and
                            inverting, twisting, or otherwise subverting their usual
                            meaning is known as subversive crafting .
                                Modding, a jargon term for modifying a game in any way
                            outside of the scope of the gameplay, could be considered subversive or
                            transgressive craft if the craft in question is game creation or game
                            authoring . However, the scope of this paper
                            is crafting systems modeled within games, and, in general,
                            modding games themselves is a higher level of abstraction than the focus
                            of this paper.
                        Many sources, including those cited previously as well as David
                            Gauntlett’s book Making is Connecting,
                            speak to the current renaissance of craft knowledge and products spread
                            throughout the internet . Popular websites
                            such as Ravelry, Craftster, and Instructables
                            encourage users to share their own patterns; and commerce websites like
                                Etsy or Amazon:
                                Handmade exist for users to sell their handmade goods and
                            materials. It is not surprising, then, to see crafting systems and other
                            creative acts being integrated into more games, leveraging art, craft,
                            DIY, and engineering visual design or theming with or without mechanics
                            or systemic models of crafting Games that only contain crafting in
                                their theme or visual style, rather than player actions, are not
                                considered to have crafting systems, and are therefore not explored
                                as examples for our crafting systems framework. . A game’s
                            craft aesthetic can wrap around and re-influence real-life crafting,
                            which has been reported by the developers of Little
                                Big Planet
                            . Games that do make crafting
                            playable are also often supported with a library of patterns, economies,
                            and player strategies that mirror communities of real-life crafts (see
                            Social Aspects below for more detail). 
                    
                    
                        Craft and Creativity
                        The Industrial Revolution’s toll on an individual’s creative freedom was
                            being felt widely enough to seed an international shift in values, the
                            Arts and Crafts movement, across Europe, in other nations in the British
                            empire, in North America, and later in Japan . This movement defined and popularized the concept of
                            “craft” as this paper refers to it: as a creative endeavor alongside and
                            sometimes including the fine arts .
                            In the games we have analyzed, we consider everything from drawing to
                            city-building and spell-crafting to fall under the umbrella of
                            crafts.
                        What is creativity, then, as a necessary component of a creative
                            endeavor? In general, many researchers of human and/or computer
                            creativity agree that the standard definition is
                            some combination of originality (or novelty, or innovation) and
                            effectiveness (or appropriateness, or usefulness, or value) . Most games do not try to operationalize or
                            evaluate creativity and instead leave it up to player interpretation.
                            However, some games, such as those discussed in the System Recognition
                            dimension, attempt to procedurally evaluate, model, or simulate some
                            qualities of entities made by the player.
                        Related to evaluation of crafts is motivation: why do people craft, in
                            games or otherwise? Unfortunately, to the authors’ knowledge, there is
                            not a quality source that outlines what motivates players to craft in
                            games. We can, however, extrapolate from the reasons why people craft in
                            general and begin to evaluate how they may or may not apply to crafting
                            in games. Winge and Stalp did an ethnographic study of 44 crafters,
                            primarily subversive ones, and some of their reasonings were: for
                            necessity (or lack thereof), to develop skills (learn), to relax, to
                            have fun, to create a supportive space, and to develop identity . Many find it therapeutic
                            to quietly reflect, or think about nothing at all, and to watch a
                            product slowly unfold . To summarize,
                            some craft to make a specific object or outcome, and others for the
                            process of making regardless of the outcome. While the value of a
                            specific object may be worth the cost of admission to create it, in the
                            real world or in a game, the process is the more interesting motivation
                            here. Through Csikszentmihalyi, we find a common thread to games and
                            crafting: the flow state . While
                            not the only feeling involved in the process of crafting, the flow
                            state — where there is a balance of challenge and skill that consumes a
                            person’s whole concentration — is shared with gaming in general, as well
                            as crafting within the game, and is likely one major motivator for
                            players to seek crafting systems in games.
                    
                    
                        Aesthetic Diversity
                        According to David Pye in The Nature and Art of
                                Workmanship, workmanship can be broken into two contrasting
                            groups, the workmanship of risk and the
                                workmanship of certainty
                            . The workmanship of risk is workmanship where
                            the quality of the result is at risk during the process of making — a
                            workman can make mistakes in the act of crafting. In the workmanship of
                            certainty, the quality of the item is predetermined at design time,
                            usually by automation .
                        To Pye, the quality of a craft is determined based on how closely it
                            follows or augments a particular intended design. Regulated workmanship
                            is when the design and final crafting result very closely match. By
                            definition, the workmanship of certainty is regulated. The workmanship
                            of risk is permitted to be worse than the design (thwarting it) or
                            better (augmenting it).
                        While the quality variation of the workmanship of risk may seem
                            undesirable, Pye argues that it is desirable for producing subtle
                            variation across created objects. Mass production (and the high degree
                            of the workmanship of certainty required for it) 
                                lack[s] all depth, subtlety, overtones,
                                    variegation, diversity…
                                
                            .
                        We call this property aesthetic diversity, the
                            quality of having many variations on a theme in a collection of crafted
                            objects. This sort of variation is often not enacted in crafting
                            systems, in fact, crafting systems almost always fall under the
                            workmanship of certainty. Reasons for this are discussed in the
                            Undefined Recipes and the Variable Outcome dimensions. Automation
                            affordances often work against aesthetic diversity, as is discussed in
                            Automation.
                    
                
            

                Definition and Dimensions of Crafting in Games
                We further develop our preliminary definition of crafting in games:
                        crafting in a game is the set of mechanics and interactions by
                    which players thoughtfully manipulate materials to create a new entity in the
                    game world. The entity For more information on the use of entity and its
                        context in game worlds, see  might be
                    created from scratch, or created by modifying or augmenting something that
                    existed before crafting. The entity may be animate or inanimate, a
                    representative of real-life crafting or some fully imaginary and virtual form of
                    crafting only possible in the abstractions of playable media. Resources are
                    often consumed or transformed in the creation process, but don’t have to be. The
                    mechanics and interactions which comprise crafting include actions and choices
                    that players make during the creation process, The creation process does
                        not include, for example, player gathering of ingredients beforehand.
                    and the game system’s immediate responses and mechanical interactions with those
                    actions and choices. Players should enact these actions and choices with the
                    intention of making something, and with the feeling that accompanies, even if
                    they don’t know precisely what the created thing will be. And finally, the
                    creation process and the created entity are explicitly represented in the
                    context of the game world Representation within the game world removes
                        game modding from consideration as crafting in games..
                In this definition, we aim to outline a general game experience for which the
                    following design dimensions may be a useful analytical tool, rather than
                    prescribe a narrow characterization of what crafting in games always is and
                    always will be. Creating virtual objects in games happens in many genres and
                    thematic domains, in both computational and non-computational games, and in
                    dialog with many other game systems. The proposed seven-dimensional framework
                    cuts across these differences, posing questions and design considerations, and
                    mapping the experiential space in a way that a narrow definition cannot. We
                    propose that the wide definition offered above be used as a rough guideline for
                    what games to apply the dimensions to, in order to answer game studies and game
                    design questions more useful than, Is it a crafting system?
                
                What follows are descriptions of seven dimensions or axes that characterize and
                    explore the space of possibilities surrounding crafting in games. While similar
                    to Jesper Juul’s dimensions of games, our dimensions will differ from his in
                    that in his system there is a canonical concept of game as exemplified by games
                    like chess. Games that score high on all of his dimensions converge on this
                    canonical concept. In contrast, there is no canonical crafting system, just as
                    there is no canonical real-life craft or way to craft. So there is no position
                    along the dimensions that converges to a canonical crafting concept, no position
                    along any given dimension that is implicitly preferred. Rather, each point on
                    each dimension supports different kinds of experiences and play. Among the 64
                    systems surveyed and discussed here, some readers may also contest particular
                    examples as not crafting systems, according to common game
                    cultures’ understandings of crafting. However, we illustrate that the framework
                    is designed to surface useful discussion wherever players create things in
                    virtual worlds. It is intended to serve as a lens, rather than a box, and is
                    informed but not prescribed by the sometimes arbitrary labeling traditions of
                    different gaming communities. We have sampled a wide enough range of different
                    systems to both stretch the boundaries of our dimensions, as well as illustrate
                    combinations of characteristics that have yet to be implemented as gaming
                    experiences in order to help discover them.
                It is important to note that the seven dimensions characterize individual
                    crafting systems, not games within which crafting systems are embedded.
                    Individual games can have multiple crafting systems. Games like Minecraft are so committed to crafting that they have
                    multiple, interwoven playable models of crafting, each of which will have their
                    own characterization along the crafting design dimensions. 
                We now describe each dimension in depth. While there is no intrinsic dimension
                    order, they are presented here roughly in order of the crafting process as
                    enacted by the player. We begin with qualities that primarily describe the
                    enactments of crafting: Recipe Definition, Fidelity of Action, and Completion
                    Constraints. That is followed by what happens after that process is enacted:
                    Variable Outcome and System Recognition of Outcome. Our list concludes with
                    qualities of the larger game experience within which the player may have enacted
                    crafting many times: Player Expressiveness and Progression. 
                
                    Recipe Definition
                    A recipe is a representation of the knowledge necessary to
                        transform a collection of game objects (ingredients or raw materials) into a
                        new object. For example (described more below), a recipe for a pickaxe might
                        specify two twigs and two flint as the materials necessary to create a
                        pickaxe. Just as objects such as twigs, flint and pickaxes can be virtually
                        possessed by a player, so too can recipes be possessed, where recipe
                        possession means that the player now possesses the knowledge to perform the
                        transformation from ingredients to produced object, typically represented
                        within the game by providing this transformation as a new player action. 
                    The Recipe Definition dimension refers to the flexibility of the ingredients
                        used as input to the crafting process. At one extreme is the strongly
                            defined recipe which dictates recipe ingredients precisely,
                        leaving no room for customization or choice in ingredient specifics. This
                        provides less control for the player, but greater control to the game
                        creator, who can explicitly enumerate all possible craftable objects. At the
                        other extreme are crafting systems with undefined recipes. Such
                        systems use an underlying simulation to determine what happens when objects
                        are combined to create a new object. By not enforcing specific ingredient
                        combinations, this opens more possibilities for experimental and creative
                        play, but reduces the game creators’ control over crafting. Between these
                        two extremes are recipes with some predefined structure that support
                        variability in input ingredients and the resulting created object. 
                    
                        Strongly Defined Recipes
                        Crafting systems which only support crafting by strict recipe sit at the
                            high end of this dimension. These recipe-based crafting systems
                            effectively force players to follow predetermined links between input
                            and output to craft anything. Strongly defined recipes are so pervasive
                            in games that such systems are more commonly called
                                crafting by game designers 
                            , player communities , games journalists , and in-game terminology (Minecraft) than the freeform crafting of undefined recipes. 
                        Don’t Starve has several crafting systems,
                            including item crafting, crockpot cooking, and structure placement,
                            which fall at different positions on this spectrum. But the one the game
                            itself calls crafting (via in-game text), is a
                            classic example of a strongly defined recipe-based system (Figure 3).
                            For example, to make a pickaxe, the player needs two twigs and two flint
                            in their inventory, opens the tools crafting menu, selects the pickaxe
                            icon, and clicks build. The player similarly clicks
                            on other object icons and their “build” buttons to make torches, traps,
                            top hats, crock pots, etc.
                        
                            Crafting items and tools like pickaxes in Don’t Starve involves selecting from a library of
                                completely defined recipes.
                            
                        
                        The recipe for an item never changes, and never allows a range of
                            possible resources to fulfill a single ingredient requirement. These
                            recipes also never vary in their output. If the player selects and
                                builds the pickaxe, she
                            will inescapably have two twigs and two flint removed from their
                            inventory and replaced with a pickaxe. There’s no notion of
                            contextualized raw ingredients, of different kinds or shapes of wood or
                            stone, perhaps from different parts of the virtual world, which might
                            otherwise be visible in the texture and quality of a pickaxe they were
                            used to create. A crafted pickaxe also isn’t changed by random dice
                            rolls, or by the experience, handiness, or personality of the player or
                            player-character. A pickaxe, or any other item the player makes in
                                Don’t Starve, is the same, whether
                            crafted by a full, healthy, lucid adventurer, or one delirious from
                            hunger and monster attacks. 
                        From a designer’s perspective, limiting the otherwise large possibility
                            spaces (as strongly defined recipes do) is practical, both reducing
                            development complexity and tightening authorial control over a player’s
                            experience. Strongly defined recipes have an analog to
                            node-and-link-based hypertext, especially when the result is at first
                            unknown to the player. Performing a crafting action using the recipe is
                            like traversing a hypertext link, where the source text is the set of
                            input ingredients, and the destination text is the output of crafting.
                            That the two texts are connected by a
                                crafting relationship signals a
                                part-of or transformation
                            relationship to the player. While many existing games use these links
                            functionally, they could just as easily be made more lyrical and
                            interpretive, in the sense of Susana Tosca’s lyrical links
                            . 
                        When the individual recipes of a virtual world are considered together,
                            they can describe the logic and conceptual makeup of the fictional world
                            and its inhabitants. Many of the recipes in fantasy RPGs like World of Warcraft, Skyrim, and Dragon Age are
                            composed of found materials like herbs, minerals, and animal fur, which
                            are transformed into items you’d expect from Medieval European
                            craftspeople. Ingredients in No Man’s Sky
                            recipes are often atomic elements or alien machinery, which are
                            transformed into science fiction space-travel technology. The
                            ingredients of strongly defined recipes tell the player how their
                            character understands and acts in the fictional world. 
                        Furthermore, the most important of the strongly defined recipes of a game
                            are often revisited many times during play, and thus solidified in
                            players’ minds and Wiki pages. This recipe-learning through repetition
                            can solidify the meaningful connections of strongly defined recipes, and
                            cause players to see the game world through the subjective lens of their
                            fictional avatars. 
                    
                    
                        Parametric Recipes
                        Crafting according to a semi-defined recipe links multiple ingredient
                            sets to the same output, or links a given set of input components to
                            multiple possible results. We call both patterns parametric recipes, or recipes that take parameters of
                            input ingredients. In both cases the player has some options in enacting
                            a recipe, either by being able to choose among multiple sets of
                            ingredients to produce a given object in the first case, or in being
                            able to produce multiple objects given a set of ingredients in the
                            second. 
                        An example of parametric recipes is the Don’t
                                Starve crockpot cooking system. The crockpot is a crafted
                            structure placed in the world, which itself is a crafting station for
                            producing food items. The player navigates to it, clicks on it, fills
                            the four available slots with individual ingredients, clicks
                                cook, and waits for the result to appear in the
                            pot. Crockpot cooking is recipe-based because each combination of four
                            ingredients placed in the slots is linked to an output according to
                            hand-authored connections (where order of the four ingredients doesn’t
                            matter), but the recipes are templated. Each one allows multiple
                            different ingredient combinations for the same output. For example, the
                            Stuffed Eggplant recipe calls for one eggplant, one vegetable food item,
                            and two fillers (Figure 4). The eggplant requirement can be fulfilled by
                            two different single items (eggplant and cooked eggplant), and the
                            vegetable and filler can be fulfilled by 25 and 52 different items,
                            respectively. In effect, Stuffed Eggplant can be produced in 2x25x52x52
                            = 135,200 different ways.
                        
                            The parameterized recipe for Stuffed Eggplant in Don’t Starve’s crockpot system, as shared
                                on the player-run Don’t Starve Wikia
                                page (dontstarve.wikia.com/wiki/Stuffed_Eggplant). The second
                                box indicates vegetable, and the question marks
                                indicate filler.
                            
                        
                        Though the dish is the same, whether made with twigs as
                            filler or with meat, the space of possible input gives the player
                            potentially interesting choices to make in enacting the recipe. She can
                            execute the recipe strategically, using the most widely available or
                            lowest valued ingredients in the set of options. A strategic enactment
                            of Stuffed Eggplant would be to use twigs, a low-risk, readily
                            available, widespread resource in the world, before meat, which is
                            usually risky, rare, and more productively used in other recipes. And
                            the player can adapt her enactment according to what she has an
                            abundance of at the time. But she can also enact it in support of more
                            self-expressive play, which can be encouraged or discouraged by other
                            aspects of the game’s design and the context of crafting. For example,
                            the player can use less efficient ingredients even when there’s an
                            option to use others, if the less efficient ingredient suits their
                            specific play style or desired experience, particularly in terms of
                            role-playing, perceived realism, or exploration and experimentation (see
                            Player Expressiveness). Furthermore, defining a recipe as a space of
                            input, rather than a single possibility, changes the way the player
                            thinks about their crafting. The player can see resources in the world
                            as classes of ingredients connected by abstract properties, and,
                            similarly, interpret crafted entities as the union of abstract
                            properties that define their input parameters. 
                        The second kind of parametric recipe is one which represents, rather than
                            ignores, the individuality of ingredients in an enacted recipe’s result.
                            There is still a space of possible input, like the multiple options of
                            many Don’t Starve crockpot recipes, but now
                            the choice among those options is represented in the output. Consider,
                            for example, the Minecraft pickaxe (Figure
                            5). The player arranges materials in the same, T-shaped graphical recipe
                            to craft any pickaxe in the game. The handle is always formed by two
                            vertical sticks, but the head can use several different kinds of blocks,
                            with the different materials contributing different strength and
                            durability values for the resulting pickaxe. The pickaxe recipe, in
                            effect, is parameterized by those materials. The pickaxe isn’t
                            completely defined; the player has room to enact the recipe in different
                            ways. But, unlike for Stuffed Eggplant, different ingredients produce
                            observable changes in the resulting item. 
                        
                            A Minecraft pickaxe is always crafted
                                by the same, T-shaped graphical recipe, but many different materials
                                can be used to form the head, making it parametric. The material
                                parameters are carried through to the output in the form of its
                                strength and durability. Diamond pickaxes last for 1562 uses and can
                                mine all blocks, while wood pickaxes have durability 60 and can only
                                mine basic blocks.
                            
                        
                        Considering games as a 
                                series of interesting decisions
                                
                            , this kind of parametric recipe affords the player crafting
                            decisions which are arguably more interesting and impactful than the
                            previous form of parametric recipe. The decisions she makes in enacting
                            a recipe are visible and significant to gameplay as long as the crafted
                            item exists or is in some way simulated in the virtual world. A player’s
                            choices are made tangible in the very tools she uses, items she carries,
                            and structures she adds to the world. 
                        As the constraints of a recipe are relaxed, the closer the experience of
                            following it resembles the freeform mode of creating described in the
                            next subsection. And the closer the crafting experience is to this
                            freeform, experimental mode, the greater the crafter’s agency and
                            expressive potential, the less the authorial control of the
                            recipe-writer, and the larger the impact of the player’s choices on the
                            output and player’s experience According to Wardrip-Fruin et. al.,
                                agency can be considered as a result of not just the player, but the
                                player and the game . In this
                                case, a relaxed recipe does not necessarily increase agency without
                                the game supporting and enabling that freedom with
                            mechanics.. 
                    
                    
                        Systems with Undefined Recipes
                        Crafting systems without well-defined recipes sit at the low end of this
                            dimension. Instead of explicitly mapping specific crafting inputs to
                            specific outputs, these systems tend to specify rules by which a player
                            can craft, with the results determined by the interaction of those
                            rules. For example, Minecraft block
                            placement (different from the grid-based crafting used to craft a
                            pickaxe) allows players to attach solid cubical blocks to each other
                            along a three-dimensional grid, as long as there is another solid
                            surface in the world to attach them to.
                        Combining components without a recipe is more akin to real-world
                            art-making than real-world cookbook-following. A given set of components
                            may be combined in many different ways to produce many potential
                            results. There is not a hard-coded link from input to output but,
                            rather, a large space of possibility reachable from a given set of input
                            components. Players can create things that are individual and perhaps
                            even unique, if the possibility space is large enough. They can express
                            themselves through crafting; they can take actions and make choices that
                            not all — and sometimes not any — other players will make. Players can
                            create things that surprise even the developers. For instance, because
                            water can be poured into holes and is subject to abstract liquid
                            mechanics in Minecraft, players have
                            invented endless title pools that their avatars can ride in perpetually,
                            without movement input from the player (Figure 6). These AFK
                                pools have become popular ways to prevent servers from
                            automatically logging players off for extended idleness (AFK standing
                            for Away from Keyboard). In Terraria, obsidian farms and slime machines are often
                            crafted by players to automate particular resource gathering. Freeform
                            crafting systems often sustain large gaming communities of inventive
                            in-game crafting. This kind of inventive play is one of the primary
                            draws of games like Minecraft, Terraria, Besiege, SimCity, Kerbal Space Program, and Draw Something. 
                        Especially in the AFK pool and obsidian farm examples, players are
                            inventively crafting with the mechanics of the larger game systems in
                            mind. One of the hallmark affordances of crafting in games is that
                            crafted output exists in a virtual world, interacting with the other
                            systems in the game to varying amounts (see Recognition of Outcome). It
                            becomes part of other game systems, influencing world variables and the
                            behaviors of other objects, while they, in turn, influence and act on
                            the crafted item. When Recognition of Outcome is high, players need an
                            understanding of the operations of the game system to be able to
                            intentionally control it through crafting. This understanding, described
                            by the SimCity Effect , is iteratively developed from player
                            expectations, experimentation, and observations during play. Freeform
                            crafting allows players to test and refine their expectations of system
                            behavior in a unique way, by making them material. Indeed, crafting in
                            systems with undefined recipes and high Recognition of
                            Outcome supports the player learning and iterative mental model-making
                            of the SimCity Effect.
                        
                            A Minecraft player-character riding
                                in an AFK pool.
                            
                        
                        Low recipe definition also allows for crafted objects with
                            individuality — that express aspects of the process and the person who
                            created them — a quality commonly valued in real-world crafts . Draw Something’s
                            drawing system is so freeform that the player is visible in what she
                            crafts, through her virtual brush strokes, art style, and chosen
                            subject. There is also great variation in how players draw the same item
                            for a friend to guess. And there are often unintended flaws, which means
                            that Draw Something supports the
                            workmanship of risk, as well as aesthetic diversity, in its virtual
                            crafting . This individuality is nearly
                            impossible for a player to express in a strongly defined recipe. 
                        Players can improvisationally create within an undefined-recipe system,
                            but also share their inventions and borrow from others through social
                            venues external to the game. They essentially define their own recipes
                            that other players can follow, enabling the kind of socially embedded
                            creativity that is characteristic of real-world crafting communities
                            (see Social Aspects).
                    
                
                
                    Fidelity of Action
                    One concept of psychology that game designers take advantage of in their
                        trade is the idea of affordance as the possibility of an action
                        on some other entity. Buttons beg to be pushed, and tea cups suggest being
                        held by their handle. Affordances For more information on affordances
                            in games, including game narrative, see  are a core component in leading a player to perform particular
                        actions within the game world: pickaxes are used for mining, and sewing
                        machines sew fabric. Fidelity of Action represents how detailed those
                            player-performed actions are within the game world, how accurate those
                            actions are to applicable real-life actions, and how embodied the player
                            performance of those actions is. We reiterate that there is no
                        moral judgement or criticism of a game’s design on how well or inaccurately
                        a game represents their chosen affordance.
                    
                        An illustrative example of Fidelity of Action using dancing as a
                            subject. The closer to dancing the game demands of the player, the more
                            physically demanding and nuanced the controls, the higher the system
                            would score. 
                        
                    
                    As an example, consider the representation of knitting in games. In real
                        life, a knitter performing the craft uses manual dexterity to manipulate a
                        continuous thread on two sticks called needles, which produces a knit
                        fabric. The act of knitting has been represented in games in a wide range of
                        fidelity that stretch across this dimension. Knitting
                            Simulator 2014 is an example of extremely high fidelity to
                        knitting because it involves embodied knitting, the player physically
                        mimicking the act of a knitter, on custom game controllers consisting of
                        knitting needles with motion sensors. Each wiggle of the knitting needles
                        represents stitch progress in the game. A game with less fidelity in the
                        knitting genre would be Crafting Mama on the
                        3DS. Without any controllers representing the knitting needles, the player’s
                        embodied action while playing the game is tapping the stylus on the Nintendo
                        DS screen, which is further away from those in Knitting
                            Simulator 2014 and from real-life knitting. However, the player
                        does tap the screen rapidly to progress stitch-by-stitch, and in traditional
                            Mama fashion, she judges your performance
                        at the end, and you can even dress up Mama in your scarf. The knitting
                        mini-game in Crafting Mama is still very much
                        about the act of knitting. Games with the lowest amount of fidelity in their
                        crafts abstract away the process and leave nothing but a progress bar and/or
                        an end result. For example, a tailor in World of
                            Warcraft (WoW) makes fabric, using
                        nothing but fiber, at a click of a button. It could be a woven, knit, or
                        even felted fabric; the player’s character could be using knitting needles,
                        a loom, a crochet hook, or some other tool. We just don’t know. The fidelity
                        of fabric-creation in the case of WoW is
                        extremely low, so low that we cannot distinguish the process as
                        knitting.
                    
                        The Applicability of Fidelity
                        Custom arcade machines, the Nintendo Wii system with its Wii-Mote and
                            Nunchaku, the Playstation Move and its Motion Controller, Microsoft’s
                            Kinect, and other games and systems with custom hardware such as Rock Band have all helped explore the space of
                            high-fidelity experiences. These experiences have so far focused
                            primarily on musical instruments, combat, or other physical tasks, such
                            as requiring accurate aiming with a gun, slicing
                            with a sword, or placing feet in dancing (Figure
                            7). Some crafts, such as knitting described previously, are also
                            physical. However, some crafts, and especially design activities and
                            planning, are not primarily performed via physical actions.
                        
                            Accuracy of Abstractions
                            In SimCity (2013), where players craft a
                                city, is the player a mayor, an urban planner, or an urban engineer?
                                Real-life incarnations of these jobs cannot plop down miles of road
                                at a click of a button, or evict a neighborhood of high-class
                                citizens, rezone the district, and instantly create a casino in its
                                place. However, some aspects of the city such as traffic, pollution,
                                hospital access, and water and power systems are more deeply
                                simulated, and the management actions with respect to these city
                                aspects are higher fidelity. Thus the Fidelity of Action of SimCity is quite low in some cases, much
                                higher in others, and so we consider it to have a middling score for
                                this dimension as an average.
                        
                        
                            Completely Fictional Crafts
                            Some developers design a completely fictitious crafting system and/or
                                crafted items for their game’s mechanics, such as spells in CodeSpells or items in the Atelier series. In these cases, we judge
                                the fidelity of the crafting system’s process by the game’s
                                descriptions of that process, as well as player’s fidelity in
                                enacting those processes. We cannot compare the accuracy of the
                                outcome because there is not a real-life equivalent. In CodeSpells,
                                    CodeSpells is in beta as of the
                                    writing of this paper and is subject to radical change. For
                                    example, the designers may remove the ability to look at the
                                    underlying code behind the visual language before
                                    release. the player writes code to create spells for
                                their avatar to execute, including effects over time, changes to the
                                environment, and visual elements, such as particle effects. As the
                                game is made of code and exists by executing code, we determined
                                there was no greater fidelity for a digital fictional system other
                                than programming its behaviors. 
                            In contrast, the Atelier series
                                describes the process of alchemy as partially physical. Alchemy, in
                                this case, is a fantastical incarnation of the real-life profession,
                                which involves mixing loosely related materials in a special
                                cauldron to produce everything from potions, baked goods, equipment,
                                and even living creatures. In Atelier
                                    Totori, the protagonist is often shown learning how to
                                stir contents of an alchemy cauldron in a particular manner.
                                However, while each Atelier game
                                involves different alchemy minigames as the primary gameplay and
                                progression mechanic, none involve stirring or embodied action with
                                the cauldron. The player progresses through a series of menus,
                                managing ingredients, item properties, and alchemical skills, but
                                the player never learns the details of how the alchemist makes the
                                final product. While the process of alchemy is intricate in many
                                areas and offers extraordinary depth in its menus, it fails to fully
                                model all the aspects of the craft it created, and so the series is
                                slightly above average on the Fidelity dimension. 
                        
                    
                
                
                    Completion Constraints
                    Everything that is required for an entity to be crafted is encapsulated
                        within this dimension. For the general crafting process, resources are
                        usually consumed, perhaps some tools are used (what we call required
                        components), and time passes to indicate the transformation of resources to
                        the end product. Sometimes a game might impose other restrictions on the
                        player, such as only being able to have two professions in World of Warcraft, what we discuss below under
                        miscellaneous constraints. While this paper does not address systems outside
                        of crafting, such as prerequisite resource-gathering, the use and
                        consumption of resources or tools heavily influences a player’s crafting
                        experience. Designers often use resources or recipes to gate
                            progression, require crafting stations to pace gameplay, or
                        consume player time as a function of gameplay. 
                    The completion constraint categories are also problematic upon further
                        inspection: there are many systems that use no resources, some games with
                        legal tender that make differentiation between resources meaningless, and
                        the concept of time is not consistent between systems. Given the breadth of
                        systems and mechanics, the subjective difficulty of these constraints, and
                        the often compounding influence of these constraints due to crafting trees,
                        it became impossible to objectively compare the impact of the different
                        types of constraints between systems. 
                    Instead, we largely took a quantitative approach of how many different types
                        of constraints were involved in the crafting process (resources, time,
                        location, and peripherals), with the presence of miscellaneous constraints
                        and the severity of the constraints nudging games that fell within the same
                        number.of types of constraints (Figure 8). For example, systems with
                        resources are more constrained than those that do not use resources, but
                        resource systems that have a legal tender that allows for resource trade are
                        less constrained than those resource systems without. In general, the higher
                        the score, the more disparate conditions the player must satisfy in order to
                        complete crafting.
                    
                        Our quantitative approach to this completion constraint dimension.
                            Each main constraint category (consumed resources, present resources,
                            time, and location) that was expressed by the system increased its
                            overall score by 25%. The score was then modified by 5-10% per
                            constraint if it was particularly lax or egregious (such as being a
                            movable or symbolic location or having a currency relaxing those
                            constraints), or if it had another notable constraint not captured by
                            the categories (a miscellaneous constraint). If the system in our graph
                            encapsulates multiple crafting systems with different scores, we average
                            their score and make note of it.
                        
                    
                    
                        Consumed Resources
                        Games often deal with consumed resources — currency or materials players
                            acquire that can be spent in order to achieve certain goals in a game.
                            Consumed resources may also include the recipe itself as a blueprint
                            object and is actually consumed to craft an item (such as in EVE Online, Lichdom spellcrafting, or Wildstar gear crafting). Any prerequisite material with a
                            limited durability, in that some part or whole of the material is
                            removed or destroyed during crafting, counts as a consumed resource.
                            Thinking about games in terms of how these resources flow, how they are
                            acquired and spent, has a history in game analysis. For example,
                            Dorman’s Machinations is a way to describe
                            arbitrary game mechanics in terms of resource flows . 
                        However, not all crafting systems have consumed resources. Knitting Simulator 2014, where the player goes
                            through the actions of knitting, does not consume any resource. Players
                            do not spend anything to make a new stitch. In general, when players
                            play with crafting systems in free-play modes (where they are presented
                            with an unlimited amount of resources that are always present), it
                            becomes challenging to consider crafting systems as only resource
                            transformation systems.
                    
                    
                        Present Resources
                        Materials or tools that are not consumed, but are still required to be
                            present in an inventory or game world, are considered present resources.
                            We bother with the distinction because present resources are a one-time
                            need that is more flexible than consumed resources. A jeweler’s kit is
                            required to be held by jewelcrafters in World of
                                Warcraft for them to create gems and jewelry, but so long as
                            they have that item, they can craft at any location in the world (Figure
                            12). While economies are often deeply integrated with consumed
                            resources, present resources, other than possibly first acquisition, are
                            separate from the influence of currency.
                        Once the player acquires access to a present resource, it often opens up
                            a whole new set of recipes in crafting
                                progression. For example, the hellforge is a crafting
                            station in Terraria that can only be found
                            in the underworld (but it can be picked up and carried back to the
                            player’s base). It can smelt some of the most powerful pre-hardmode
                            materials and can be used as a consumed resource to create the first
                            forge able to smelt hardmode metals, helping unlock two new tiers of
                            player strength. A crafting tree that combines consumed and present
                            resources for a Terraria item is shown in
                            Figure 9.
                        The constraint of present resources is kept separate from location
                            constraints because, as in Minecraft’s or
                                Terraria’s crafting stations, they can
                            sometimes be picked up and carried with the player, functionally
                            removing the location restriction that other systems may enforce. 
                        
                            Marked up Terraria crafting tree for
                                an Ankh Shield. The parts of the tree highlighted in yellow are
                                consumed resources. The bookshelf-like parts of the tree highlighted
                                in pink are present resources that must be placed in the gameworld,
                                where the crafting actions must then be performed. In Terraria, some present resources are found
                                in the gameworld, others are the result of crafting themselves.
                                Original image distributed with the CC-BY-SA license, original attribution goes to the Wikia
                                user Juper0.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        Time
                        Time is a complex topic in games. According to Zagal & Mateas, there
                            are four common temporal frames: real-world time (experienced in the
                            physical world), gameworld time (in-game time including events around
                            gameplay action), coordination time (coordination between player and
                            agents, such as navigating menus), and fictive time (acknowledged
                            sociocultural labels and event sequences) .
                            Sometimes, crafting takes time in any of these temporal frames. This
                            slows down a player’s completion rate, either because crafting comprises
                            a game in and of itself which takes time to play, or players just need
                            to wait a certain amount of time before the crafting is finished (in
                            real-world time or gameworld time). However, not all time is created
                            equal. Some crafting delays take up all of the player’s focus and
                            ability to perform other tasks, while other delays are completely
                            idle.
                        In Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn, a
                            player must spend time performing a sequence of crafting actions to
                            complete a craft, during which time the player cannot perform other
                            gameplay actions without abandoning the crafting sequence (Figure 15).
                            When romancing piñata animals in Viva
                                Piñata, the player has a skippable cutscene, but a
                            non-skippable minigame to play. Macro engines (discussed later in
                            Automation) allow a player to remain attentive of other things as the
                            performing of crafting actions is automated, but she still needs to wait
                            for crafting to complete. In the same vein, players cannot act while
                            waiting for a bar to fill to complete a craft in World of Warcraft, although this sort of delay does not
                            require intense player focus (Figure 10).
                        
                            In the Draenor World of Warcraft
                                expansion, Scribes used ink in large quantities, which would take
                                many minutes to make (15+ in this example). In the newest Legion expansion, Scribes use pigments
                                directly and skip this step.
                            
                        
                        Time, when considered this way, is a hard, unskippable constraint. Besiege does not have this constraint, because
                            the player can complete crafting her fantastical steampunk death machine
                            by just clicking go. Further, Besiege
                            starts players with a core ‘starting’ block, and considers this starting
                            block a valid, completed craft; thus, players do not have to make any
                            crafting decisions in any temporal frame in order to immediately begin
                            playing the game In contrast, in Final Fantasy XIV:
                                A Realm Reborn, the player must execute a series of
                            repetitive actions in order to fill a completion bar to create a craft
                            (Figure 15).
                        This is different from the time constraints in Pokémon This is true from when Pokémon breeding was introduced in Pokémon Gold/Silver up until Pokémon X/Y. Pokémon
                                    Sun/Moon has a sauna, where players can leave eggs for
                                breeding. Hatch time, for eggs in the sauna, is measured in
                                real-world time, much like Eve Online
                                manufacturing. breeding. Time, as measured in the number of
                            steps the avatar has taken in the game world, is a large delay in
                            breeding a new Pokémon. Although the player is free to perform other
                            in-game tasks while she waits, time only passes — at least in relation to
                            waiting for pokémon to breed — when the player avatar moves.
                        Both these examples are different from how time is considered in Eve Online’s manufacturing system. Time in
                                Eve Online’s manufacturing system
                            heavily involves the real-world temporal frame and is directly tied to
                            the passage of real-world time outside the game — a manufacturing job is
                            measured in a number of minutes, hours or even days (Figure 11). A
                            player does not have to be playing the game for that entire amount of
                            time. Progress on completing the manufacturing job happens regardless of
                            the player being logged in.
                        
                            This is a screenshot of an Eve Online
                                crafting calculator (accessed at http://www.eve-cost.eu/calculator). Time taken to craft
                                an item is highlighted in yellow, showing the massive (for virtual
                                crafting) timescales at play with crafting in Eve. The highlighted
                                portion on the right is the time for all the runs to finish; the
                                highlighted portion on the left is for a single ship to be created.
                                At such large timescales, it makes sense to use the passage of real
                                time, rather than just time when the player is actively playing or a
                                proxy for time like steps taken.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        Location
                        Typically, only a concern when a player is embodied, some games require a
                            player to be in a particular gameworld location to craft items. Not all
                            locations serve as meaningful completion constraints, however. Kerbal Space Program has specialized hangers
                            where a player builds rocket ships and space planes, but a player can
                            snap to these locations at any time (even in the middle of a rocket
                            launch). Thus, they provide a thematic frame for construction
                            (construction happens in hangars), but don’t introduce an actual
                            gameplay constraint within the crafting system. Systems that include
                            more thematic and less functional location constraints receive a smaller
                            score than those with immobile, hard location constraints. Examples of
                            gameplay location constraints include workbenches in Minecraft, cooking fires in World of Warcraft (Figure 12), or the
                            non-player character (NPC) craftspeople a player visits to craft
                            weapons, armor, or gems in Diablo III.
                        
                            Certain items, such as this Juicy Bear Burger in World of Warcraft, need to be created at a
                                cooking fire, which is a present resource constraint. Cooking fires
                                exist in certain spots in the world, forming a location constraint
                                on where Juicy Bear Burgers can be created. However, players can
                                also generate cooking fires, loosening the location constraint as
                                compared to a forge, which are not mobile. An example of a present
                                resource that has no physical location is the Jeweler’s Kit, which
                                must be carried in the player’s inventory.
                            
                        
                        It is important to note that locations can also represent available land
                            for construction, in games where the player is crafting some physical
                            space (e.g., creating a pond or fencing in a garden space in a Viva Piñata garden). Although the player isn’t
                            really embodied in Viva Piñata, she still
                            needs to maneuver the camera to an unoccupied place in the game world
                            before being able to complete a crafting step of planting tree or
                            building a fence.
                    
                    
                        Miscellaneous Constraints
                        In addition to consumed resources, present resources, time, and location,
                            there are other miscellaneous constraints that are occasionally used in
                            crafting systems. For example, in World of
                                Warcraft, player characters are limited to two professions;
                            each profession limits what the character can and cannot craft. Some
                            professions have further specializations, such as World of Warcraft engineers being able to choose between
                            gnomish or goblin engineering. To get around this constraint, players
                            often have more than one character, each with a different set of
                            professions. These alternate characters (alts for short) allow players
                            to maximize their crafting output . But time, location and resources account for the vast majority of
                            constraints found in crafting systems. 
                    
                
                
                    Variable Outcome
                    Crafting systems are not always deterministic paths representable by a
                        crafting tree. Two players can have the same tools, have the same resources,
                        be at the same location, take identical actions, and still end up with two different results. We refer to this
                        randomness as Variable Outcome.
                    Variable Outcome is not the same as having visible variables in a crafting
                        system. Rather, fixed or random variables may be hidden from the player;
                        this requires a player to explore the system in order to unveil the rules
                        under which the gameworld operates. Players may develop a
                            feel for the values a stochastic variable may take.
                        Crafting systems often allow players to manipulate the probability
                        distributions of their random variables, increasing the odds that they will
                        get the outcome they want. For example, in World of
                            Warcraft, whether or not crafting a particular recipe will help
                        level up a crafting stat is random. However, certain recipes at a given
                        cooking skill have a higher probability to give further stat increases and
                        are color coded to show this to the player (Figure 13). By only crafting
                        particularly colored recipes, the player is putting a thumb on the
                            increase crafting stat variable and pushing it in
                        her favor.
                    
                        A screenshot of the player’s cookbook in World of
                                Warcraft. Each recipe a player knows is highlighted in a
                            different color, which relates to the odds that preparing that recipe
                            will increase the player’s crafting skill (in this case, cooking skill).
                            Recipes highlighted yellow give a medium chance of increasing the
                            cooking skill. The screenshot shows how each instance of crafting does
                            not necessarily increase the skill: orange recipes guarantee skill
                            increase, green recipes indicate a low chance of skill increase, while
                            gray recipes guarantee zero skill increase.
                        
                    
                    Randomness in a crafting outcome can sometimes include a complete failure to
                        craft, or randomly assign properties to a completed item. An item can be of
                        better or worse quality. Or the process may refund a variable amount of
                        resources back to the crafter upon completion.
                    A common paradigm for games is to randomly apply some extra properties to a
                        crafted item, with some of them being negative. Each act of crafting always
                        produces something, but it might not be exactly what the player is looking
                        for.
                    For example, when crafting a new weapon in Terraria, players combine various resources at a particular
                        location in the game world. Part of this is deterministic; players will
                        always get a particular weapon with certain default characteristics.
                        However, the weapon also gets a random modifier that is outside the player’s
                        control. This modifier can impact the effectiveness and utility of the
                        weapon at hand, shown in Figure 14.
                    
                        The strongly defined recipe Wooden Sword from Terraria produces a sword with default properties. These
                            properties are potentially changed by random modifiers. In these two
                            examples, we see the “Legendary” modifier increasing the damage and
                            effectiveness of the sword, while “Shameful” decreases its damage and
                            its ability to keep enemies away from the player but still increases the
                            sword’s size
                        
                    
                    There is no way to control the random selection of a modifier; a player
                        cannot make particular modifiers more or less likely. Terraria does allow for a player to reroll a modifier after a
                        weapon has been created as many times as she likes until she happens on the
                        desired one. For variable outcome, this is a common design choice — if a
                        player can’t have control over an aspect of crafting, at least she can retry
                        somewhat easily in order to find the values she wants.
                    
                        Variable Outcome is Uncommon
                        Variable outcome is not particularly common, especially in systems built
                            for simulation. Most of the crafting systems analyzed do not have any
                            variable outcome. The spaceship manufacturing in Kerbal Space Program is typical of the common case of
                            completely deterministic crafting. Players have complete control over
                            how the parts are placed on their spaceship, and how those parts will
                            function. The player has absolute control over the form and function of
                            each new spacecraft she creates. This helps reveal the underlying rules
                            of the world to players via the crafting system. It is more difficult
                            for players to form a mental model of the crafting system when it
                            contains hidden variables or is intrinsically stochastic.
                    
                    
                        Variable Outcome in the Real World
                        Linking variable outcome back to real life crafting, it intuitively feels
                            like a proxy for the random forces that impact successfully completing a
                            craft in real life. Think of the random forces that impact successfully
                            making a dish in a kitchen — a cook can accidentally add too much of an
                            ingredient at a particular time, grab the wrong spice, or have the lid
                            of the spice container come off while shaking some into the dish.
                            However, Variable Outcome in game crafting systems leads to different
                            effects than the variability in real life crafting.
                        In the Workmanship of Risk (see Aesthetic
                            Diversity), Pye argues at length about the virtues of workmanship and
                            how it relates to design. Items created with unregulated or free
                            workmanship often look very different from each other, but can serve the
                            same functional purposes. In addition, they can be of the same quality,
                            even if they look very different. This kind of variability relates to
                            the improvisational skill of the craftsperson given the dynamic richness
                            of real-world situations. In contrast, variable outcome in game crafting
                            systems often works against Pye’s dream of aesthetic variability. Given
                            the stochastic modeling of object attributes typical in crafting systems
                            with variable outcome, the results are often not functionally
                            equivalent — they vary along attributes with gameplay significance, making
                            one crafted object clearly superior to the other. 
                        Either due to internal motivation, social pressures, or
                            other forces such as gameplay thresholds, players often look for optimal
                            items. These players grind until they get the optimal bit of gear,
                            repeating the crafting attempt as many times as it takes until the
                            outcome lines up with their definition of optimal. Variable outcome, in
                            this case, doesn’t actually improve the aesthetic diversity of various
                            crafted items in games.
                        This actually makes variable outcome, in the games we analyzed, a poor
                            proxy for the random forces that impact real-world crafting. A missed
                            stitch, awkward tension, or a flaw in the yarn does not meaningfully
                            change how warm a sweater is. However, this type of improvisational
                            variability that free workmanship has been under-explored in crafting
                            systems and is a rich future direction for crafting system design.
                    
                    
                        Progression with Randomness
                        Gaining influence over a random variable is a way to add progression into
                            a crafting system, which sometimes ties this dimension to
                                Progression. As players progress in the game (sometimes
                            within the crafting system, and sometimes as part of a different
                            system), players may get new ways to view the random variables at play
                            or the ability to narrow the ranges on the random variables.
                        This is one of the primary ways players progress in the crafting system
                            of Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn
                                (FFXIV). FFXIV’s crafting system is complex, giving the player a
                            range of crafting actions that are abstractions over ideas and concepts
                            that ground out in real-world crafting (e.g. Precise
                                Touch, Muscle Memory). Some of these
                            skills fill up a progress bar, and when the bar is full, the item is
                            created (see Figure 15).
                        
                            The progress window for an item during the crafting sequence from
                                    Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn,
                                and a snippet of the crafting details relayed to the player in their
                                chat log. The player uses crafting actions, such as the shown ‘Basic
                                Touch’ and ‘Careful Synthesis’ to alter the progress, quality,
                                durability, condition, and chance for high quality (HQ) outcome.
                                Note that in the chat log these crafting actions succeed, but some
                                actions have a chance of failure. There are three possible outcomes:
                                failure (via 0 durability without a full progress bar, or quitting),
                                success, and HQ success.
                            
                        
                        However, in Figure 15 we can see items also have a running durability
                            score, which represents how many more actions can be performed before
                            the crafting is forcibly resolved. Finally, there is a quality bar,
                            which is the chance that, when the craft is completed, the item produced
                            will be of high quality (better in terms of stats). In addition,
                            randomly, the next action taken can be flagged as excellent, good,
                            normal or poor, which impacts the rate at which the progress and quality
                            bars fill. This random action bonus or penalty is referred to as the
                            action’s condition.
                        Starting crafters in FFXIV are at the mercy
                            of conditions — without a few lucky successful actions while avoiding an
                            unlucky failure, the progress bar cannot be filled and the craft fails.
                            However, as players progress, they unlock more crafting skills which
                            gives them more control over the crafting process. A ‘poor’ condition
                            becomes less of a setback, an ‘excellent’ condition can be capitalized
                            on. Likewise with the quality bar — at the start, players have very few
                            ways of filling the quality bar, or can fill it, but at the expense of
                            being able to fill the progress bar. As players progress, filling the
                            quality bar becomes more feasible, and players can more consistently
                            create items of high quality. This mastery of randomness is pleasing and
                            powerful, and one case study into how Progression can work in a crafting
                            system.
                    
                    
                        Recipe Definition with Randomness
                        While attempting to visualize the range of inputs that could be part of
                            the Recipe Definition, Completion Constraints, and how they related to
                            the variability of the outcome, we created Figure 16.
                        
                            A generic summary of the relationship between crafting inputs and
                                outputs, combining the concepts of different types of defined
                                recipes, crafting inputs, player intention/design, and variable
                                outcome. The left-hand circles start with strongly defined recipes
                                and represent less and less defined recipes as the examples progress
                                (their circles get bigger, representing a greater space of potential
                                inputs). The right-hand outcome circles show that either the output
                                results in a determined output (not variable), or a range of
                                outputs, small or large, that result from some amount of
                                variability. The bottom half of the diagram expands on what could be
                                involved in crafting inputs: some amount of materials (completion
                                constraints), the crafting process, and (optionally) an implicit or
                                explicit plan to make or use the materials or output in a different
                                context.
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    System Recognition of Outcome
                    System Recognition of Outcome refers to the manner and degree to which a
                        larger game system models and represents the results of crafting. This is
                        the reinforcement after player’s crafting actions by which players know that
                        they have crafted something; that something new exists in the virtual world
                        as a result of their decision-making and actions. System recognition ranges
                        from one-time, immediate graphical or textual acknowledgement, to complex
                        behavioral modeling of the crafted item over time. 
                    The level of system recognition of a crafting system may be estimated by
                        answering these questions, adapted for crafting from Chris Crawford’s
                        listen-think-speak definition of interactivity . 
                    
                        How many properties of the resource constraints and crafted output
                            does the system use to impact future game actions?
                        How much processing, or transformation, does the player perceive to be
                            carried out on those properties? Do those properties change the final
                            product or how the final product interacts with the greater game
                            systems?
                        How deeply is the output of crafting represented to the player? Can
                            the player perceive the transformation by some textual, graphical, or
                            other signal expressed by the final product?
                    
                    These questions culminate in how well a crafting system (1) listens to, (2)
                        thinks about, and (3) speaks about what a player is crafting
                        and has crafted. In Crawford’s terms, it is how well the system holds up its
                        end of the conversation with the player, after the player has
                            spoken. In this case, the player spoke through
                        crafting actions, and the focus of conversation is on what the player has
                        crafted. If the system looks at few properties of the output, processes them
                        minimally or not at all, and presents that minimal processing directly,
                        without impacting other game systems, it is considered to have low system
                        recognition of outcome. If the system uses many properties of crafting
                        output, connecting crafting output to non-trivial functions and other game
                        systems, and presents a transformed representation and cascading
                        consequences of the output back to the player, it has high system
                        recognition. 
                    
                        Low Recognition
                        Among the lowest modes of recognizing player crafting is by direct,
                            one-time acknowledgement by static text or image. In Kittens Game, crafting a stone slab results in
                            a slab counter in a list of many other counters quietly increasing, or a
                            new counter quietly appearing if it hasn’t been crafted before (Figure
                            17). Such counter-based representation of crafting, in which the sole
                            purpose of crafting objects is to increment counters which then serve as
                            resources for crafting other objects (which are themselves just
                            counters), is typical of the idle games (or incremental games) genre
                                
                            . 
                        
                            The system uses for recognition only a single property of a
                                crafted item: that the item now exists. It doesn’t need any other
                                information about that item.
                            The only processing over that single property is the incrementing
                                of a numerical inventory count of identical items that existed
                                previously. In the context of gameplay action, the system propagates
                                the consequence of that changed numerical value to other relevant
                                systems (such as trade).
                            The only direct representation of the output is a changed textual
                                counter.
                        
                        The indirect representation of output through other game
                            systems pushes Kittens Game’s crafting
                            model higher than its otherwise minimal position on this dimension. It
                            further recognizes player-crafted items by modeling them as ingredients
                            in future crafting recipes, and as inputs to the game’s economy, as
                            goods that can be sold or traded. 
                        
                            Crafting outcomes in Kittens Game are
                                recognized through minimal text representation and as input to
                                future crafting and economic actions.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        Medium Recognition
                        Contrast this representation with crafting whose output is given physical
                            manifestation in the gameworld, beyond an inventory abstraction. In
                                Minecraft crafting (versus block
                            placement), many craftable items exist as icons in inventory slots, but
                            may also be placed in the world or held and used by the player
                            character. When a pickaxe is crafted, it appears as a static, 2D icon in
                            the inventory menu, that may be dragged and dropped into different slots
                            of a grid. It may then be selected to be equipped, at which point its
                            3D, voxel representation is visible in the player character’s hand as
                            she moves about the world. With pickaxe equipped, the player can click
                            on blocks in the world, causing the pickaxe’s 3D model to move and
                            rotate with the avatar’s arm, as if being swung. Each click and swing
                            causes cracks to appear on the clicked block, growing more pronounced
                            with each swing, until finally bursting into collectible resources if
                            the pickaxe was crafted with a strong enough metal. Besides the
                            all-important pickaxe, Minecraft crafting
                            supports the creation of other equipable tools, weapons, armor, and
                            several classes of placeable blocks and vehicles. 
                        Minecraft easily has deeper recognition of
                            crafting outcomes than Kittens Game, but less
                            than games which, for instance, apply and visualize detailed physics
                            simulations. We analyze this already complex middle case as follows: 
                        
                            The Minecraft crafting system
                                recognizes several properties of its crafted items: item category
                                (e.g., pickaxe, sword, wood plank) and several classes of
                                ingredients, which are different for different item categories
                                (e.g., for pickaxes, axes, and swords, the metal used matters; for
                                wood planks, the kind of wood blocks used matters).
                            The system-observed properties of the crafted items are
                                transformed and processed only slightly: for stackable items, an
                                inventory counter is increased, and for items with quality, that
                                quality is compared to the quality of an action target to determine
                                the action’s outcome. When the player uses these different items,
                                their properties are used in determining action outcomes (e.g., if
                                mining with a crafted pickaxe, a block can burst into
                                resources).
                            The crafted items are modeled as moveable graphical icons in a
                                gridded inventory space, as 3D-modeled objects in the world. The
                                material composition (and thus strength) of the item is ‘spoken’ to
                                the player as different-colored versions of the same item
                                corresponding to the color of the material.
                        
                    
                    
                        High Recognition
                        At the highest end of this spectrum are games which save a lot of
                            information about how an item is crafted and use that information as
                            input to a simulation, which applies functions or rules to transform
                            that saved information, and whose behavior may be observed during play.
                            Such simulation-based crafting recognition games include
                                Besiege, Kerbal
                                Space Program, SimCity, CodeSpells, and Spore’s character creation.
                        In Besiege, players craft hyper-destructive
                            siege machines from a large pallet of combinable engine parts, including
                            beams, springs, flame-throwers, and motorized wheels. The resulting
                            objects often look like they could be Medieval European war technology,
                            but are crafted from atomic parts with a large space of potential
                            combination. Players regularly create mechanisms never used in
                            historical European warfare and that are in fact completely new to
                                Besiege and its online community. 
                        
                            In Besiege, recognized properties of
                                a crafted item consist of its types of component pieces (e.g.,
                                beams, springs, wheels), and how those pieces are arranged relative
                                to each other in a 3D space (e.g., this particular beam is connected
                                to this wheel in this orientation). The game system represents many
                                physical properties of the constructed entity, excluding only
                                information such as the exact sequence of actions or time the player
                                took to construct it.
                            The recognized properties are transformed by putting their
                                representation through Besiege’s
                                stylized physics simulation. X- and y-positions of engine parts are
                                modified by gravity, collision with other solid objects, input
                                controls, and the behavior of connected parts and the type of
                                connection.
                            The crafted item is well represented to the player. When the
                                player completes a siege machine, they can press a key or button to
                                    play the scenario, which exits build mode,
                                begins applying the physics engine to the machine as it is
                                represented graphically, enables keyboard-controllable pieces to be
                                controlled, and initiates the movement and targeting of tiny,
                                defending NPC knights and archers toward the newly minted death
                                machine.
                        
                    
                    
                        Patterns of System Recognition
                        In games like Besiege, with particularly
                            high outcome recognition, the core loop often emphasizes it via a
                            separate, watch-it-run or simulation phase, following the crafting.
                            Often, the phase makes the crafted item more traditionally playable,
                            with movement-control or other minimal interactivity. True also of
                                Kerbal Space Program, Incredipede, and Spore character creation, this affords the player the
                            unique pleasure of seeing her creations theatrically come to life, in a
                            performative reveal after a suspense-building crafting period. The
                            player creates with an idea of what will happen, runs the simulation and
                            inevitably finds her idea only partially correct, but in an
                            understandable way, so that her idea of what will happen is updated to
                            reflect a better understanding of the simulation. Her updated mental
                            model is immediately actionable in the next crafting phase. The
                            game-internal core loop is neatly translatable to the player-internal
                            iterative model-making loop of the SimCity
                            Effect . Further,
                                live recognition, that happens in real time,
                            both as the item is crafted and afterward, as with Minecraft block placement, supports player embodiment as a
                            character in the virtual world, and is more commonly integrated with
                            larger gameplay experiences that aren’t focused primarily on crafting.
                            Furthermore, systems high on outcome recognition and low on recipe
                            definition generally support the SimCity
                            Effect (named for a live crafting system), regardless of the presence of
                            a detached watch-it-run phase after crafting.
                        Other patterns of system recognition include graphical modeling and
                            physics simulation (e.g., gravity, collision, fluid physics), impact on
                            a stats system (combat, character progression, NPC relationships), and
                            adjacency bonuses in base or city-building (e.g. building a Theatre
                            District next to a Natural Wonder in Civilization
                                6 produces bonus culture). All of these can vary on system
                            recognition by how flat or complex the model is. 
                        Another interesting pattern is the use of outcome recognition to identify
                            conditions-based recipes in an otherwise undefined recipe system. In
                                Terraria, houses can be built for NPCs
                            using the general block-placement system, anywhere in the large sandbox
                            world. But NPCs will only become residents if particular requirements
                            are met: blocks are placed to form a fully enclosed structure, with at
                            least one entrance, covering at least 60 total tiles, but less than 750,
                            containing at least one valid light source, flat surface item, and
                            comfort item. The system will check for player structures which satisfy
                            this after crafting, rather than impose the
                            requirements before the structure can be built at all, as in strongly
                            defined recipe crafting. This pattern is also visible in the gardening
                            of Viva Piñata, in which specific clusters
                            of player-placed items and piñata residents in a garden entice other
                            piñatas to visit and become residents. This style of recognition enables
                            both the creative experimentation and expression of freeform crafting as
                            well as the authorial control of predefined recipes. When players
                            discover these implicit recipes, without having looked them up or known
                            about them beforehand, this style of system recognition can be a
                            delightful and surprising meeting of minds between the player and
                            system. 
                        Games with undefined recipes often have high system recognition, as with
                                Besiege, Kerbal
                                Space Program, and Minecraft
                            block placement, but this is not always the case. Draw Something has no recipes, yet low system recognition
                            of the player-created drawings. The system doesn’t listen and respond to
                            player input beyond presenting the drawing on the screen as it was
                            drawn. Instead, the finished drawings are recognized by a human partner,
                            in an association game paradigm similar to Pictionary or charades. Player-recognized crafting is not
                            mapped by this dimension, yet features importantly in Player
                            Expressiveness.
                    
                
                
                    Player Expressiveness
                    The dimension of player expressiveness captures the range of reasonable
                        actions and outcomes within a crafting system suggested by the domain of the
                        game world. Expressiveness is a somewhat vague term, as
                        is creativity (See Craft and Creativity), but this
                        dimension focuses on the amount of reasonable choice the player has, given
                        the game’s setting and the tools provided to them, during the process of
                        crafting. This dimension is not trying to capture players explicitly
                        subverting or exploiting a crafting system, as might occur in counter-play.
                        Further, this dimension is not about the process of choosing what to craft,
                        nor about the uses of the item after being made. For example, this dimension
                        is about the process of customization and sewing of a shirt, not about
                        choosing to wear the shirt (because it may be pretty or powerful), nor about
                        how to dye, alter, or equip the shirt in a different crafting system after
                        being completed. In short, we are ignoring the infinite combinatorial
                        influences of outside systems as much as possible, but we acknowledge that
                        an outside influence can inspire creative action or exploration. We do not
                        care where inspiration comes from; this dimension only measures whether or
                        not the player can express her inspiration successfully. 
                    For example, in Draw Something, the player is
                        given a one-word prompt to draw, and she is victorious if the other player
                        guesses her prompt successfully. The player is free to draw anything she
                        likes in a rainbow of colors, whether or not it supports the prompt. The
                        user may draw an expansive beach scene, put Batman lounging in a beach chair
                        with a coconut drink complete with tiny umbrella, and point to the little
                        straw in the cup for the prompt “straw.” While the brushes and drawing tools
                        are extremely basic, players can use fingertips or a stylus to be as
                        creative as they like or spend as much time on a drawing as they desire, and
                        this results in extremely high player expressiveness.
                    In Neko Atsume, a game of
                            gardening cats via putting down enticing furniture,
                        players don’t have the ability to pet, adopt, customize, or directly
                        interact with the cats, which are common actions players may want to do with
                        real or virtual cats. There is a lack of fulfillment of player desires in
                        customizing their homes or interacting with their cultivated garden of
                        adorable felines, which results in lower player expressiveness. A game world
                        that suggests many creative options without offering the ability to
                        capitalize on them has the lowest level of Player Expressiveness. For
                        example, Knitting Simulator 2014, which
                        emulates knitting extremely well, offers no ability to change, adjust, or
                        customize yarn color, pattern, or stitches. All of the creative choice a
                        crafter has when knitting is absent. The mechanics of the game distill down
                        to a progress bar, leaving no space for player agency and no support for
                        player choice. In the terms of Mateas, this would be called an imbalance of
                        material affordances (reasonable player desire) and formal affordances (game
                        system support) , expanded in . In these examples, we show that high
                        player expressiveness is a combination of a creative domain or space that
                        begs for customization, as well as mechanical support for the player to
                        create within that space. 
                    
                        Subversive Play
                        In real-life situations including games, open-ended play, or law, many
                            humans have cheated, found loop-holes, and otherwise circumvented the
                            rules or intended purpose of rules. Often, cheating leads to avoiding or
                            skipping game challenges by amassing experience, automatically aiming at
                            critical targets, or having unlimited health or lives. However, a subset
                            of creative players cheat or find alternative modes of play within a
                            given arena. Game scholars call these activities
                                critical or subversive
                            play . Game developers can try their
                            hardest to snuff out cheaters, and often do in competitive games such as
                                Overwatch or DOTA, where one player’s cheating harms the play experience
                            for another real-life human. Other developers may embrace and attempt to
                            support subversive play, such as Will Wright, creator of the Sims and a
                            fan of attaching toys to rockets . The
                                motherlode debug code, which grants the player
                            a large sum of in-game currency, has existed in nearly every Sims game since Sims
                                II. The Sims series of games
                            has many interesting opportunities for subversive play, such as
                            torturing and killing sims in countless ways, flirting with Death, and
                            having babies with aliens . Since choosing to
                            play subversively is a direct choice of the player’s, and a developer’s
                            support of those choices enables players to explore new and creative
                            experiences, games that explicitly support subversive play have
                                increased player expressiveness. This is distinct from
                            unsupported subversive play, which, as we say above, we do not count
                            towards player expressiveness in our analysis. There are very few
                            examples of these games, however, and this is a rich area of potential
                            future exploration.
                    
                    
                        Resources and Recipes
                        Different materials and recipes often spark new ideas or give avenues for
                            fresh inspiration and methods of crafting. For example, many players of
                                Minecraft do not immediately recognize
                            that the positions of materials in the 2x2 and 3x3 crafting grids
                            (discussed previously in Strongly Defined Recipes and Figures 5 &
                            19) are meaningful. However, once the player discovers this fact, if she
                            doesn’t already know the other recipes, there is an immediate suggested
                            course of action discovered within the crafting grid. Regarding Minecraft’s other primary crafting system of
                            block placement, different block materials can help crafters better
                            suggest form in their low-resolution sculptures or apply other forms of
                            art, such as pixel graphics. Not only do users have the range of
                            naturally occurring material, such as stone or wood, but they can dye
                            wool in a range of 16 colors. If we examine character customization in
                                Minecraft, we also see that those 16
                            colors can be mixed or overdyed to create 12,326,391 colors
                                Statistic and equations that calculate color from minecraft.gamepedia.com/Dye.
                    
                
                
                    Progression
                    Progression addresses the experience of interacting with the crafting system
                        over time. Games that read higher on this dimension, such as those with deep
                        crafting prerequisite trees or the leveling up of avatar crafting skills,
                        afford a greater sense of growth and development. A crafting system with no
                        system-underwritten progression allows any of the system’s recipes or
                        combination mechanisms to be engaged at any time during play, which enables
                        more player self-direction and freeform experimentation. 
                    This dimension is highly related to player skill at a particular crafting
                        system. Crafting systems can be difficult, such as the complex calculations
                        that go into a successful ship for Kerbal Space
                            Program, or the planning and architectural design for large
                            Minecraft creations. As people engage with
                        the game systems, they master them, being able to better direct them towards
                        a particular goal. However, this sort of progression is highly dependent on
                        the person playing the crafting system rather than properties in the system
                        itself. For example, a rocket engineer may build a successful ship in Kerbalvfar more quickly than the average player.
                        Therefore, this dimension avoids addressing player skill and instead focuses
                        on how the crafting system itself supports growth and development through
                        engagement.
                    We identified five types of progression in crafting systems: leveling
                        (improving an abstraction for crafting skill), resource unlocking (getting
                        new resources to use), recipe unlocking (finding new recipes), prerequisite
                        crafting (needing to craft something before being able to craft something
                        else), and mechanics changes (new ways to craft things).
                    
                        Leveling
                        This type of progression is related to increasing the player-character’s
                            crafting skill. Most commonly, crafting skill is represented as an
                            abstract number, and increasing this number is interpreted as an avatar
                            becoming more skilled at a craft. Not all forms of leveling in a game
                            pertain to crafting, or are relevant to crafting progression. In Skyrim, the player has many different stats to
                            level that are abstractions over the avatar’s skill in a variety of
                            domains. Leveling up combat-focused skills (like one-handed weapon
                            combat) does not impact the player’s ability to craft in any way, while
                            certain skills in Skyrim are centered
                            around crafting (e.g., smithing).
                        There is another, less explicit form of crafting leveling. When looking
                            at games like Katamari Damacy in terms of
                            crafting, a player progresses through levels by building balls, called
                            katamaris, to a certain size or with specific types of items. Because
                            the level requirements of the player’s katamari get more and more
                            demanding, moving from level to level works as a form of crafting
                            leveling, unlocking new resources to use in katamaris as well as
                            proposing new recipes. The player may not think to make a katamari
                            almost solely of school supplies, but the level requirements force the
                            player to make conscious choices on what to pick up with their katamari.
                            NPCs may comment, as a player moves into later levels or overshoots the
                            level’s requirement, that their avatar is becoming a better and better
                            crafter, still feeding into the core idea of development and growth that
                            is important to this part of this dimension.
                    
                    
                        Implicit or Explicit Resource Unlocking
                        Progression through a crafting system can work in more ways than
                            increasing an abstraction for skill. Another common mechanism is
                            revealing new resources for a player to use. These reveals can be
                            explicit: a single flag that must be flipped or a condition that must be
                            satisfied in order to reveal new resources. Often, the revealing
                            condition will be brought to the player’s attention, or the unveiling of
                            a new resource will be announced to the player when it is available. 
                        In other games, such as Minecraft, this
                            happens implicitly by virtue of world building or level design. As
                            players play Minecraft, they explore the
                            world primarily by digging down through it. It takes tools built from
                            rarer, deeper resources to dig through tougher, deeper kinds of rock.
                            This is an implicit resource unlock — there is no flag that must be
                            flipped by getting to a particular level or finishing a quest in order
                            to unveil new kinds of ore to mine. This is broadly true for
                                    Minecraft, until players decide to
                                go to the Nether, which has an explicit locking mechanism of
                                building a Nether portal. The Nether has several unique resources in
                                it. Instead, there is a natural barrier that can be overcome
                            in a variety of ways, all of which require some time spent interacting
                            with the game world. This natural progression through strata of the game
                            world is systematically enforced through properties of the procedural
                            content generator that generates Minecraft worlds. 
                    
                    
                        Implicit or Explicit Recipe Unlocking
                        Just like resources can be explicitly or implicitly locked, so can
                            particular recipes for crafting. This concept ties in heavily with the
                            Recipe Definition dimension, as a game needs to have semi-defined or
                            strongly defined recipes in order to unlock them. Explicitly locked
                            recipes might be quest rewards, or given to the player if she achieves a
                            certain level. Games that have implicit recipe unlocking may randomly
                            distribute their recipes throughout the game world (like No Man’s Sky, see Figure 18). There is nothing
                            the game explicitly asks the player to do to unlock a particular recipe,
                            outside of interacting with and exploring the game world.
                        
                            A player picking up a new recipe in No Man’s
                                    Sky. These recipes are scattered throughout the galaxy,
                                requiring a player to explore the galaxy however she sees fit to
                                unlock them.
                            
                        
                        This is also common in idle or incremental game crafting 
                            , and it may be explicit or implicit. New
                            recipes in incremental games often appear as new buttons (new ways to
                            convert resources) or tabs (entire banks of new buttons or existing
                            functionality on old buttons). Some recipes may be implicitly unlocked
                            by just spending a certain amount of time with the incremental game,
                            while others are explicitly locked with a certain amount and combination
                            of resources required.
                    
                    
                        Prerequisite Crafting
                        Prerequisite crafting is when there is an explicit requirement for
                            something to be crafted before something else can be crafted. This is
                            the type of progression in crafting trees, which are long chains of
                            prerequisite objects that usually terminate in a single item. A good
                            example of this are the crafting trees of Terraria, which often have players crafting a good many
                            items before being able to craft a final product, as shown in Figure
                            12.
                        Games with strongly defined recipes are better equipped to have crafting
                            trees. As the ingredients are explicitly laid out in front of the
                            player, it is easy for a player to see how crafting one item allows for
                            the ability to craft a second. It also often fits naturally within the
                            game world — many defined recipes are for more refined raw materials that
                            will be used to craft more complex objects at the roots of crafting
                            trees.
                        Not all prerequisite crafting is a crafting tree; sometimes a player
                            needs to craft an item before a particular new set of crafting mechanics
                            are available, or a crafted item might be the way to explicitly unlock a
                            recipe or resource. 
                    
                    
                        Mechanics Changes
                        Sometimes games provide progression by revealing more mechanics to the
                            player as she crafts. This is highly common in games that have multiple
                            crafting subsystems, as they tend to be introduced gradually, waiting
                            until a player is comfortable with one before moving on to the next.
                            There is no requirement that this be the case, and certainly games
                            running a god or sandbox mode reveal all of the crafting abilities to
                            the player at once. That is, what a player may usually experience as
                            gradual changes can be presented as not being changed, but we consider
                            them mechanics changes as they are still comprised of different
                            sub-systems.
                        In Minecraft, players start with a very
                            small set of abilities. After punching down their first tree, they can
                            create a workbench which vastly expands the set of available crafting
                            options. As they progress, they can eventually create a brewing stand,
                            which unlocks a different set of crafting mechanics for creating
                            potions, and an enchantment table, for crafting enchanted items (Figure
                            19).
                        
                            Some of the various crafting stations in Minecraft. Each interface has its own mechanics, which
                                allows players to make more items and also gives a sense of
                                mastery.
                            
                        
                        In Final Fantasy XIV, the crafting
                            professions are individually leveled. At level 13, players learn
                                Observe which is a skill that does literally
                            nothing. At this higher level, and with this skill, players are prompted
                            to learn about item conditions, which they have had no control over and
                            no reason to care about up until now (Figure 15). Players learn how to
                            optimize quality gains when the condition of items is
                                excellent and use Observe
                            when the condition is poor, minimizing quality
                            loss.
                    
                    
                        Goals in Crafting
                        Progression is often tethered to goal-setting and what a player wants to
                            achieve. For example, a player who wants to become the best crafter as
                            quickly as possible will likely craft different items than one who wants
                            to craft for the highest amount of profit. People may follow long,
                            winding and very different paths through crafting trees to get vastly
                            different final items. Tying into Social Aspects, as part of
                            progression, crafters may specialize, opening up new mechanics, recipes
                            and/or resources, but being gated out of other mechanics, recipes and/or
                            resources.
                        A unique case of a crafting system as a driver for narrative progression,
                                Dark Cloud’s town-building puzzle
                            heavily motivates the player toward one specific goal of restoring the
                            town to how it used to be. The player is free to place buildings, bits
                            of road, and water wherever she likes, and to fill the houses with
                            whomever and whatever she likes. However, for example, if the
                            protagonist’s main window doesn’t face eastward and if the house doesn’t
                            include a keg, chimney, upstairs storage, Renee (the protagonist’s
                            mother), a llama, and a stray cat, then the player cannot receive the
                            second party member, Xiao. Without the proper party members, dungeon
                            bosses and mechanics can be extremely difficult, if not impossible.
                            Progression is gated by not just crafting, but by building the town to
                            be precisely how the NPCs desire. This is also an interesting case study
                            for Player Expressiveness as the player must navigate a tension between
                            her aesthetic crafting goals and the systematically-enforced desires of
                            NPCs.
                        Each dimension, on its own, covers just a facet of the full experience of
                            a crafting system. In some cases, we’ve discussed how interplay between
                            dimension scores affords different ways to view a crafting system. This
                            is only a small part of how different dimension settings work together
                            to describe the experience of crafting in a game. We hope that future
                            work can dive deeper into dimension interplay.
                    
                
            

                Beyond the Dimensions
                With all the dimensions presented in this paper, there is still much more that
                    remains to be explored within the broad definition of crafting systems we
                    outlined earlier. However, the following sections, while important to many
                    crafting systems, were too narrow or too complex and multifaceted to classify as
                    a common attribute representable with a single numerical value. However, in the
                    games we analyzed, the following concepts of automation and social involvement
                    offered notable parallels to real-world crafting.
                
                    Automation
                    Crafting systems are sometimes focused on the single production of an item,
                        letting players imbue that item with meaning and care. However, some games
                        let players mass produce items, or let large chunks of the system run
                        automatically with no player input for extended periods of time. In short,
                        some games give players the ability to automate their crafting systems.
                    Automation starts to push a crafting system into a different experience than
                        one often associated with real-world hand-crafting. Going from an intimate,
                        item-by-item experience in games like Cooking Mama
                        where each step of the crafting process is a rich minigame, to a
                        large-scale operation, powered by automated actions or helper systems like a
                        redstone powered Redstone is a special type of brick in Minecraft that allows for simple logic gates
                            to be encoded in-game. This forms the basis for incredibly complex
                            automatic Minecraft machinery.
                        mining operation in Minecraft, changes how the
                        player crafts. We can look at both of these styles in terms of how various
                        positions on the dimensions help afford automation.
                    Automation affordances score low in the Fidelity of Action dimension. High
                        fidelity crafting systems often have highly detailed, complex, (virtually)
                        embodied actions that take time and focus for a player to complete.
                        Automation pushes against this, as it tries to afford an experience that’s
                        focused on producing and handling crafting outcomes at a large scale, rather
                        than embodied action. A way to look at large scale crafting is that a
                        crafter is creating an operation, rather than the items. Massively
                        multiplayer online game (MMOs) crafting systems often invoke similar
                        feelings, as Robert Rice points out, 
                            More often than not the process is unrewarding and
                                more like a highly repetitive mass production and manufacturing of
                                items
                            
                        . We do not make any claims about MMO crafting feeling rewarding or
                        not, but do agree that MMO crafting often has crafters create large
                        quantities of similar items.
                    It is unsurprising, then, that MMOs allow for macroing. Macroing can afford
                        automation while maintaining a higher degree of player fidelity. A macro is
                        a small program, built within game provided tools, that can automate some
                        character actions. As a defense against botting, or having entirely
                        autonomously controlled agents within a game, it is rare to see program flow
                        control structures or loops as part of a game-provided toolkit for macroing.
                        However, some games have historically afforded loops and if statements in
                        their macro systems; for example, Star Wars
                            Galaxies had self-callable macros, which affords repetition like
                        loops through recursion. With a rich macroing language, a game can have a
                        higher degree of fidelity while still allowing some players to automate the
                        process.
                    Games with strongly defined recipes (see Recipe Definition) often support
                        automation. Because a recipe has a known, fixed number of input components,
                        recipes can be made in batches. Fixed recipes also help with macro design
                        and creation, as the actions that lead to success are listed to the player
                        and encoded in the system. However, even games with no recipe definition can
                        afford automation.
                    Minecraft block generators are player-crafted
                        machines that produce resources for players to perform more block-placement
                        crafting (Figure 20). The machines themselves are created by taking
                        advantage of Minecraft’s physics engine and
                        placing particular blocks in particular locations (Terraria has similar player creations, see Out-of-Game, below).
                        Although this doesn’t afford automation of the actual crafting process (in
                        terms of block placement), it still works as an inroad into working with
                        crafting at a large scale. It also does take some crafting know-how and
                        skill to set up a block generator in the first place.
                    
                        A running cobblestone block generator in Minecraft. This sort of work does not automate the crafting
                            process, unlike macro engines, but shows how freeform crafting can lead
                            to creations that ‘craft’ on their own, or automate other parts of the
                            game.
                        
                    
                    Variable Outcome is problematic when it comes to automation, especially when
                        we reflect back on real-world crafting. On one hand, games that read high on
                        this dimension often work as motivation for why a player might want to
                        automate the crafting process. A player searching for an optimal item in a
                        game with a lot of randomness in crafting might need to craft the same item
                        20, 50 or even 100 times. It is not hard to imagine why such a player might
                        want autonomous tools. On the other hand, Variable Outcome thwarts the
                        regulation that is associated with mass production, automation and the
                        workmanship of certainty. Crafting systems with high variable outcome have
                        large fluctuations in outcome quality even with automated ways to go about
                        the crafting process. Crafting systems high in variable outcome have a
                        reason to add automation affordances to their crafting systems to help
                        mediate the monotony of searching for a highly desirable outcome. However,
                        this process of using automation to burn through bad results is a different
                        experience from how automation functions in real-world crafting, where
                        automation and the workmanship of certainty prevent particular bad results
                        from ever occurring.
                    So far, we have only discussed the production of a large quantity of in-world
                        items. Along with automating the crafting process to allow for players to
                        produce a large quantity of items, games also afford a player to inspect,
                        handle, and quantize a large amount of crafted output. These sorts of
                        systems are a bit beyond the scope of this paper, but it is worth
                        remembering that crafting systems do not exist in a vacuum.
                    Economic systems like World of Warcraft’s
                        auction house, combined with third party analysis tools (e.g., wowuction.com) that measure things
                        like the amount of a particular item currently being sold, its local average
                        sale price versus a historical sale price and the amount of currency
                        currently in circulation, allow players to make informed decisions about the
                        large number of items a macro-wielding worker may create.
                
                
                    Social Aspects
                    Community is a fundamental component of not only the history of crafting, but
                        also the modern resurgence of crafts and crafting in games. However, the
                        wide range of amount and types of social involvement in different games,
                        both in-game and out-of-game, made the concept too awkward to include as its
                        own dimension of crafting systems. The social examples we use here are
                        directly applicable to the embedded crafting systems within the games cited
                        and may be generalized to other games or genres.
                    
                        In-Game
                        Crafting systems with in-game social involvement necessarily need some
                            amount of multiplayer connection, either as a MMO-type game or with the
                            ability to share in-game entities with other players. Within these
                            games, players can make commissions of other players personally, as well
                            as trade their crafted goods in in-game auction houses, or simply
                            collect or curate their favorite designs. For example, MMOs such as
                                World of Warcraft often make use of
                            consumable materials like potions that improve the player’s abilities
                            for a short time and are needed regularly by active players. WoW also makes use of communal improvements,
                            such as cauldrons of flasks from the Burning
                                Crusade and Legion expansions,
                            or food carts from the Mists of Pandaria
                            expansion and feasts from the Wrath of the Lich King expansion onward. 
                        In some MMOs with many professions, different professions require
                            materials from each other, and a single player may need to make another
                            character with that profession, or be forced to buy or trade for
                            materials with other players. Some players of MMO games that include a
                            free market economy spend all their time manipulating the market or
                            taking advantage of changes in the ever-updating game. Players may
                            choose to make their money mass-producing ingredients for other crafters
                            (see Automation), or buying all items of a type and owning part of the
                            market. Crafters in real life struggle with pricing and selling their
                            goods as well, whether in-person during craft fairs or on websites such
                            as Etsy (see The Evolution of Crafts).
                        There are a few interesting single-player examples either modeling social
                            behavior for crafters or cleverly sharing in-game entities without
                            embodied trade or currency at all. Recettear: An
                                Item Shop’s Tale is a game about crafting an item shop,
                            including gathering your own stock items, curating your shop’s
                            atmosphere (by changing the walling and flooring), and haggling with
                            customers. Customers have a reputation with the player character which
                            increases their budget, so short-term discounts may lead to long-term
                            profits. Not many games bother with modeling these social behaviors,
                            which leaves this space very under-explored. Another game, Spore, managed to share its wide variety of
                            creatures between players without a connection between them by saving
                            creature data in a PNG image. The Sporepedia hosts, among other items, a
                            gallery of images that any Spore player can
                            grab and upload as a fully functioning creature using only 8KB of data.
                            However, to avoid intentional hacking, the creators of Spore obfuscated how the data was encoded
                            within the image.
                    
                    
                        Out-of-Game
                        There is no limit on how players connect outside of games. Many games
                            have entries in GameFAQs, a website with
                            fan-made walkthroughs, guides, maps, save files, Q&A, and a forum
                            where fans can post polls or pose deeper questions for discussion.
                                Reddit is another common communal area
                            for unstructured game questions and strategy discussion. More popular
                            games have either company-hosted or fan-curated Wiki pages, such as
                            Sporepedia, which include official-looking guides with images and
                            hyperlinks defining everything from game concepts to crafting trees and
                            character stats. Fan-curated content may also include community
                            strategies and sometimes exploits that the creators of the game may
                            monitor for future updates. 
                        In general, these websites offer players a means to share details about a
                            game’s crafting system, such as Minecraft’s
                            crafting trees, where often no such resource exists in-game. Players can
                            also offer player-made recipes for complex structures, such as Terraria’s obsidian farm, which generates a
                            highly-valued resource every player wants but is difficult to obtain.
                            The sharing of recipes and techniques is an exact parallel to real-life
                            crafts. There is a massive amount of craft tutorial videos on YouTube, as well as crafting pattern sharing
                            or hosting websites such as Craftster,
                                Ravelry, and Craftsy (see The Evolution of Crafts).
                    
                    
                        In-and-Out-of-Game
                        The rise of Facebook games in the 2000’s
                            rocked the gaming industry, where Farmville
                            brought Zynga and casual games to the forefront. Using psychological
                            skinner box techniques like those described as dark
                                patterns by Lewis , Farmville reached critical mass by motivating
                            its players to share, poke, prod, and harass their real-life friends for
                            in-game rewards. The more active friends you had, the more materials you
                            had to craft with, and the better you were at the game. Many people made
                            multiple accounts or simply made a separate account for gaming
                            altogether, collecting hundreds and thousands of fellow gamers as
                            friends. Farmville’s model of mixing
                            out-of-game viral marketing and in-game rewards became the foundation of
                            a whole new genre of games, many of which include crafting, such as
                                Castleville.
                        Both automation and social play go beyond just crafting, showcasing an
                            instance of a separate system to afford different play experiences in a
                            crafting system (automation) and an instance of of how crafting can work
                            with other game systems to afford different play experiences (social
                            play). These lines are fuzzy, as automation often ties into in-game
                            economies, which are primarily a social phenomenon. We hope that this
                            section motivates future inspection in game crafting. This is not a
                            complete listing of all ideas that touch on crafting, but showcase some
                            concepts around potential future discussion on crafting in games.
                    
                
            

                Conclusion
                Within games journalism and design, there is not a strong definition of what
                    crafting is or means in games. We’ve proposed a definition of crafting and shown
                    a seven-dimensional framework that highlights important features of crafting
                    across a myriad of games and systems. In Recipe Definition we separated games
                    around the notion of a recipe and how free-form the crafting experience may be.
                    For the Fidelity of Action dimension, we examined how detailed and performative
                    player actions are, and how closely they correspond to any real-world crafting
                    equivalents. We enumerated the types of constraints a game puts on completing a
                    craft in Completion Constraints. We addressed randomness and the amount of
                    control a player has over the outcome of a crafting attempt in Variable Outcome.
                    We analyze how richly a system understands and models the outcome of a crafting
                    attempt in System Recognition of Outcome. In Player Expressiveness, we examined
                    the range of creative actions available in crafting domains, and how they are
                    supported by material and formal affordances. Finally, for the Progression
                    dimension, we enumerated the types of advancement the player may achieve from
                    interacting with the crafting system over time.
                Each of these dimensions is important in its own right, and we have shown through
                    many examples that there is no one set of scores on these dimensions that
                    represent a ‘canonical’ or ideal crafting system. This framework is remarkably
                    flexible, providing a useful lens for games that might not fall under the
                    traditional umbrella of crafting, but which have crafting elements. We looked at
                    various crafting-like actions in games, from placing blocks in Minecraft to designing spacecraft in Kerbal Space Program. Although not covered in detail
                    in this paper, we’ve even looked at crafting-like systems in borderline cases of
                    crafting, ranging from link exploration in With Those We
                        Love Alive to katamari accretion in Katamari
                        Damacy. The affiliated web visualization showcases these extra
                    examples.
                We hope that this paper helps build a critical vocabulary around crafting
                    systems, and helps start discussions and shed light on this common concept in
                    games. 
            

                Games Cited
                
                    5th Cell. (2012). Scribblenauts Unlimited.
                        [Android, Wii U, Nintendo 3DS, iOS, Microsoft Windows], Nintendo, Warner
                        Bros. Interactive Entertainment.
                    Angel, R. (1985). Pictionary. [Board Game],
                        Angel Games Inc, Hasbro.
                    Barone, E. (2016). Stardew Valley.
                        [PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, Microsoft Windows, Linux, macOS],
                        Chucklefish Games.
                    Bethesda Game Studios. (2006). The Elder Scrolls IV:
                            Oblivion. [Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360], Bethesda
                        Softworks.
                    Bethesda Game Studios. (2011). Skyrim.
                        [Microsoft Windows, Playstation 3, Xbox 360, Playstation 4, Xbox One],
                        Bethesda Softworks.
                    Bethesda Game Studios. (2015). Fallout IV.
                        [Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One], Bethesda Softworks.
                    BioWare. (2011-). Star Wars: The Old
                            Republic. [Microsoft Windows], Electronic Arts.
                    BioWare. (2014). Dragon Age: Inquisition.
                        [Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One],
                        Electronic Arts.
                    Blizzard Entertainment. (1998). StarCraft.
                        [macOS, Microsoft Windows, Nintendo 64], Blizzard Entertainment.
                    Blizzard Entertainment. (2002). Warcraft III.
                        [Mac OS, Microsoft Windows], Blizzard Entertainment.
                    Blizzard Entertainment. (2004-). World of
                            Warcraft. [Microsoft Windows], Blizzard Entertainment.
                    Blizzard Entertainment. (2012). Diablo III.
                        [Microsoft Windows, macOS, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation 4, Xbox
                        One], Blizzard Entertainment.
                    Blizzard North. (2000). Diablo II. [Microsoft
                        Windows, Classic Mac OS, macOS], Blizzard Entertainment. 
                    bloodrizer. (2014). Kittens Game. [Web
                        Browser].
                    Carbine Studios. (2014). Wildstar. [Microsoft
                        Windows], NCSOFT.
                    CCP Games. (2003-). EVE Online. [Microsoft
                        Windows, macOS], CCP Games.
                    Cooking Mama Ltd. (2006-2009). Cooking Mama.
                        [Nintendo DS, iOS], Taito Corporation. Series.
                    Cooking Mama Ltd. (2010). Crafting Mama.
                        [Nintendo DS], Square Enix.
                    EasyGameStation. (2007). Recettear: An Item Shop’s
                            Tale. [Microsoft Windows], Carpe Fulgur.
                    Game Freak. (1996-). Pokémon Red, Pokémon Blue, Pokémon
                            Green, Pokémon Yellow: Special Pikachu
                            Edition, Pokémon Gold, Pokémon Silver, Pokémon
                            Crystal, Pokémon Ruby, Pokémon Sapphire, Pokémon
                            FireRed, Pokémon LeafGreen, Pokémon Emerald, Pokémon
                            Diamond, Pokémon Pearl, Pokémon Platinum, Pokémon
                            HeartGold, Pokémon SoulSilver,
                            Pokémon Black, Pokémon
                            White, Pokémon Black 2, Pokémon White 2, Pokémon
                            X, Pokémon Y, Pokémon Omega Ruby, Pokémon Alpha
                            Sapphire, Pokémon Sun, Pokémon Moon. [Gameboy Color, Gameboy Advance,
                        Nintendo DS, 3DS Virtual Console], Nintendo, The Pokémon Company.
                        Series.
                    Gust. (2010). Atelier Totori. [PlayStation 3,
                        PlayStation Vita], Gust.
                    Gust, Amazing, Banpresto, Bothtech, E3 Staff, GMO Mobile, Hyde, Idea
                        Factory, Otomate, Rideon Japan, Tose. (1997-2016). Atelier. [PlayStation, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3,
                        PlayStation 4, PlayStation Network, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation Vita,
                        PlayStation TV, WonderSwan Color, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS, Nintendo
                        3DS, Dreamcast, Sega Saturn, Microsoft Windows, Android, EZ, GREE, i, iOS,
                        S!], Tecmo Koei, Gust. Series.
                    Harmonix, Pi Studios. (2007). Rock Band.
                        [Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, Wii], MTV Games, Electronic
                        Arts.
                    Hello Games. (2016). No Man’s Sky.
                        [PlayStation 4, Microsoft Windows], Hello Games.
                    Hit-Point. (2014). Neko Atsume. [iOS,
                        Android].
                    Klei Entertainment. (2013). Don’t Starve.
                        [Microsoft Windows, macOS, Linux], Klei Entertainment.
                    Konami. (2005). Lost in Blue I. [Nintendo
                        DS], Konami.
                    Level-5. (2000-2001). Dark Cloud.
                        [PlayStation 2], Sony Computer Entertainment.
                    Marvelous Entertainment. (1996-2016). Harvest
                            Moon. [Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Game Boy, Game Boy
                        Advance, Game Boy Color, Nintendo 3DS, Nintendo 64, Nintendo DS, GameCube,
                        PlayStation, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Wii], Natsume.
                        Series.
                    Matrix Software. (2007). Lost in Blue II.
                        [Nintendo DS], Konami.
                    Matrix Software. (2007). Lost in Blue III.
                        [Nintendo DS], Konami.
                    Maxis. (2008). Spore. [Microsoft Windows,
                        macOS, iOS], Electronic Arts.
                    Maxis. (2013). SimCity. [Microsoft Windows,
                        macOS], Electronic Arts, Maxis.
                    Maxis, The Sims Studio. (2010). The Sims 3.
                        [Microsoft Windows, macOS], Electronic Arts.
                    Maxis, The Sims Studio. (2014). The Sims 4.
                        [Microsoft Windows, macOS], Electronic Arts.
                    Mojang. (2011-). Minecraft. [Microsoft
                        Windows, macOS, Linux, Android, iOS, Windows Phone, Xbox 360, Xbox One,
                        PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Raspberry Pi, Universal
                        Windows Platform, Wii U, Nintendo Switch, Apple TV], Mojang, Microsoft
                        Studios, Sony Computer Entertainment.
                    Monomi Park. (2016). Slime Rancher. [Xbox
                        One, Microsoft Windows, Linux, macOS], Monomi Park.
                    Multi-Dimensional Games. (2015). CodeSpells.
                        [Windows, macOS], ThoughtSTEM.
                    Namco. (2004). Katamari Damacy. [PlayStation
                        2], Namco.
                    Nintendo. (2001-2016). Animal Crossing.
                        [Nintendo 64, iQue Player, GameCube, Nintendo DS, Wii, Nintendo 3DS, Wii U],
                        Nintendo. Series.
                    Northway Games. (2012). Incredipede.
                        [Android, iOS, Adobe Flash Player, Microsoft Windows, Linux]. Northway
                        Games.
                    OMGPop. (2015). Draw Something. [iOS,
                        Android, Windows Phone], OMGPop.
                    PopCap Games. (2009). Plants vs. Zombies.
                        [Web Browser, Microsoft Windows, macOS, iOS, Xbox Live Arcade, PlayStation
                        Network, Nintendo DS, DSiWare, Bada, Android, Windows Phone, PlayStation
                        Vita, BlackBerry Tablet OS, BlackBerry 10], PopCap Games.
                    Porpentine. (2014). With Those We Love Alive.
                        [Web Browser].
                    Rare. (2006). Viva Piñata. [Xbox 360,
                        Microsoft Windows], Microsoft Game Studios.
                    Re-Logic, Engine Software. (2011). Terraria.
                        [Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita, iOS, Android,
                        Windows Phone, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo 3DS, Wii U], 505 Games,
                        Headup Games.
                    Smilebit. (2000). Jet Set Radio. [Dreamcast,
                        Java ME, Game Boy Advance, Microsoft Windows, Playstation 3, Xbox 360,
                        Playstation Vita, iOS, Android], Sega.
                    Sonic Team. (1998). Sonic Adventure.
                        [Dreamcast, GameCube, Microsoft Windows], Sega.
                    Sonic Team. (2001). Sonic Adventure II.
                        [Dreamcast, GameCube, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Microsoft Windows],
                        Sega.
                    Sony Online Entertainment, Electronic Arts. (2003-2011). Star Wars Galaxies. [Microsoft Windows],
                        LucasArts.
                    Spiderling Studios. (2015). Besiege.
                        [Windows, macOS, Linux], Spiderling Studios.
                    Squad. (2015). Kerbal Space Program. [Linux,
                        Microsoft Windows, macOS, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Wii U], Squad.
                    Square. (2002). Kingdom Hearts. [PlayStation
                        2], Square.
                    Square Enix. (2010). Final Fantasy XIV.
                        [Microsoft Windows], Square Enix.
                    Square Enix Product Development Division 1. (2005). Kingdom Hearts II. [PlayStation 2], Square Enix.
                    Stone, K. & DaRienzo, G. (2014). Knitting
                            Simulator 2014. [Custom Hardware].
                    Xaviant. (2014). Lichdom: Battlemage.
                        [Microsoft Windows]. 
                    Zynga Dallas. (2011-2016). CastleVille.
                        [Adobe Flash], Zynga.
                
            
