Title:  Comparing Disciplinary Patterns: Exploring the Humanities
                    through the Lens of Scholarly Communication
Volume:  011
Issue:  2
Date:  22 May 2017
Abstract:  
                For the past fifteen years, scholarly communication networks such as H-Soz-Kult –
                    the German Information Service for Historians – and H-ArtHist – a specialized
                    discussion and information network for art history based in Germany with an
                    international reach – have been steadily publishing conference announcements and
                    reports. Since both services were born digitally, starting with the listserv
                    infrastructure of the Michigan based H-Net and later supplemented by
                    database-driven web sites, the archives are easily accessible by electronic
                    means. The aim of this paper is to demonstrate that the archives of scholarly
                    communication provide a suitable basis for conducting an assessment of broad
                    fields such as German historians or German art
                    history, with relatively low technical effort. For the initial analysis
                    of H-Soz-KultFirst presented at the Historical Network Research Conference
                        2014 in Ghent., editorial practices facilitated the automated
                    extraction of the speakers’ names as a key feature. But even in cases where no
                    such special markup has been applied, freely available Web services such as
                        AlchemyAPIAlchemyAPI Entity Extraction, http://www.alchemyapi.com/products/alchemylanguage/entity-extraction.
                    provide methods that can be used to achieve comparable results.Thanks to
                        Victoria H. Scott for suggesting analyzing H-ArtHist’s conference
                        announcements in similar ways.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Methods
                The starting point for the following analysis was Lev Manovich’s provocative talk
                        How to do Digital Humanities Right? presented
                    at the Digital Humanities revisited conference in Hannover in December 2013. His
                    initial proposition stated: don’t
                        start with a research question.http://lab.softwarestudies.com/2013/12/how-to-do-digital-humanities-right.html
                    Though Manovich’s program of cultural analytics makes strong use of visual
                    explorations and focuses mainly on images, the articles presented in the newly
                    founded Journal of Cultural Analytics illustrate
                    numerous applications of his concepts to text corpora ranging from literature to
                    restaurant menus .
                By exploring an extensive corpus of texts of a single genre – H-Soz-Kult has
                    published over 5,000 conference reports since 1998 – we were confident of
                    revealing relevant insights into the disciplinary culture of historians as
                    practiced in German-speaking countries over the past fifteen years.
                The initial approach was primarily technology-driven. Readily available tools for
                    Natural Language Processing (NLP) such as Carrot2 for dynamic text
                        clusteringCarrot2, open source framework for building search
                        clustering engines, http://project.carrot2.org/, MALLET for topic modeling
                         and Stanford NER for named entity extraction
                         were applied to the corpus. But the initial
                    outcome was rather inconclusive.
                As the following example screen shows, Lingo –
                    Carrot2’s clustering algorithm – is sensitive to slight term variations such as
                    the German singular and plural of Edition. Other clusters were labeled
                    with stop words (Seit,
                    Denen,
                    Verschiedene) that carry little
                    information about the actual content within this corresponding set of
                    documents.
                
                    Carrot2’s dynamic clustering of Conference Reports matching the query
                            digital?
                    
                
                Similar effects could be observed in the list of representative terms for a set
                    of 100 topics generated from the conference reports by an initial run of MALLET:
                    While some of them are immediately recognizable (juden
                            jüdischen jüdische jüdischer antisemitismus israel jewish geschichte
                            jerusalem ghetto), others again looked like fairly random
                    aggregates of stop words (so sondern diese etwa nur
                            dabei gerade damit hat deren).
                These initial difficulties shouldn’t be taken as a general argument against the
                    two clustering methods: As a recent study of scholarly blogging platforms has
                        shown, it should be possible to improve the
                    results by using optimized stop word lists both for most and least frequent
                    terms in the corpus. In addition, word stemming or morphological analysis and
                    moving to a bilingual topic model (of the 3,537 conference reports since 2008,
                    slightly less than 3,000 are in German, the rest are in English) might avoid
                    enough of the irritations just described and thus make the clusters readable
                        .
                Stanford NER provides a classifier explicitly trained on large German language
                    sets . When applied to our corpus, both precision
                    and recall for person names were far from sufficient. Thanks to a lucky
                    editorial decision, it was still possible to get the speakers name extracted
                    from the H-Soz-Kult conference reports by much simpler technical means: From
                    2008 on, the names of all conference speakers have been emphasized in all
                    upper-case letters (e.g. HANS BLOMME). By using a relatively simple regular
                    expression matching at least two consecutive words in all caps, an extensive
                    list of more than 30,000 speakers lecturing at over 3,500 conferences could be
                    compiled.

                
                    Bipartite network between speakers and conferences. The one-mode
                        projection to speaker nodes leads to (undirected) edges between Speaker A
                        and Speaker B (by common appearance at Conference 1) as well as Speaker A
                        and Speaker C (through Conference 2).
                    
                

                This list of persons grouped by conferences then formed the basis for a bipartite
                    network where each appearance as a speaker defines an edge between a conference
                    and a person. The one-mode projection to the speaker nodes reveals
                        co-speaker relations which are structurally similar to
                    co-authorship analysis for scientific papers.
                Web-services such as genderize.ioGenderizo.io, Determine the gender of a
                        first name, https://genderize.io/ trying to determine the gender of a
                    person based on his or her given name were initially integrated into the
                    extraction pipeline to improve the precision of our regular expression based
                    extraction algorithm: Matches without a first name recognized by this service
                    were flagged for manual review and thus reduced the number of mistakenly
                    extracted person entities. After looking at the gender distribution as one moves
                    from less to more active speakers in our set, we gained valuable insights into
                    the still existing glass ceilings in the humanities.
                Visualizing the speakers’ network in GephiGephi: The Open Graph Viz
                        Platform, https://gephi.org/
                    showed some remarkable disciplinary patterns in the field of history, as for
                    example the close-knit groups of early modern and medieval history opposed to
                    the rather frayed borders of contemporary or cultural history.
            

                The Datasets
                As mentioned above, the initial dataset consisted of 3,537 conference reports as
                    listed on the website of H-Soz-Kult from January 2008 until summer
                        2014.See http://www.hsozkult.de/conferencereport/page On average,
                    we find slightly more than 40 reports per month with a strong yearly cycle for
                    the conference dates: There is a low due to summer vacation in August, followed
                    by a three months peak conference season after the summer break and a lower but
                    slightly wider peak in spring. These peaks coincide with the preference of
                    putting conferences into the semester breaks of the German academic calendar,
                    excluding the month of August which overlaps with school holidays.

                
                    Number of Conferences reported on H-Soz-Kult by Month (January 2008 until
                        June 2014)
                    
                

                The website archive for the second dataset, H-ArtHist’s conference announcements,
                    starts a couple years later towards the end of 2010. The monthly average of
                    roughly 39 conferences per month is slightly lower compared to the number of
                    reports on H-Soz-Kult but in a similar range.

                
                    Number of Conferences announced on H-ArtHist by Month (January
                        2011-December 2015)
                    
                


                The yearly conference cycle shows distinct peaks in November and June of every
                    year and doesn’t follow the German academic calendar as closely. This confirms
                    the more international focus of H-ArtHist that we observe among both the
                    countries of subscribers and conference locations:

                
                    Conference Announcements and Subscribers by Country on H-ArtHist
                    
                

                Germany dominates, but we observe a significant share of subscribers and
                    conferences held throughout Western Europe, especially the UK. For the US, we
                    note a striking difference: While more than fifteen percent of the subscribers
                    are based in that country, only 8% of the conferences announced are held in the
                    US. Two factors may account for this difference: many of the influential art
                    history departments belong to private universities, and there is simply no
                    tradition of widely circulating information about conferences. In addition,
                    conferences as announced on H-ArtHist are closely tied to a third-party driven
                    mode of research less common in the humanities in North America. For France and
                    Italy, we observe the opposite relation: They show more prominently among
                    conference locations than would be expected from the subscribers’ share. This is
                    mainly due to the three independent German art history institutes abroad with an
                    active and actively announced conference schedule, the Kunsthistorisches
                    Institut in Florence, Bibliotheca Hertziana in Rome, and the Deutsches Forum für
                    Kunstgeschichte in Paris.
            

                Preparing the Dataset: Extracting Person Entities
                The essential step for building a bipartite network between the conference
                    reports or announcements and the respective speakers was the extraction of the
                    person entities from the unstructured texts. In the first case, the H-Soz-Kult
                    conference reports, a suitable regular expression led to a reasonable set of
                            candidates.\b(\p{Lu}[\p{Lu}\x{00df}-\']+\s[\p{Lu}\x{00df}-\'\s.]+[\p{Lu}\x{00df}])s?\b
                        \p{Lu}, short for \p{Uppercase_Letter}; a
                        Unicode upper case \x{00df}: German ß (has no upper-case
                        variant) optional lower case at the end for genitive (HANS MEIERs Vortrag).
                    
                A significant number of near duplicates resulted from variations of upper and
                    lower case, umlauts, accents and hyphens, illustrated by a single person in our
                    corpus alternatively spelled as Xosé Manoel Núñez, Xosé-Manoel Núñez and
                    Xose-Manoel Nunez. Our solution was to build a name slug in
                    lower caps without any accents and just one form of hyphen for any whitespace or
                    hyphen. In the example above, all three cases then resolve to the single key
                        xose-manoel-nunez. Another source of slight variations, the
                    trailing S in German genitive (e.g. ALEXANDER BADENOCHS (Utrecht)
                        Vortrag), was addressed by the editorial decision to set the trailing
                    s to lower case if it isn’t part of the proper noun (ALEXANDER BADENOCHs
                        (Utrecht) Vortrag).
                We still found numerous misspelled names in the original reports: Between one and
                    two percent of the names contained errors besides variations in accents and
                    punctuation. Since the median of speakers per report is – as will be detailed
                    below – a bit above 10, more than 400 reports had to be manually adjusted. Some
                    of the misspellings could easily be found by checking against a list of known
                    first names (e.g. Urlike instead Ulrike). Harder to catch were variations among
                    given names with multiple correct spellings such as Matthias and Mathias. Even
                    for a human, it was sometimes tricky to decide if such variants (e.g. Höppner,
                    Annika vs. Höppner, Anika) needed to be adjusted towards a single person or
                    should remain as is since these are actually two different individuals both
                    correctly spelled.
                Both our regular expression as well as more advanced NER algorithms come up with
                    false positives. One could be tempted to start building a classifier that would
                    be trained to distinguish human names from company or room names like BMW AG or
                        Salle Vasari. This turns out to be very hard for certain edge cases,
                    such as LINDE AG (the company) compared to LINDE NG (a person that actually has
                    a Facebook profile).Almost any general assumption about person’s name will
                        break down, especially as one leaves the Western world, http://www.kalzumeus.com/2010/06/17/falsehoods-programmers-believe-about-names/
                    A more realistic example from our dataset shows Brage Bei Der Wieden as a
                    person’s actual name, while Berge An Der Via Regia
                    – mountains along the Via Regia – is the title of a talk appearing in the
                    conference overview appended to the report. Instead of investing additional
                    technical effort into a programmatic solution, a cursory overlook of the full
                    list of all person entities with manual removal of false positives was used to
                    take care of these cases.
                Even after this manual correction step, there are known mistakes in the full list
                    of speakers. Since the effort to manually research the following systematic
                    errors was deemed too high, no attempts were made to unify the following
                    variations: 
                        Changing names over lifetime (Jeannette Madarasz vs. Jeannette
                            Madarasz-Lebenhagen)
                        different transcriptions of Cyrillic names into German / English (ow
                            vs. ov)
                        inconsistent usage of initials / multiple names 
                                Patel, Kiran Klaus vs. Patel, Kiran
                                Miller, Michael vs. Miller, Michael B.
                            
                        
                    
                
                In addition, due to changing affiliations and broad fields of interest that pose
                    a serious obstacle to a systematic disambiguation even by human investigators,
                    we did not try to resolve persons with the same exact name. So ANDREAS SCHNEIDER
                    (Berlin) and ANDREAS SCHNEIDER (Meiningen) as well as HARALD MÜLLER (medieval
                    history) vs. HARALD MÜLLER (law) show up as a single person entity in our
                    dataset. From our experience with the H-ArtHist speakers’ list where
                    GND-identifiers were manually researched for the 1,000 speakers with most
                    conference appearances, we can be reasonably sure that namesakes are a
                    relatively rare phenomenon in a corpus with predominantly Western names
                    affecting at most half a percent of the persons.
                After all these steps, we were left with 30,502 speakers among H-Soz-Kult’s 3,537
                    conference reports. In the case of H-ArtHist, the somewhat messier list resulted
                    in 26,023 persons extracted from 2,459 conference announcements.
                While the editorial convention in the H-Soz-Kult reports differentiates speakers
                    (e.g. MORITZ FÖLLMER) from persons being spoken about (e.g. Walter Benjamin),
                    this is not the case for H-ArtHist’s conference announcements. Therefore, key
                    figures in the historiography of the arts such as Giorgio Vasari, Walter
                    Benjamin and Aby Warburg showed up prominently among the most active persons and
                    have to be manually flagged as non-speaker entities. H-Soz-Kult also
                    differentiates between persons acting as speakers and those welcoming the
                    attendants or taking part in the discussion. Clearly separating these roles can
                    be difficult even for a human reporter: when does a welcome note turn into an
                    introduction; what is the difference of a respondent’s statement compared to a
                    far-reaching question during the discussion?
                In this light, we should expect the number of speakers in conference reports for
                    H-Soz-Kult to be significantly lower than the average number of persons found in
                    H-ArtHist’s conference announcements. The actual difference is relatively low
                    (H-Soz-Kult: median of 13, average: 8.62, H-ArtHist: median 14, average: 10.8).
                    This can partially explained by the observation that there are but a limited
                    number of reports on small conferences with just a few speakers (40 reports with
                    1 to 3 speakers compared to 101 announcements with the same person count).
            

                Analyzing the dataset: Estimating the size of a discipline
                Sorting the speakers’ list by the highest number of conference appearances
                    provided a simple means for identifying the core group of very active (art)
                    historians.
                It has been shown that preferential attachment – well known conference speakers
                    have a higher chance of being invited to the next conference – can lead to power
                    law distributions. Both for H-Soz-Kult and H-ArtHist, we can observe such a
                    pattern when graphing the distribution of the number of speakers in our list by
                    the number of conference appearances on a double logarithmic scale:

                
                    Speakers' Distribution by Number of Appearances on H-Soz-Kult (Double
                        Logarithmic)
                    
                

                In the case of H-Soz-Kult, there are more than 22,000 persons appearing in just a
                    single report. Around 4,300 appear in two reports, 1,650 in three reports. On
                    the very opposite, we will find but 23 people appearing twenty times or more. To
                    the very right of this distribution, we find a single person who presented at 37
                    conferences within less than seven years. Very prominent among this highly
                    active group are the leaders of non-university research institutes. If we focus
                    on the group of the most active university professors, we see that younger
                    researchers clearly dominate over eminent scholars towards the end of their
                    academic career.
                Twenty-two thousand persons appearing at just one conference over more than six
                    years seems to be an incredibly high figure. Picking out random samples, it
                    turns out to be a very diverse set ranging from graduate students presenting
                    their topic for the first time, visiting scholars from abroad, scholars from
                    neighboring disciplines as well as politicians and other well known but rather
                    rare speakers in an academic setting. More important: The total number of 30,000
                    people is in a similar range as the total number of subscriptions to H-Soz-Kult
                    which is currently around 25,000 people. Due to the wide variety of professional
                    backgrounds just mentioned, we wouldn’t expect a full overlap. But we can safely
                    conjecture that of the roughly 8,000 people appearing twice or more, a
                    significant amount will also turn out to be subscribers to the mailing list.
                    This group forms a core of research oriented historians in
                    the German speaking countries.
                DE-Statis, the Federal Statistical Office, counts slightly more than 6,000 full-
                    or part-time employees at German Universities in 2013; accounting for a
                    comparable per capita share in Austria and the German speaking part of
                    Switzerland, we’d expect a bit more than 7,000 full- or part-time employees in
                    history in the German speaking academy .
                For H-ArtHist, the number of entities extracted from the announcements amounts to
                    slightly more than 26,000 persons with roughly 21,000 appearing just once. Due
                    to the less accurate name extraction process and no manual filtering so far, we
                    should take this number with a pinch of salt. But if we again assume the
                    remaining 5,000 people that appear more than once to represent the academic core
                    of art history; assume that half of them are active in the German speaking
                    academy (based on the country distribution of the announcements), we can
                    estimate that there are about 2,500 academic art historians, a count again not
                    too far from the employment figures reported by DE-Statis.For art history,
                        DE-Statis counts 1,700 full- or part-time employees, so roughly 2,000 in the
                        German speaking countries.
            

                Analyzing the dataset: The Gender of the Discipline
                As mentioned above, checking the first word of extracted person entities against
                    a given set of well known given names was initially introduced to identify typos
                    and false positives. Since genderize.io provided a suitable API for this job, we
                    ended up with an automated assignment of female or male gender for the wide
                    majority of persons extracted from our datasets.
                Gender inequality in the academia has been extensively studied for the past fifty
                        years.Linda Nochlin’s groundbreaking 1971 article Why have there been not great women artists contains many
                        answers to the related questions of Why have there been no great women
                            [art] historians? For an overview of recent studies focusing on
                        teaching and research in the US see 
                    Lyndal Roper, in her keynote at the 2014 German Historikertag in Göttingen
                    stated that 45% of academic staff in history departments in Germany is
                            female.. For an up-to-date history of
                        women in West German history departments, see  When one looks at the number of professors, this number drops to
                        29%.2,812 of 6,137 (45%) employees and 225 of the 753 (29%) professors
                        in history in Germany are female according to DE-Statis, Personal an
                        Hochschulen 2013.

                
                    Relation between Female and Male Speakers by Number of Conference Reports
                        on H-Soz-Kult
                    
                



                If we look at the figures from our reports, we find a Leaky
                        Pipe between occasional and regular conference speakers similar
                    to the one between University employment and professorship. Overall, slightly
                    less than 40% of the speakers are female, not too far below the 45% figure of
                    female academic staff. If we focus on the more active set of speakers appearing
                    at five or more conferences, the female percentage drops to 27% (309 female vs.
                    808 male). If we focus solely on the most prominent speakers with 10 or more
                    talks, this number further decreases to 25%. To put this percentage into
                    perspective, note that we find an average of around 50 habilitations in history
                    in Germany per year for the past five years, roughly a third (16.6) by women.
                    The reasons for this enduring gender gap in German history departments have been
                    concisely described by Barbara Stollberg-Rillinger – one of the only two women
                    appearing in our otherwise all-male group of speakers with 20 or more
                    appearances – in a panel discussion celebrating thirty years of the DFG’s
                    Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Prize: The sudden
                        drop [among women] happens in the postdoc phase, when family planning is
                        pending, but the academic system only offers uncertain perspectives. Female
                        academics that have to muddle through temporary and poorly paid third-party
                        projects until the age of 40 are often forced to choose between a child and
                        a career.Quoted in NN. 01.04.2015. Im Jahr des Mannes. Hat der
                        Leibniz-Preis ein Frauenproblem? Frankfurter Allgemeine
                            Zeitung, N4.
                Art history, maybe not that unexpectedly, shows a significantly smaller gender
                    gap: The distribution among all persons mentioned in our announcements is 56%
                    (male) to 44% (female). If we only take into consideration the people being
                    mentioned in five or more announcements, the woman’s percentage drops slightly
                    to 40%, for 10 or more announcements to 35%. This is roughly comparable to the
                    share of women’s habilitation in German art history.4 out of 12
                        habilitations in art history in Germany in 2013, or 60 out of 124 if we take
                        the more reliable period between 2004 and 2013, DE-Statis, Personal an
                        Hochschulen 2013. What our dataset fails to convey is the fact that
                    the relatively even picture looks very distorted once we consider the major loss
                    in the field of art history earlier on the career track: Around 85% of all
                    degrees at the BA and MA level in art history in Germany are completed by female
                    students, and still more than three quarters of all PhDs are successfully
                    defended by women.1,261 out of 1,463 Bachelor-degrees, 535 out of 639 MAs
                        and 126 out of 166 PhDs were finished by woman in 2013. See DE-Statis. 2014.
                            Prüfungen an Hochschulen 2013. https://www.destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/Thematisch/BildungForschungKultur/Hochschulen/PruefungenHochschulen2110420137004.pdf?__blob=publicationFile
                    But we find significantly fewer women moving from advanced education to advanced
                    research compared to male graduates in the field, both measured by conference
                    appearances as well as by employment figures.1,530 of 2,755 (56%)
                        employees and 167 of the 405 (41%) professors in art history are female
                        according to DE-Statis, Personal an Hochschulen 2013.


                
                    Relation between Female and Male Speakers by Number of Conference
                        Announcements on H-ArtHist
                    
                



            

                Analyzing the dataset: From Text to Social Networks
                After these rather simple but nevertheless insightful counts of basic properties,
                    we finally move over to the more complex relations among persons studied through
                    the network of co-speaker relations. Since this network is
                    defined by drawing a tie between any two persons speaking at the same
                    conference, we need to ask if it is reasonable to assume that this tie implies
                    some kind of social relation between the two?For a much more in depth
                        discussion of these aspects, see  As
                    discussed before, a typical conference consists of a bit more than ten speakers.
                    So while we can never be sure that a social interaction between all of the
                    around 80 possible pairings within such a group actually took place, the
                    assumption, that there is at least a strong interaction potential as part of the
                    discussions, during the breaks in-between sessions, as well as during a possible
                    conference dinner, seems valid. And even in cases where no such interaction took
                    place, we can still assume some sort of shared research interest since most
                    conferences are organized around a unifying theme.
                If we compare our tie to those commonly studied in bibliometrics, co-speakership
                    is certainly weaker than co-authorship, a relation we still only very rarely
                    observe in the humanities. On the other hand, our tie seems quite a bit stronger
                    than citations among different authors; a primarily intellectual connection
                    among them, which – at least in larger disciplines – only rarely implies a real
                    world social interaction.For details concerning these two types of
                        networks, see .
                Since speakers that only appear once don’t add any additional connections between
                    otherwise unrelated speakers, we started with the reduced network including only
                    persons appearing at two or more conferences. In the case of H-Soz-Kult, we get
                    a graph with 8,361 speaker nodes connected by more than 130,000 edges. For
                    H-ArtHist, the corresponding graph consists of 5,165 person nodes and a bit less
                    than 65,000 edges.

                
                    Complete graph for H-Soz-Kult colored by modularity classes, label sizes
                        by Eigenvector centrality
                    
                

                Though the full pictures shows the typical hair-ball one would expect, coloring
                    the graph by modularity classes, Gephi’s community detection
                        algorithmGephi: The Open Graph Viz Platform, http://gephi.github.io/. The
                        community detection is based on the algorithm outlined in , shows a surprising feature for the case
                    of German historians: We find a recognizable tightly knit group – in our case in
                    green on the upper left – which can be easily identified as historians of the
                    early modern period. On top of them (in this graph in blue), we find medieval
                    history. Towards the bottom, we find researchers related to contemporary
                    history, colored in the purplish blue. The multiplicity of historical research
                    still organized primarily along epochs, is the one feature that stands out from
                    a distance in this graph.
                No such division could be observed in the corresponding Gephi-graph for art
                    history. We find a few well known scholars in the center of the graph, but their
                    neighborhood is much less defined by specific periods or topics than by the
                    geographical location of the research institute.

                
                    Complete graph for H-ArtHist colored by modularity classes, label sizes by
                        Eigenvector centrality
                    
                


                The more unitary structure of the narrower field of art history is probably due
                    to the smaller sized institutes and departments resulting in wider teaching
                    duties and a lower degree of specialization.
                Of the commonly studied centrality measures for one-mode networks, Degree
                    distribution and Betweenness centrality directly correlate with the total number
                    of conference appearances of a person in our datasets and therefore add no
                    additional insights to our analysis.A thorough introduction to bi- and
                        multimodal networks is given in Scott Weingart’s Networks Demystified Series part 9: Bimodal networks, http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/?p=41158. He points out that Gephi,
                        our preferred tool for Social Network Analysis, is not really suited to
                        calculate centrality measures for such networks, pointing to Tore Opsal’s
                        detailed overview of Clustering in two-mode Networks, http://toreopsahl.com/tnet/two-mode-networks/clustering/
                    The one measure that led to interesting insights is the so called Eigenvector
                    centrality, a measure assessing how well
                        connected an individual is to the parts of the network with the greatest
                        connectivity.
                Going back to the full network of H-Soz-Kult, one sees that the early modern
                    period shows a group of highly connected people (marked by the size of the
                    labels). This corresponds to the gateway function between the medieval and
                    modern periods as well as the tight connections among themselves. So it is
                    absolutely not surprising that the only working group of the German Historian’s
                    association organized around a specific period is the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Frühe Neuzeit. The opposite phenomenon can be
                    observed among scholars from the younger field of Transnational History and the
                    recently emerging field of Visual History. The Eigenvector
                    centralities of the most prominent actors from these fields are significantly
                    lower than those of comparable speakers from more established fields showing a
                    similar number of conference appearances. While a high centrality core
                    comparable to the early modern period is lacking in the case of art history, we
                    find similar patterns for the group of people with a low centrality despite of
                    frequent appearances: Australian Aboriginal Art or the Materiality of Magic are
                    clearly topics far off the beaten paths in the discipline.
                Another fact worth investigating is the number of
                        conference-buddies. Is it common to have two speakers
                    that have lectured together at one or more conferences before? A look at the
                    graph from the H-Soz-Kult set below shows, that edge weight is a rapidly
                    decreasing distribution: In average, just two speakers at a conference have
                    lectured together before or will do this on a follow-up conference in our set.
                    Only six couples share six, and a single pair belonging to
                    the same University department appeared at eight conferences together. Enduring
                    relations seem to be a rare exception rather than the norm.

                
                    Number of shared Conference Appearances on H-Soz-Kult (Logarithmic
                        Scale)
                    
                


                This relative rareness of co-appearances leads to a very simple but amazingly
                    effective clustering algorithm for socially similar
                    conferences: If two conferences share at least two speakers, there is a high
                    chance of thematic overlap between these events. Contrary to content-based
                    similarity measures, this metric is independent of the languages of the report:
                        Atom global: Kulturen und Krisen im Vergleich
                    is close both to the English language report on Accidental
                        Armageddons: The Nuclear Crisis and the Culture of the Second Cold War,
                        1975-1989 as well as the German report on In
                        Bewegung. Neue Geschichten der Umweltbewegungen.
            

                Conclusions
                Due to the rise of electronic publications and communications (e-mail, Twitter),
                    large scale social network analysis will become more and more feasible,
                    especially in politics, contemporary history as well as in science studies. As
                    the case of H-ArtHist has shown, readily available NER-services such as
                    AlchemyAPI are working reasonably well to get roughly comparable results on
                    corpora where implicit (H-Soz-Kult) or explicit (well structured TEI-editions)
                    markup of persons is missing.
                The data we’ve been analyzing covers the past six (H-Soz-Kult) and five
                    (H-ArtHist) years respectively. In the humanities, this corresponds to a
                    relatively brief period roughly comparable to the time used for writing a PhD or
                    a habilitation thesis. Therefore we cannot yet trace personal careers all the
                    way from the first conference appearance – usually at the beginning of a PhD –
                    all the way up to the appointment as a professor generally more than a decade
                    later. Hopefully, both services continue their work in order to repeat this
                    analysis in a few years with a special focus on newly appointed faculty. Such an
                    analysis might identify successful personal and thematic networks similar to the
                        Arbeitskreis Historische Frauen- und
                        Geschlechterforschung recently studied by Angelika Schaser Of the 18 co-founders of this network in 1990
                        at the PhD level at that time, thirteen are now tenured
                    professors..
                While citation indices and impact factors are widely accepted in many branches of
                    science, social sciences and economics, we are well aware of the fact that
                    attempts to quantify and measure institutional or personal research activity
                    have been strongly opposed by professional organizations in the humanities,
                    especially in Germany.See for example .
                    This dislike can at least partially be attributed to the incomplete measures of
                    currently available indices: Frank Bösch, the most prominent German historian in
                    our dataset, is listed with only 13 publications and 12 citations in Thomson
                    Reuter’s Web of Science. The resulting h-index of only 2 would probably be too
                    low to get tenure recommendation in most disciplines that value these measures.
                    Once we perform a similar search through Google Scholar which accounts for
                    monographic citations as well, both the number of publications and the h-index
                    rise by a magnitude to around 150 papers and an h-index of 17. As this single
                    example shows, an adequate corpus is crucial for any serious attempt to quantify
                    academic performance.
                But even where a suitable corpus is available, professional curiosity eager to
                    reveal fine grained images by assembling pieces of public data must not forget
                    the right of individuals not to be spied upon.This ethical tension has
                        been investigated by  For this reason, we
                    are still not sure if the two datasets discussed in this paper should be treated
                    as Open Data, free for anyone interested to investigate or if the preferred mode
                    of access should limit it to researchers agreeing to value the privacy of all
                    persons involved.
            
