Title:  Finding Narratives in
               News Flows: The Temporal Dimension of News Stories
Volume:  015
Issue:  4
Date:  11 January 2022
Abstract:  
            
            Previous studies indicate that the capacity of media to influence the salience of
               issues in the public realm is strongly dependent on specific attributes that
               characterize these issues. In this work, we investigate two internal aspects of issue
               types related to the attribute of duration. First, we address whether news stories
               belonging to different issue types can be identified and represented using a set of
               quantifiable temporal dimensions (i.e. lifespan, intensity, and burstiness). Second,
               we conduct a qualitative analysis to investigate whether news stories of different
               issue types have different narrative patterns, regardless of their specific topic. We
               use a corpus of 50,385 political news articles in Spanish from 2018 as a case study,
               and propose a novel system to aggregate the articles into stories. Our results show
               that stories belonging to different issue types do have distinguishing behaviours,
               especially along the intensity dimension. At the same time, the qualitative analysis
               indicates a tendency to associate narrative patterns to issue types. This analysis
               shows the potential of using news stories as research units to study framing
               strategies. 
         
Full Body Text: 

            INTRODUCTION
            News stories shape the public perception of reality. Agenda-setting theory suggests
               that readers not only get informed through news media but also get to grasp the
               salience of a specific issue on the basis of the amount of information that is
               published about it   .
               Whereas mass media could function as gatekeepers that determined which
               issues became news, and thus public , this is more
               complicated in the current online decentralized information ecology. 
            The volume of journalistic articles published by print media has been increasing
               steadily since the emergence of the World Wide Web .
               The transition from paper to the digital format has removed the
               barrier of space limits allowing online media to publish a virtually unlimited amount
               of documents. News organizations compete with each other but also with other agents
               about the attention of news users. In this attention economy the speed of the news
               cycle has tremendously risen. Studying how news circulates in the information ecology
               and the dynamics of how broader news stories are constructed and put on the public
               agenda is therefore increasingly important . At the same time, this
               limitless space can be used by digital media to silence some topics and emphasize
               others  . In the age of
               digital news, the frequent publication of articles about a story has become a source
               of power in digital reporting. Thus, it becomes important to regard the temporality
               of news and the timing that newspapers use to inform about a story. 
            A relevant terminological distinction is the difference between a news article and a
               news story. A news article is a unitary mention of a potentially larger sequence of
               events. A news story is a unitary sequence of events that can be reconstructed by
               aggregating multiple unitary mentions (i.e. news articles). For instance, a news
               article on the arrest of a suspect (i.e., a unitary mention) can be embedded as a
               component in a news story of a specific crime. Focusing on news stories allows us to
               understand how news organizations produce meaning by making sense of various news
               events and interpreting them as parts of larger societal developments and
               discussions. 
            The lifespan of digital news articles, i.e. unitary mentions, has been previously
               investigated by observing how long a specific news article remains in a salient
               position (e.g. the front page)   .
               However, in the digital realm, news stories have gained
               more prominence, as articles remain accessible and are connected to each other
               . This new environment points at the need for aggregation
               strategies that facilitate the study of news reporting .
               As Bødker and Brügger (2018) observe, digital newspapers have switched from an
               archival logic to constructing stories based on networks of links. Hereby, they put
               the focus on the story as an organizing principle, rather than on the journalistic
               filtering of the front page. Following Bødker and Brügger (2018), we consider stories
               as our minimal units of analysis (cf. ).
            Focusing on stories rather than on news articles enables us to investigate the
               temporal dimensions of newspapers' online reporting. We build on Soroka (2002), who
               developed a typology that focuses on the attributes of the reported issue when
               evaluating the effects of agenda-setting. This framework argues that the capacity of
               media to influence the salience of a particular issue depends on its attributes,
               namely: (1) obtrusiveness; (2) abstractness; (3) dramatism; and (4) duration. Using
               the first three attributes (i.e. obtrusiveness; abstractness; and dramatism) Soroka
               develops a three-fold issue-typology that distinguishes between sensational,
               governmental and prominent issues. Duration is not fully included in his framework,
               conceivably, because issues on their own do not have an attribute of duration. Issues
               need to be identified as stories in order to have a temporal dimension. In this
               article, we investigate how duration contributes to agenda-setting through three
               quantitative dimensions, namely: (1) lifespan (number of consecutive days that
               articles keep being published), (2) intensity (amount of articles per day), and (3)
               burstiness (speed of increase/decrease of the number of articles). Our goal is to
               examine whether the three types of news issues defined by Soroka can be
               differentiated along these quantitative temporal dimensions.
            We design a methodology that extracts all the salient stories in digital newspapers
               over a fixed period of time. Our approach uses k-means clustering on the set of
               articles of each relevant time span of the target period. It then links the clusters
               through time by looking at the cosine similarities of their content. The stories are
               later manually assigned to one of the three types: sensational, governmental or
               prominent, according to a specific decision tree (see Fig. 4). We have used the data
               of four Spanish newspapers during the entire period of 2018, scraped from their
               archives on the section about politics, and used weeks as relevant time spans to
               aggregate single news articles. What we present here is a case study on journalism,
               while the proposed methodology can be applied to other dimensions of variations or
               types of text. For instance, recent initiatives on digitization and analysis of
               historical newspapers (e.g., NewsEye,
               Impresso) could use our methodology to 
               explore the historical evolution of issue types. On the other hand, its application
               (with minor changes) to literary texts can support computational textual studies in
               identifying coherent sequences of events and thus contribute to the advancements in
               the area of computational narratology. 
            The aggregation method we propose works as a proxy to investigate and visualize the
               eventual narrative patterns of issue types. Following narratology frameworks 
               , we adopt the notion of narrative patterns as fixed, recurring
               global structures that yield coherence to the stories configuring the arrangements of
               the events from the beginning to the end.
            This paper makes three main contributions: (1) it tests a semi-automated approach to
               aggregate mentions, i.e. news articles, into sequences of events, i.e. stories; (2)
               it empirically validates Soroka's framework of issue types; (3) it provides a
               qualitative analysis of the narrative patterns in the different types of stories,
               focusing on the timings and content of each part of the plot. This renders the
               interconnectedness of news stories visible, and shows the temporal structure of
               various types of stories and how this impacts meaning-making. Furthermore, the
               identification of narrative patterns can support the investigation of variations in
               writing styles of the plot of a news story at different moments in time.
            In the upcoming section, we introduce Soroka’s theoretical framework and the
               quantitative measures we are going to use for this work (Section 2). We then discuss
               previous approaches to story extraction and present our methodology and data, as well
               as the evaluation of the methodology (Section 3). We then present the quantitative
               results (Section 4) and our qualitative analysis on narrative patterns (Section 5).
               Finally, we illustrate our conclusions and future directions (Section 6). 
         

            EMPIRICAL APPROACH TO SOROKA'S ISSUE-TYPOLOGY
            The concept of agenda-setting was first used in 1922 by Walter
               Lippmann. However, it was developed into a formal theory by Maxwell McCombs and
               Donald Shaw in 1972. They described agenda-setting as the ability of news media to
               influence the relative importance of topics on the public agenda. Their research on
               the US presidential campaign of 1968 showed that voters tend to share the media’s
               perception of what is important . 
            Later work suggests that the impact news media have on certain issues varies
               depending on the attributes of these issues  
                . Relying on this literature, Soroka
               (2002) identifies four main attributes that can make the media's influence differ: 
            
               Obtrusiveness refers to the direct experience that individuals on a large scale
                  have with an issue. It has been argued that the less direct experience citizens
                  have with an issue, the more they have to rely on the media for information and
                  interpretation. 
               Abstractness opposes concreteness, suggesting that the potential for media
                  effects is diminished when an issue is abstract, since it is more difficult for
                  the audience to visualize and relate to. 
               Dramatism refers to the existence of a dramatic event playing a significant
                  role in the issue becoming news.
               Duration represents the time a certain issue has been in the news. Some
                  theories suggest that the longer an issue stays in the media, the lower the
                  chances of media having an influence on the public debate, because people tend to
                  have made up their minds or get bored of the issue  .
               
            
            Soroka proposes to combine the attributes of obtrusiveness, abstractness and
               dramatism to study the media’s agenda-setting capacity. The three types of issues he
               defines using these attributes are (1) sensational, (2) governmental, and (3)
               prominent issues. 
            Sensational issues have little observable impact on the majority of the population
               (i.e. unobtrusive). They are concrete and, very often, they are the result of a
               dramatic event that attracted media’s attention. They are mostly put on the public
               agenda by media coverage. A murder or a corruption case are examples of such
               issues.
            Governmental issues are perceived as unobtrusive (although they might have a relevant
               long term impact). They are usually led by political actors, such as political
               institutions and policy-makers. They are mostly abstract issues that are difficult to
               comprehend without expertise. They rarely offer any dramatic component. Public debt
               or the national budget are examples of these issues.
            Prominent issues affect a significant amount of people directly; they are obtrusive
               and concrete. These kinds of issues become news as a result of real-world
               experiences, and their outcome can result in a perceivable change for many people.
               The rise of salaries or pensions are examples of these issues. 
            Soroka’s typology puts great emphasis on who or what puts news on the public agenda
               in the first place. In short, sensational issues are usually put on the public agenda
               by the media, governmental issues are led by political actors, and prominent issues
               by real-world conditions. 
            Soroka (2002) describes the possible influence of the attribute duration, however, he
               does not use it in the definition of his typology. In this contribution, we
               investigate if the attribute of duration is also a distinctive feature between these
               three types of news stories. We portray duration through three quantitative
               dimensions: 
            
               Lifespan is defined as the number of days in which articles about a news story
                  keep being published.
               Intensity corresponds to the number of articles published about a news story in
                  one day.
               Burstiness indicates the speed with which stories go from incipient to the
                  climax. It is measured with the Fano Factor, a ratio between the variance and the
                  mean of counts.
            
            Following Downs (1972), Zucker (2017) and Soroka (2002), we expect sensational issues
               to be put on the public agenda by the media. Consequently, we expect this type of
               stories to have a short lifespan, a high intensity and a high burstiness. By
               comparison, we expect prominent and governmental issues to have a longer lifespan and
               a lower intensity. In the following section, we introduce a semi-automated
               methodology for the empirical validation of these hypotheses.
         

            AGGREGATION OF NEWS STORIES AND ISSUE TYPES IDENTIFICATION 
            In this section, we describe the previous approaches to automated systems for news
               stories extraction (Subsection A); we then present our semi-automatic method to
               identify news stories (Subsection B), the dataset (Subsection C), the guidelines for
               the manual classification (Subsection D), and the evaluation of the results
               (Subsection E). 
            
               Previous approaches to automated systems for news stories extraction
               Identifying news stories within a large corpus of news texts is not a trivial
                  task. An ideal automatic system should be able to identify the linguistic mentions
                  of the reported events and of the associated actors in documents published at a
                  time t, and then connect them to other mentions in other
                  documents published at a later time, t+1, through a
                  cross-document coreference relation . Due
                  to the complexity of the task and the low performance of such automatic systems
                  , previous work has mainly employed topic detection and
                  tracking techniques through the use of clustering. Clustering is an unsupervised
                  machine learning technique that automatically organizes a collection of objects
                  into smaller coherent groups. The end goal is to have clusters whose elements are
                  as similar as possible between them (intra-cluster similarity) and as dissimilar
                  as possible from the elements in the other clusters (inter-cluster similarity).
                  This implies that we cannot determine a priori which criteria are going to define
                  the different clusters. 
               Clustering has been mainly employed to divide a set of news according to their
                  topic (e.g. politics, sports, etc.) . However,
                  the use of clustering to identify news stories is very challenging. Some
                  approaches have tried to improve the performance of this task by incorporating
                  properties of news stories, such as timing features 
                   , named
                  entities  and burstiness . In
                  our case, timing and burstiness are measures we are trying to obtain from our
                  system and, consequently, they cannot be part of the design. Named entities have
                  also limited value, since the actors or places appearing in different news stories
                  can be common between stories. 
               Later approaches have used Latent Dirichlet Allocation models to deal with news
                  streams   .
                  These techniques, however, focus on
                  the extraction of topics rather than stories. 
               Another approach is timeline generation: automatically generated chronological
                  sequences of events. This is done by using the temporal information attached or
                  contained in single news documents. The timelines are usually centred on a target
                  entity, giving rise to so-called entity-centric timelines  
                   . Other
                  work has proposed to go from timelines to storylines by taking into account the
                  timelines of the actors, i.e. entities, co-participating in event mentions
                   . Storylines are thus
                  represented as intersections (i.e. co-participation) of independent entity-centric
                  timelines. Vossen, Caselli, and Kontzopoulou (2015) used the basic concepts of the
                  narratology framework to bridge the relations between events of different
                  timelines, starting with the most salient event of the storyline, i.e. the climax
                  point.
               A successful model for story tracking is the European Media Monitor .
                  This system runs every 10 minutes, and clusters all
                  the news articles published during the last 4 hours. In every run, the system
                  picks the clusters with the biggest number of articles, and compares them to the
                  clusters that already existed in the last run. If two clusters have at least 10%
                  of their articles in common, they are merged, becoming a single story. This system
                  allows for a flexible time span and is language independent. 
               In this contribution, we use a similar model to the one in Gey, Karlgren, and
                  Kando (2009). However, given that our data is not real-time, we employ a similar
                  approach to Vossen, Caselli, and Kontzopoulou (2015) to account for time. For
                  every pre-defined time window, we identify the most salient
                  stories by clustering the corresponding news articles. Once this is completed, we
                  approximate Vossen, Caselli, and Kontzopoulou (2015)’s proposal of bridging relations across time windows by means of
                  similarity scores between pairs of story clusters (see Subsection B) to
                  reconstruct the full story timeline.  
            
            
               A system for news stories extraction
               Our pipeline for story extraction consists of (1) clustering the news articles of
                  every week (i.e. the time window) and (2) connecting the clusters across relevant
                  time spans, i.e. weeks, using each of the valid clusters as the climax of a story.
                  The method is language independent, as clustering does not require any
                  language-specific resource, such as lexicons or parsing models. The code of
                     the system can be found in https://github.com/BlancaCalvo/Stories-from-News-Streams .
               
               Given a set of news articles from a fixed span (one year), we divide the corpus
                  into smaller units (weeks). For each week, k-means
                  clustering is applied. We use the Sci-kit learn implementation of k-means. The purpose of the clustering process is
                  to detect the most salient stories of each week, spotting both short and long-span
                  stories. We assign the number of clusters in a semi-automated way by manually
                  reviewing the results of each week. 
               The value of the number of clusters per week (k) is
                  assigned using the Elbow method. This method computes the clustering for k 
                  in the range from 1 to 30 (the range has been empirically
                  chosen through a set of preliminary experiments) and stores the sum of squared
                  errors (SSE) for every set of clusters. The optimal number of clusters is the one
                  after which the SSE starts decreasing slower. This number can be easily detected
                  by plotting the SSE in the y-axis and the number of k in
                  the x-axis, which creates an elbow shape in the desired value.
               In a collection of news articles, it is to be expected that not all articles are
                  going to be part of a story. These isolated articles are gathered by the algorithm
                  in one or two general clusters with very low SSE. These general clusters are
                  detected and deleted using Silhouette analysis . This method
                  plots all the documents in a cluster according to the silhouette coefficient. This
                  coefficient compares the average distance from all data points in the same cluster
                  and the average distance from all data points to the closest cluster. The
                  resulting plot shows which clusters have gathered the articles that do not belong
                  to any story. In Figure 1, clusters 8 and 10 are general clusters and will be
                  removed from our data for further analysis. 
               
               
               
               
                  Silhouette coefficients of the clusters of one week
                  
                  image of a bar graph
               
               
              
               In some cases, the same story is split into more than one cluster. To deal with
                  this issue, we manually merge these clusters by comparing the keywords of their
                  centroids. The centroids are the articles closest to the centre of the cluster and
                  consequently the most representative of its content. In this step, some data
                  cleaning is performed: clusters of international news are excluded (see Subsection
                  C for details), clusters with non-political topics are excluded (e.g. the lottery,
                  Christmas celebrations), and clusters with less than 15 articles are deleted. The
                  process of manual revision takes around 5 minutes per week.
               The clusters thus extracted are assumed to be the climax of different stories:
                  they have been detected in weeks in which they are salient enough to form a
                  cluster of over 15 articles. Nonetheless, stories are not limited to one week.
                  Hereafter, for each climax (i.e. each extracted cluster), we link articles of the
                  colliding weeks to the climax using cosine similarity. Henceforth, we will refer
                  to the remaining clusters as climaxes (w). 
              
               
                  Approach followed to trace the articles belonging to
                     each story
                  
                  image of a line graph
               
               
               
               It is often the case that the same story is detected as a climax in more than one
                  week. In these cases, it is reasonable to expect that, after tracing the articles
                  of the colliding weeks, an important proportion of the articles included in these
                  stories are going to be part of both clusters. If more than 33% of the articles
                  contained by a new story are already part of a previous story, and vice versa, the
                  system merges them. The threshold of 0.33 is chosen based on empirical validation
                  on our data.
               This last step runs for the 52 weeks contained in the study, resulting in stories
                  with very different lifespans and intensities that are the basis of our analysis.
                  The method allows for one article to be part of more than one story. Nonetheless,
                  this happens rarely. 83 out of 20,138 articles are assigned twice (0.4% of
                     the articles).
               
            
            
               Data
               To extract the lifespan and intensity of the news stories, it is important to
                  collect an exhaustive dataset of news that gathers all the articles published by
                  one or more media outlets on certain topics during a fixed period. Available news
                  corpora are usually from several media, time periods, and rarely care about
                  exhaustivity. For this reason, we created our own corpus by scraping all articles
                  in 2018 from four major Spanish newspaper outlets: El Pais,
                     El Mundo, ABC, and El Periódico. We narrowed the focus to news about politics,
                  collecting for El Mundo and ABC news
                  from the section España, and for El Pais
                  and El Periódico from the section Política. Political news about Spain are included in these categories,
                  with the main difference that El Pais and El Periódico also include news about international politics in it.
                  International news articles are removed during the cleaning of clusters (see
                  Subsection B). An overview of the resulting corpus is illustrated in Fig. 3.
               
               
               
                  Number of articles per week for each newspaper
                  
                  image of a line graph, representing four different papers
               
               
               
               Overall, the corpus contains 50,385 news articles: 15,245 from El Pais, 7,401 from El Mundo, 20,448 from ABC, and 7,291 from El Periódico. For
                  each news article, the following data are collected: the date of publication, the
                  title, the text, the URL, and the keywords (as specified by each news outlet). In
                  total, an average of 950 articles per week were published. ABC is the biggest publisher, with an average of 385 articles per week.
                     El Pais follows with an average of 293. El Periódico and El Mundo published
                  on average 137 and 139 articles a week, respectively. The code to scrape a
                     similar dataset can be found in https://github.com/BlancaCalvo/Spanish-Newspapers-Scraper .
               
            
            
               Guidelines for typology labelling
               The manual annotation of the news stories was performed following a decision tree
                  based on four questions. The annotation was conducted by one of the authors who is
                  a Spanish native speaker and has extensive knowledge on Spanish politics. Figure 4
                  graphically illustrates the decision tree used for the manual annotation of the
                  stories into issue types.
               
               
               
                  Decision tree used to manually assign news stories to
                     Soroka's (2002) issue types
                  
                  image of a flow chart, each box containing a question or answer
               
                
               
               The first question of the tree distinguishes the actor(s) who put(s) the news in
                  the public agenda (Q1:’Who put the news on the public agenda in
                     the first place?’). If the answer to this question is Media, Political Actors or Real-World Conditions/Citizens, then the story is classified as
                  sensational, governmental or prominent, respectively. In case the answer cannot be
                  clearly identified, the annotator has to move to the second branch of the tree,
                  which checks for the impact of the story in the public by assessing the
                  obtrusiveness of the story (Q2:’Is a large part of the
                     population going to perceive the consequences of the outcome of this
                     story?’). A negative answer restricts the choice either to sensational or
                  governmental issues. The exact labelling is triggered by a further question using
                  the dramatism attribute (Q3:’Is it a dramatic issue?’). A
                  positive answer leads to a sensational story, otherwise the story is labelled as
                  governmental. In case of a positive answer to Q2 the annotator is posed with
                  another question focused on the concreteness of the story (Q4: ‘Is it a concrete issue?’). In case of a positive answer, the story is
                  labelled as prominent, otherwise it is considered as a governmental one.
            
            
               Evaluation
               The performance of the semi-automated system for news stories extraction has been
                  evaluated with a subset of 2,666 manually annotated news articles. The gold
                  standard was created by one of the authors by inspecting the main issue in each
                  article and assigning each of them to a story. The measures used to evaluate are
                  Purity and Normalized Mutual Information (NMI). 
               Purity is a measure of the extent to which clusters are well formed, i.e. contain
                  a single class. To compute Purity, each of the clusters is assigned to its most
                  frequent class, according to the gold standard. Then, the accuracy of this
                  assignment is measured. The Mutual Information score is a complementary measure
                  that assesses the quality of the clustering. In particular, MI provides a measure
                  of the reduction in the entropy of clusters that we compare to the gold labels.
                  This measure is sensitive to the number of clusters. NMI is the normalization of
                  this value between 0 and 1, where 1 means a perfect classification.
               The evaluation scores resulted in a Purity of 0.896 and NMI of 0.625. To gain a
                  better understanding of the limitations and reliability of our approach we
                  conducted a manual exploration of the aggregated stories. In particular, we used a
                  contingency matrix to see the distribution of errors among the gold and
                  automatically generated clusters of stories. Figure 5 visually illustrates the
                  contingency matrix-based analysis of the errors against the manually aggregated
                  stories.
              
               
               
                  Contingency matrix of the manually annotated subset. 0
                     includes the articles that were not put in any story by the system but,
                     instead, they were by the annotator.
                  
                  image of the cluster represented as a matrix with colored boxes
               
               
               
               
               Overall the proposed system works quite well, with very few errors. However, major
                  classification issues concern the story labelled as Cluster 4. This cluster
                  corresponds to the story about the referendum for the independence of Catalonia.
                  This was the largest story of 2018 in Spain, as the referendum that took place at
                  the end of 2017 had a lot of political consequences in 2018. This story represents
                  a challenge for our methodology, as it spanned over the entire year, with articles
                  appearing almost every day. This results in a very large story with multiple
                  climaxes. As the cluster gets bigger (by iteratively adding new articles from
                  succeeding weeks), it becomes more difficult for the clusters emerging from new
                  climaxes to share 33% of the articles with the existing bigger cluster (see end of
                  Section 3.B). As a result, this story is represented with multiple clusters
                  instead of just one. We considered applying a more fine-grained clustering to
                  distinguish more specific sub-stories from the more general story Catalan independence referendum. However, this harms the
                  identification of smaller stories about other topics, making them disappear. A
                  single story being the main story throughout the year is not a common situation.
                  But it can happen in cases of big events like Brexit in the UK in 2018 or Covid-19
                  in 2020. To obviate these problems and also to be able to better generalize our
                  observations, we decided to exclude this large story from our analysis. 
               When excluding this cluster, we observe an improvement of the NMI (from 0.625 to
                  0.754). Finally, in Figure 6, we observe that all the differences between the gold
                  data and the output of our semi-automated system are articles that the system
                  ignored (articles in 0 were assigned by the annotator but not by the system). This
                  means that there are no articles assigned to the wrong cluster; the system only
                  missed articles. We therefore conclude that the results are reliable enough to
                  carry on our analysis.
               
               
               
                  Contingency matrix of the manually annotated subset,
                     when excluding the Catalan independence referendum story. 0 includes the
                     articles that were not put in any story by the system but, instead, they were
                     by the annotator.
                  
                  image of the cluster represented as a matrix with colored boxes. The boxes that are colored in are in diagnol
               
               
              
            
         

            QUANTITATIVE RESULTS
            Our system, described in Section 3.B, when applied to the corpus described in Section
               3.C, results in 80 news stories, from which 40 are labelled as sensational stories,
               32 as governmental stories, and 9 as prominent stories. 
            We then calculate the quantitative measures of lifespan, intensity and burstiness for
               each of these stories. The results have been averaged between all the stories of the
               same type. Two stories have been removed as they are found to not be representative
               of the classes. The first story to be removed is the one about the referendum
                  of independence of Catalonia. As mentioned before, this story spans the whole year
                  and cannot be averaged with the rest. The second deleted story is the
                  parliamentary election in the region of Andalucía. Stories about elections are
                  governmental, as they are led by political actors and do not offer dramatic
                  components. Nonetheless, they are highly obtrusive, as a huge part of the
                  population is required to take part in them. Because of the ambivalent nature of
                  this story, we exclude it. The quantitative measures show that the issue
               types differentiate only to some extent. 
           
            
               Averaged quantitative measures for issue type
               
                  
                  Sensational
                  Governmental
                  Prominent
               
               
                  lifespan
                  11.33
                  20.76
                  14.00
               
               
                  intensity
                  8.07
                  6.95
                  5.92
               
               
                  burstiness
                  6.13
                  6.38
                  4.50
               
            
            Stories classified as belonging to sensational issues, i.e. sensational stories, have
               the highest intensity (8 articles per day on average), the shortest lifespan (11 days
               on average), and an average burstiness (6.13). These measures show that sensational
               stories tend to appear out of the blue and have a short lifespan. 
            Governmental stories, i.e. news stories belonging to the governmental issue type,
               last for long periods (21 days on average) but have a lower intensity (7 articles per
               day on average). This suggests that governmental stories are planned events which’s
               reporting and development requires a long period of time.
            Stories belonging to the prominent issue type last for 14 days on average, have a low
               intensity (6 articles per day) and the lowest burstiness (4.50). 
            We found that only the difference in intensity between types of stories is
               significant, both between sensational and governmental stories (0.001849 ≤ 0.05), and
               between sensational and prominent stories (0.001998 ≤ 0.05). The p-value is
                  calculated using the Mann-Whitney U Test.  We can conclude that intensity
               is the main measurable difference between the different types of stories. It shows
               that stories that are put on the public agenda by news media themselves, i.e.
               sensational stories about dramatic events that are triggered by active reporting, get
               a lot of media attention in a relatively short period of time. Usually, news
               organizations put a lot of emphasis on such articles, for example by putting them in
               prominent positions on their website, to attract an audience. News stories that are
               triggered by political actors or developments in society, such as political events or
               more structural issues like the environment, are covered with less news articles per
               day but remain longer on the news agenda. 
         

            QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS
            In this section, we analyse the narrative patterns that emerge from different types
               of news stories. Newspapers construct stories by turning daily events into narratives
               . This is achieved by putting in place a series of strategies and
               linguistic devices. Narratologists have investigated these strategies to identify the
               presence and recurrence of narrative structures   .
            Narrative structures are what differentiate the fable (the chronological order of the
               events) from the plot, which underlies the order and manner in which a narrative is
               presented  . Adopting a post-structuralist perspective, we
               consider time as one of the main features that define the
               structure of a narrative  . 
            In all kinds of narratives, the organic temporality of the fable is subverted by the
               technical and aesthetic demands of the plot . When it comes to
               digital news, the technical settings demand a rapid publication of any relevant
               novelty about an ongoing story. In this context, the technological and commercial
               circumstances of production (the narration) affect the temporal structure of the
                  narrative . In digital newspapers, the story emerges as a
               concatenation of single news articles, which compose the daily, if not hourly,
               development of an event. In this environment, the narrative of a story gets to be
               expressed by the consecutive publication of articles. 
            Previous work in narratology has attempted to define a general grammar that can
               describe the construction of narratives. These grammatical systems agree on the
               general existence of an exposition, predicament, and resolution phase in most
               narrative texts . News stories are a special kind of narrative that
               puts its focus on climax events on a routine basis  ,
               mostly lacking an exposition or a resolution phase. Besides
               the climax, the predicament often includes a rising action and a falling action. The
               rising action starts with an inciting event that brings the attention of the public
               to the story. The climax is the moment in which the story reaches its peak of
               tension. In a story about a parliamentary discussion, the climax can be, for
               instance, the voting day for the approval of a law. A single story can have more than
               one climax (or sub-climax). After the climax, comes a falling action, which commonly
               focuses on possible outcomes or consequences of the story. 
            To analyse the narrative structure (i.e. the plot) of the different types of stories,
               we will use the proxies of lifespan and intensity, but now applied to the different
               parts of the plot: the climax, the rising action, and the falling action. 
            
               Sensational stories
               Sensational stories are, in general, ephemeral and intense. This can be easily
                  observed in Figure 7, where the smoothed conditional mean of the intensity of each
                  sensational story is illustrated, with the climax in x=0.
                  The rising action of sensational stories is the shortest of the three types. On
                  average, there are 3 days from the first day of reporting to the climax of a
                  sensational story. 
               
               
                  All sensational stories plotted with their climax at x =
                     0 (thin lines). The smoothed conditional mean is plotted in bold.
                  
                  sensational stories represented as a line chart
               
               
               
               The most common narrative pattern for sensational stories is the following: a
                  rising action of 0 to 1 days and a falling action of 3 to 5 days (median). There
                  are 13 out of 40 stories following this structure.
               In Figure 8, we have labelled the 13 stories by topic and adjusted the size of the
                  shapes by average intensity. The topics that more often recur with this narrative
                  pattern are weather incidents, social injustice, and corruption. These are topics
                  that trigger indignation, but they directly affect very few people. They generally
                  span for one single day. 
               
               
               
                  The structure of sensational stories with 0 to 1 days of
                     rising action and 3 to 5 days of falling action. The size of the symbol depends
                     on the average intensity of the story.
                  
                  sensational stories represented as a plot with points indicating intensity
               
               
              
               We further observe that stories about weather incidents get to its climax the same
                  day that they emerge, having 0 days of rising action. The incident with 1
                     rising action day happened over the night. This is not always the case
                  in stories about corruption and social injustice. 
               Three stories are clear instances of social injustice, all concerning court
                  decisions about political freedoms. Two of them are decisions from the European
                  Court of Human Rights (ECHR) that contradict previous decisions of a Spanish
                     court Estrasburgo dice que quemar fotos del Rey es libertad de expresión
                     and Estrasburgo sentencia que el tribunal que condenó por terrorismo a Otegi no
                     fue imparcial (https://elpais.com/politica/2018/03/13/actualidad/1520933026_224065.html
                     ; https://www.elmundo.es/espana/2018/11/06/5be15f9f468aeb99178b4628.html).,
                  and a third one is the final resolution from a Spanish court, which will later be
                  appealed to ECHR. El Supremo ratifica la prisión para el rapero Valtonyc
                        (https://www.elperiodico.com/es/politica/20180220/el-supremo-ratifica-la-prision-para-el-rapero-valtonyc-6637403).
                  These three stories follow a similar content structure. They start with an article
                  that explains the court decision, with very similar headlines in all newspapers.
                  Then, some newspapers report about the reactions of the government and the
                  political actors in favour or against the decision. In the case of the two
                  European court decisions (in which the tribunal ruled in favour of political
                  freedom), the reactions are published the same day. In the one coming from a
                  Spanish court (which was accused of ruling against freedom of speech), the
                  reactions are not reported until the day after, making the second day of the story
                  its climax. This shows either less previous attention to the case, or a more
                  unexpected decision compared to the other two court cases, which had already been
                  in the news in the past. The days of the falling action mainly consist of articles
                  about the precedents and the consequences, and opinion pieces. 
               We observe a similar pattern in stories about corruption. On the first day of
                  reporting, multiple articles about the event itself are published. These are
                  followed by reactions from other political actors, and some articles about the
                  context. Finally, in the last days, the articles about the consequences and the
                  opinion pieces are the most common. It can be noticed that two of the stories get
                  to their climax on the second day of reporting. In the first case, the corruption
                  case forces the resignation of the politician involved, making this second event
                  the main climax of the story. Montón dimite por las irregularidades de su
                     máster pese al apoyo de Sánchez (https://elpais.com/politica/2018/09/11/actualidad/1536664736_500550.html).
                  This story spans two days, and there are two days of climax. However, in the
                  second story of this kind, Convergència, condenada en el ‘caso Palau’ por
                     cobrar comisiones ilegales, (http://elpais.com/ccaa/2018/01/15/catalunya/1516001673_733428.html).
                  reporting starts the day before the court decision. This is an interesting case,
                  as one newspaper published several articles about the background of the corruption
                  case the day before the final sentence. This unusual behaviour seems to indicate a
                  willingness to emphasize this particular story by this media outlet. 
            
            
               Governmental stories
               Governmental stories are often political discussions or legal debates, which have
                  set timings, often known in advance by journalists. The planned nature of
                  governmental stories gives space for a longer build-up to the story, which results
                  in a longer rising action. In Figure 9, it can be observed that governmental
                  stories tend to have more than one peak (we will also call these sub-climax). For
                  this typology, the curve of the smoothed conditional mean in the main climax is
                  less pronounced and multiple peaks can be observed along the span of the stories
                  (thin lines), mainly in the rising action, but also in the falling action. The
                  rising action of governmental stories takes on average 6.5 days, a difference
                  statistically significant with respect to sensational stories. The average falling
                  action, on the other hand, is similar to sensational stories, lasting around 4
                  days.
               
               
               
                  All governmental stories plotted with their climax at x
                     = 0. The smoothed conditional mean is plotted in bold.
                  
                  sensational stories represented as a plot with points indicating intensity
               
               
               
              
               At first glance, there are no clear narrative patterns for stories belonging to
                  this issue type. In Figure 10, it can be observed that stories with 3 to 6 days of
                  rising action and 0 to 2 days of falling action are common. These stories have
                  generally one single peak (one climax). However, the big majority of the stories
                  in this typology do not fit in the main pattern represented in Fig. 10. We do
                  observe a common feature between the non-represented stories: most of them have 2
                  to 4 different peaks (1 climax and 1 to 3 sub-climax). In Figure 10, these stories
                  are identified in dark red. We observe two kinds of narrative patterns in
                  governmental stories, (1) short-spanning stories with one climax, and (2) multiple
                  sub-climax stories. 
               The first kind of stories are generally planned events, with a relatively low
                  media interest, such as the birthday of the King, a vote on the internal statutes
                  of a party, or the visit of the President to Cuba. In the days previous to the
                  climax, these stories start growing by publishing articles about the context,
                  previous similar events and the details on how the central event is going to take
                  place. Also, some opinions of known political actors and some speculation about
                  unknown facts. On the central day of the event, detailed descriptions about how it
                  went are published. In most of the cases, the effects or possible consequences of
                  the central event are published the same day, leaving 0 to 1 days of falling
                  action. If there are opinion pieces, which is not always the case, they are part
                  of the rising action.
              
               
               
                  The rising and falling action of all the governmental
                     stories  Three outlier stories have been removed for a clearer
                        representation., shaped by topic. The size of the symbol indicates the average
                     intensity of the story. The colour shows the number of peaks. 
                  
                  Rising and falling action of governmental stories represented on a plot
               
               
               
             
               The stories with multiple climaxes are discussions from legislative bodies,
                  ideological struggles between parties, and law approval debates at regional,
                  municipal, or state level. The multiple peaks in this kind of stories are often
                  due to disagreements on the issue by different actors. These stories start like
                  the first kind: they are planned, and the press knows when the involved characters
                  are going to talk about the issue. However, after the first peak, in which a
                  personality has shown its position/decision, new peaks come from other actors
                  disagreeing and asking for an alternative decision. 
               An example of this pattern can be found in the story about the renovation of the
                  General Council of the Judiciary. One first peak emerges when the new members of
                  the council are announced. Manuel Marchena presidirá un Poder Judicial con
                     mayoría progresista (https://elpais.com/politica/2018/11/12/actualidad/1542008392_972068.html).
                  Though, a larger peak is created when the person who was appointed to be the
                  president of the council announces he will not take the position. El juez
                     Marchena renuncia a presidir el Supremo y el Poder Judicial (https://www.elperiodico.com/es/politica/20181120/marchena-supremo-poder-judicial-7156914).
               
               Another example of this pattern emerges when the government announces that
                  children in Catalan schools will be able to study in Spanish. El Gobierno
                     garantiza que se podrá estudiar el 50% en castellano (https://elpais.com/politica/2018/02/16/actualidad/1518780919_449844.html).
                  The announcement of the government generates the main climax of the story. Some
                  days after, a smaller sub-climax emerges when a court declares a previous measure
                  to facilitate the schooling in Spanish in Catalonia unconstitutional. El TC
                     tumba los 6.000 euros de Wert para estudiar en castellano en Cataluña (https://www.elperiodico.com/es/politica/20180220/constitucional-declara-inconstitucionales-ayudas-6000-euros-wert-lomce-estudiar-castellano-catalunya-6637168).
                  Finally, a third smaller sub-climax closes the story with the announcement that
                  the Government will take some time to rethink their policies on the regularisation
                  of Spanish in Catalan schools. Gobierno se tomará ‘tiempo’ pare regular el
                     castellano en Cataluña (https://www.abc.es/espana/abci-gobierno-tomara-tiempo-para-regular-castellano-cataluna-201802231845_video.html).
               
            
            
               Prominent stories
               Since there are only 9 stories of the type prominent, it is risky to extract many
                  conclusions from them. Figure 11 illustrates the smoothed conditional mean of the
                  intensity of stories belonging to this type, excluding one case: the story of
                  pensions, which is further illustrated in Fig. 12.
               
               
                  All prominent stories plotted with their climax at x =
                     0 (thin lines). The smoothed conditional mean is plotted in bold.
                  
                  plot of all prominent stories
               
               
              
               It is safe to observe that 6 out of 9 of the prominent stories have a falling
                  action of 1 to 3 days. The rising action, on the other hand, is more varied. These
                  stories are mostly social demands expressed as demonstrations and protests, and
                  the development of policies related to these demands. These observations suggest
                  that media attention to prominent issues is infrequent and fades short after its
                  climax.
               We have excluded the story about pensions from Fig. 11 because the plot of this
                  story is very different from the other prominent stories. This story is unique in
                  the whole corpus: it has the longest rising action (38 days) and the longest
                  falling action (24 days). It has 8 different peaks, and the highest one has 34
                  articles published on a single day. The pensions system is a recurrent topic in
                  Spanish politics, as it is public and universal, and the biggest expense of the
                  national budget.
               In 2018, the yearly uprising of pensions was 0.25%, while prices had risen around
                  3%. This caused indignation, and the first demonstrations took place in the middle
                  of January. However, Pensions does not emerge as a news
                  story until the 8th of February, the day in which the Prime Minister announced
                  some measures to incentivize private retirement funds. From then on, there were
                  demonstrations every week in many cities, with a large one on the 22th of
                  February. After this date, the opposition parties started discussing the topic and
                  the media coverage focused on the politicians, even though the demonstrations kept
                  taking place. On the 14th of March, there was a Parliament session focusing
                  exclusively on the topic of pensions. This day is the highest peak of the story.
                  The Parliament session did not have a clear outcome, and even bigger
                  demonstrations took place after that. By that point, the topic of pensions had
                  become the main point in the political agenda, becoming the trading issue for
                  parties negotiating the national budget (which is a governmental topic). 
               In the story about pensions, we observe that the constant efforts of the social
                  movement brought a prominent issue into the space that is usually taken by
                  governmental issues. This suggests that prominent stories can in fact become very
                  salient, but they require a sustained mobilization.
               
               
               
                  Story of Pensions with climax at x = 0
                  
                  plot of all Pensions stories
               
               
           
            
         

            CONCLUSION
            In this work we have defined news stories as unitary sequences
               of events that can be reconstructed by aggregating multiple unitary mentions, i.e.
               news articles. Our work focused on the development of a semi-automatic method that
               can be used to facilitate the application of empirical analysis in media studies
               using large quantities of data. 
            We have shown that clustering methods can be effectively applied to identify news
               stories, and that news stories are a meaningful unit of analysis. Our approach still
               requires some manual intervention and background knowledge from the researcher.
               Rather than a limitation, we consider this a virtuous way to combine quantitative and
               qualitative analysis to large corpora or collections of datasets. It has proven
               efficient when applied to an automatically scraped corpus of 50,385 news articles in
               Spanish, with a purity score of 0.896. A further advantage is represented by its
               language independent nature: there is no language specific module to pre-process the
               data, and the story identification is completely unsupervised. Some drawbacks,
               however, remain unsolved, like the difficulty to deal with very large stories (see
               Section 4.A). An additional aspect that will be further investigated is the
               validation of the proposed decision tree for story type classification by means of an
               extensive inter-annotator agreement study. 
            As a case study, we attempted an empirical validation of Soroka’s issue-typology, and
               especially of the temporal dimension, an aspect that was ignored in the original
               framework. Time has been quantitatively proxied by three attributes of news stories:
               lifespan, intensity, and burstiness. We hypothesized for sensational stories to have
               a short lifespan, a high intensity and a high burstiness and we expected prominent
               and governmental issues to have a longer lifespan and a lower intensity. The results
               of the quantitative study using the three temporal attributes showed that, when it
               comes to time, stories belonging to different issue types differentiate only to some
               extent. In particular, only intensity appears as a significant
               differentiation attribute, especially for sensational stories. This can be explained
               by both news values and commercial motivations. Sensational stories such as natural
               disasters and murders are unexpected, and thus get much attention when they break.
               Moreover, these stories are able to attract many readers and thus create traffic to
               news websites. To do justice to their perceived importance and to maximize the effect
               of such stories, news organizations publish in a relatively short amount of time many
               articles about them . 
            We complemented the quantitative study with a more qualitative analysis inspired by
               narratology frameworks. In particular, we applied the notion of plot structure to
               analyse whether there are further distinguishing elements across the types of
               stories. We thus attempted to measure and visualize the narrative patterns of the
               types of stories, and in particular, the rising actions, climax, and falling actions.
               We observed that the days of the rising action are significantly lower in sensational
               stories compared to governmental stories, while falling actions are similar. A very
               common trait in governmental stories is having multiple peaks, which correspond to
               different stages of the political debate. It is interesting to point out that
               prominent stories have been the least covered stories over the year we analysed. They
               also had very short falling actions, with the exception of one story. 
            The observed narrative patterns within different issues can be used in the future to
               identify unusual plots in news reporting, which could indicate an intention of
               emphasis from a newspaper on a story.
            The methodology we have illustrated can be used in the future by other scholars in
               the Humanities interested in conducting computational textual studies of documents
               that present an evolution of coherent sequences of events in time. In literary
               studies, our method can help in identifying and aggregating subplots in novels. The
               code is open and accessible. Required changes are minimal, and in particular they
               concern the input data and the adaptation of the empirical thresholds for the
               identification of the elements belonging to a cluster and the merging of the stories
               over time. At the same time, our methodology can be used to investigate the evolution
               of issue types in a diachronic perspective, providing an additional level of analysis
               for digitized collections of historical newspapers. 
            By offering an approach to studying the circulation of news and news stories in the
               online information ecology, we make a clear contribution to Journalism Studies. In
               addition, we consider our work useful for other areas in Digital Humanities,
               especially where the application of computational text analysis methods is involved.
               Being semi-automatic, our proposed methodology leaves the human in control while the
               machine is a support to deal with large amounts of data. Once a news story is
               identified, more fine-grained levels of analysis can be applied. We have applied core
               concepts from narratology to non-literary texts, opening a new direction in
               computational narratology. As already stated, having access to plot structures can
               help investigating variations in writing styles: not only there can be differences
               across issue types, but it would be interesting to investigate whether there are
               differences across the components of a plot structure (i.e., rising action, climax,
               and falling action). In addition to this, having access to stories rather than single
               unitary mentions can facilitate the investigation of framing and whether this mirrors
               existing dynamics of power in the society   . 
            Further research with this methodology could focus on the linguistic content of these
               stories, by investigating possible phenomena like language change for different types
               of news stories, as well as for different moments of the plot. Following previous
               work on the agenda-setting framework  ,
               the influence of social media
               interactions on news stories' timing features could be studied, as well as their
               impact on public opinion. Differences between the plots created by different
               newspapers about the same story could also be assessed.
         
