Title:  The Boundless Book: A Conversation between the Pre-modern and
               Posthuman
Volume:  007
Issue:  1
Date:  1 July 2013
Abstract:  
            
            Digital humanities and medieval studies share a long history, beginning with one of
               the first large-scale digital humanities projects, which was carried by Father
               Roberto Busa using IBM’s Literary Data Processing Center. Why then, do many scholars
               of historically-minded fields consider digital humanities to be a “helping
               discipline” instead of a full-fledged area of study in itself? Beginning with the
               above question, this paper explores the ways in which scholars need not use the
               digital humanities to update historical disciplines or vice versa. By examining the
               pre- and post-print histories of the book, and interrogating the ways in which
               reading technologies and interfaces link the past and future of the book together,
               the past and present histories of reading coalesce and offer scholars novel ways of
               approaching many different disciplines that engage with the digital humanities.
         
Full Body Text: 
The Boundless Book: A Conversation between the Pre-modern and Posthuman

            Men louen of propre kynde
               newfangelnesse

            
               Chaucer, The Squire's Tale
               
            

         

            Here, there are no longer any forms or
               developments of forms; nor are there subjects or the formation of subjects. There is
               no structure, any more than there is genesis
            Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus
               
            
         

         	
            Medievalists have always loved innovation. Perhaps because the discipline is so
               far-removed from the present cultural moment, medievalists continue to embrace
               academic change. The first large-scale project in the digital humanities was
               undertaken by a medievalist. Using IBM’s Literary Data Processing Center in Gallarte,
               Italy, which opened in 1956, Father Roberto Busa completed a concordance on every one of the thirteen million words
                  written by Aquinas, a daunting task for even the most hardy of scholars
                  .McDonough’s 1959 article Computers and Classics provides a good summary of these
                  early connections between Classicists and medievalists with computers . The Literary Data Processing Center made this
               type of work feasible and started a wave of concordances and compilations by Busa and
               other early digital humanists.In addition to McDonough’s article, Susan
                  Hockey’s more recent work The History of Humanities
                     Computing describes these early projects . By the 1960s, medievalists, and scholars in other disciplines as well,
               began to meet and discuss the ways in which computers could impact their field of
               study and the humanities in general.One notable meeting regarding the ways in
                  which computers could help medieval literary study took place at the University of
                  Colorado and resulted in the 1967 article Computer Study of
                     Medieval German Poetry: A Conference Report
                  .
            
            Indeed, by the 1980s the digital humanities became the new helping discipline
               for literary scholars, giving them a means to an end in the rush to give people
               easier access to hidden archives, hard-to-find editions, and almost-forgotten poets.
               I call the digital humanities a helping discipline and it will be helpful to
               define what this term has meant elsewhere in the field of medieval studies.This
                  almost-pejorative term has also been leveled at the discipline of paleography —
                  the study of ancient scripts — and it is no coincidence that both paleography and
                  the digital humanities have since changed the ways that scholars understand books
                  and their place within medieval and contemporary cultures. In his essay
                  Latin Palaeography since Traube, esteemed book
               historian Julian Brown described Ludwig Traube’s influence in helping to change
               paleography from a Hilfswissenschaft, or helping discipline, to
               one that gave scholars insight into larger cultural movements ). Traube’s contribution to the study of paleography
               was groundbreaking due to the fact that, after his scholarship, paleography became
               not just a means-to-an-end but a full-fledged area of study that has since yielded
               major contributions in the ways we think about medieval literary culture and book
               history. Although researchers in the digital humanities, new media, and electronic
               literature continue to produce scholarship that changes the way scholars think about
               the technologically-mediated world, it is only in the past decade that the field has
               become more than a helping discipline at most universities.
            In the 1990s, books dealing with the digital humanities were rife with heady essays
               exclaiming the discipline-changing power of computers for humanists that promised to
               update and renew historical disciplines for the new digital era. Take, for example,
               the edited collection Hypermedia and Literary Studies,
               published in 1991. In the introduction, its editors, Landow and Delany, exclaim
                  hypertext thus presages a potential
                  revolution in literary studies
               . The essays within the book’s covers echo the
               editors’ initial utopic claim, and extol the digital humanities’ potential for
               fundamentally changing the way research is carried out by literary scholars. This
               particular book is divided into three sections, with the last focusing on
               applications, which highlights a number of early digital humanities projects. Most of
               these examples deal with pre- and early modern literature and history, including
               Biblical Studies, Classics, Shakespeare studies, and early modern emblem
                  books.For more information see: Biblical Studies and
                     Hypertext, by Steven J. DeRose (1991); Ancient
                     Materials, Modern Media: Shaping the Study of Classics with Hypertext,
                  by Gregory Crane and Elli Mylonas (1991); The Shakespeare
                     Project, by Larry Friedlander (1991); The
                     Emblematic Hyperbook, by David Graham (1991). The rhetoric
               surrounding many of these projects is one that seeks to update historical
               texts for the present moment (as if the historical sources need the digital
               humanities’ intercession to maintain their importance for a new generation of
               reader). 
            Indeed, one need only look to the names of recent exhibitions and books to find the
               history and future of the book tied together. From Gutenberg to
                  Google
                and From Parchment to
                  Pixel (British Library 2009) are two examples of titles that, at least
               alliteratively, connect these two historical moments.The latter example is from
                  a recent British Library exhibit, From Parchment to Pixel:
                     The Virtual Reunification of the Codex Sinaiticus, which was part of a
                  larger initiative to digitize the entire codex . The teleological evolution from one state to another in
               both these titles emphasizes a tacit progression, which places the past at odds with
               the present. What I have highlighted here are two different sides of the same coin.
               On one hand, medievalists and other scholars use the digital humanities as a way to
               provide access to one-of-a-kind manuscripts and engage with the digital humanities as
               only a Hilfswissenschaft, or helping discipline; on the
               other, practitioners employ digital humanities tools to update a discipline. 
            Rather than using the digital humanities to update the medieval period or vice versa,
               I would like to suggest another approach to studying these periods. Instead of
               writing this paper as a medievalist or as a digital humanist, I come at this paper as
               a hybrid of both worlds, always Janus-faced in the ways that I see each discipline.
               As a scholar of manuscript studies and the digital humanities, I cannot help but talk
               about the future of reading and books as I research the past — some might say, the
               beginning — of books. With this approach in mind I wish to explore some of these
               commonalities in this paper. Part of my aim here is to give the digital humanities
               equal space with medieval studies instead of using one discipline to enlighten and
               enliven the other and, as Jessica Brantley points out, to interrogate the systems of thought that are both revealed
                  and created by the physical structures through which ideas are expressed
               . Rather than pitting the medieval period
               against the digital humanities or vice versa, this paper seeks to further link these
               two periods together through the lens of the history of reading and books.For
                  this reason, I avoid terms such as remediation, which suggest that the
                  medieval period is somehow the genesis of digital literary developments. Instead,
                  I wish to examine how each of these periods anticipates a certain type of reader
                  through similar reading technologies. For more information on remediation, see
                     .
            
            Jessica Brantley’s article The Prehistory of the Book,
               focuses the ways in which the discipline of book history eschews non-printed material
               — specifically medieval manuscripts. She takes issue of Robert Darnton’s definition
               of book history as the social and
                  cultural history of communication by print
                and asks that the definition of the book be
               broadened to the material support for
                  inscribed language, a category that includes rolls and codices and even monumental
                  inscription, both written by hand and printed by many different mechanisms, and
                  also a wide variety of digital media
               . Although her article is not about digital
               media per se, Brantley touches upon an important point for this argument: if the book
               as it is defined by many book historians is really a history of print, where, then,
               does that leave the study of medieval manuscripts and the study of
               electronically-mediated texts?Brantley’s article touches upon an interesting
                  point. Many works that seek to study the beginnings of new media begin with
                  print’s dominance as well, such as From Gutenberg to
                     Google
                   and New Media,
                     1740–1915
                  . 
            
            In her introduction to the book New Media, Old Media,
               Wendy Hui Kyong Chun cautions against arguments that concentrat[e] on the remarkable yet over determined
                  similarities between entities now considered media and claims that any such argument must grapple with the ways
                  that mediums have changed
               . While giddy declarations as to the commonalities
               themselves do little to further our knowledge of digital humanities or old
               media, it is more useful to postulate why medieval manuscripts and
               electronically-mediated texts have so much in common. When the printed page is no
               longer the dominant means of transmitting data, how do we understand the concept of
               the book? To put it yet another way, this paper will study the book ends of
               book history and examine the reading technologies of the pre- and post-print eras in
               the same breath.
         

            Writing on the Body: Skin as Interface
            If we put aside the printed words’ dominance from book history and concentrate
               instead on the ways we might define books in the pre- and post-print eras, the most
               telling commonality is one of interface. In the Middle Ages, reading is always, in
               its most literal sense, an embodied process. Medieval manuscripts are made out of
               sheep or cow skin, which has been scraped and processed until it is milky-white and
               smooth to the touch. Even so, in most cases, it is easy for a reader to determine
               which is the hair side or the flesh side — that is, if hair follicles
               are visible to the reader on a recto, the verso will have a creamier appearance due
               to the fact that it was on the inside of the cow or sheep. In some cases, the reader
               can see a difference in the parchment’s quality as the page nears what would have
               been the animal’s haunch — asking the reader to imagine the animal as a living
               entity. This embodiment is more than a visual process, but a haptic one as well: as a
               reader turns a page in a medieval manuscript, she touches skin — sometimes brushing
               against stray hairs — always aware that the reading interface is, in fact, a body
               itself. For when I open a medieval manuscript, and
                  this is different from opening a printed book, comments Michael Camille:
                  I am conscious not only of the
                  manu-script, the bodily handling of materials in production, writing,
                  illumination, but also how in its subsequent reception, the parchment has been
                  penetrated; how it has acquired grease-stains, thumb-marks, erasures, drops of
                  sweat; suffered places where images have been kissed away by devout lips or holes
                  from carious eating animals.
            
            Camille’s observation — that reading a medieval manuscript is also an embodied
               process for a modern reader — is a salient one. Like a palimpsest, each reader leaves
               a mark on the manuscript, whether it is a marginal notation, emendation to the
               textual unit, or a new binding.This process of past embodiment and what it can
                  mean for contemporary readers was made especially clear to me when I researched
                  the Exeter Book (Exeter MS 3501), which houses the only copy of many
                  Old English poems. A previous reader mislaid a hot poker onto the manuscript and
                  burned through many pages; because of this careless reader, a number of Old
                  English poems have lacunae that will never be recovered.  Thus, medieval
               manuscripts become a living history: from the original flock of sheep and the
               craftsmen who constructed the manuscript to all of its subsequent readers and
               writers. 
            It would be easy to assume that the reading interface in new media would be one that
               eschews bodies altogether for a completely virtual reading experience. Rather, many
               electronically mediated texts revisit a medieval practice and create a multi-sensory
               reading experience, or, as Mark Hansen suggests, these works signal a redemption of embodied experience
               . This avowal of an embodied interface corresponds
               to a reading process that involves sound and touch, which signals a paradigm shift from a dominant ocularcentrist
                  aesthetic to a haptic aesthetic rooted in embodied affectivity
               . This more tactile experience of gaining unique
               meaning from touch and sound questions the primacy of the visual altogether and,
               indeed, asks us to redefine our definition of a text to one that encompasses a world,
               soundscapes and bodily understanding.
            Sound is especially important in many works of electronic literature, and often goes
               hand-in-hand with haptic response as a way to create added layers of narrative
               meaning. In Young-Hae Chang Heavy Industries’ Flash-based electronic poem, "Dakota," the reader hears a
               musical phrase that is quietly repeated as the screen slowly flashes from black to
               white (Young-Hae Chang Heavy Industries nd). Suddenly the music changes to a loud,
               frenetic drum solo by Art Bailey as the first words and numbers flash across the
               screen like a strobe light, matching Bailey’s rhythmical pattern. In this poem, the
               flashing words and percussive music mirror the motion of the poem’s subject matter,
               as the first words of the narrative announce: FUCKING / WALTZED ØUT TØ THE CAR. The pulse of the
               words follows the pattern of the drum, creating haptic feedback as the drums blast
               through the reader’s speakers and the letters vibrate in time to various drumbeats.
               As the reader’s eyes quickly scan the word-images as they flash across the screen
               rapid-fire, she cannot help but read sotto-voce to keep up with
               the fast-moving text. This blend of visual, aural, and haptic feedback have much in
               common with medieval reading practices, Reading for the medieval literate was charged with [...] associations that made
                  every turn of the page an act of intense interpenetration and one resonant with
                  sensations, comments Michael Camille; from the feel of the flesh and hair side of the parchment
                  on one’s fingertips to the lubricious labial mouth of the words with one’s throat
                  and tongue
               . Reading in the Middle Ages was a tactile and
               sonorous experience, asking the medieval reader to interact with the textual unit in
               more than a strictly visual sense. Unlike print media, both medieval manuscripts and
               works of electronic literature are — as Anna A. Grotans writes regarding medieval
               reading practices — intended as much for
                  the ears as for the eyes, and authors wrote them with this reception explicitly in
                  mind
               . Sonority and haptic feedback create a reading
               experience for both medieval and contemporary readers that, insofar as they are able,
               mirror each other in the ways that works were produced for a multisensory
               experience.
         

            Ice-Age Reading and the Embodied Medieval Text
            Both electronically mediated texts and medieval manuscripts ask their readers to
               negotiate complex reading interfaces — these embodied experiences are not singularly
               tied to the user experience, but also to the metaphorical structures within the works
               themselves. Mapping prognostications onto the human body and using body parts to
               mimetically guide a reader was a common practice in medieval didactic texts. One
               example of this type of device is the Zodiac Man, which
               was often found in the scientific manuscripts.For a general overview of images
                  associated with medieval medical practices, such as the Zodiac Man, consult Astrology in Medieval Manuscripts, by Sophie Page
                  (2002). In these illustrations, the human body serves as the reader’s
               interface, performing a narrative and visual function as it guides the reader down
               various paths. 
            The Zodiac Man, usually part of a Physician’s Calendar,
               advises medieval doctors as to which body part is ruled by a certain astrological
               sign; based on the image and the accompanying text, a medieval doctor could avoid
               bleeding or operating on that part of the body depending on the moon’s position . 
                  
                In this particular example, the parchment is folded into three sections and
               would have attached to the physician’s belt so that he could easily refer to it when
               he was visiting patients . This image places the
               body in the middle of the three sections of parchment, echoing a Christian triptych.
               The human body serves as the background while the astrological symbols crowd on top
               of the body, vying for the reader’s attention. When engaging with this image, the
               reader must first traverse the human body and then navigate to the appropriate
               astrological symbol. Once the reader has found the appropriate sign, she must then
               navigate the accompanying textual unit in order to read the supplementary warning
               about each body part.
            The same type of embodied and symbolic navigational process is suggested by Stephanie
               Strickland’s hybrid print and electronic world 
                  Vniverse.
               I use Vniverse to refer to both the website and
                  accompanying print book, V: WaveSon.nets/Losing
                  L’una. This poetic project self-consciously connects the modern
               reader with, what Strickland calls the Ice Age reader; as Strickland and
               Lawson state in the essay that accompanies the web-based portion of the project:
                  V is haunted by similarities
                  between the nomadic Ice Age task of reading and 21st-century reading
               . For the web-based portion of Vniverse, the reader navigates a starry sky. As she mouses over various
               stars, constellation-like patterns connect the stars together and short poems, or
                  triplets, appear on the screen. Strickland encourages the reader to
               interact with the text using multiple senses and paths, but the fundamental method of
               traversing the starry sky is by touch. The reader can touch the night sky (using the
               mouse in place of a hand) in a shape that is not dictated by linearity or by the
               pages of a book, gesturing back to a nomadic reader who would have read the night sky
               to plot a course. At its heart, this nomadic reader is one who navigates differently
               than a modern one, who negotiates time, affect, and images in a fundamentally
               dissimilar way. In Strickland’s words, this reader performs a type of reading closer to seeing, one that
                  problematizes the see/read difference, thus involving both sides of the
                  brain. The medieval physician, like Strickland’s Ice Age reader,
               would navigate through the Zodiac Man in much the same fashion. The human body at the
               center and background of the illustration serves the same canvas-like purpose as the
               night sky in Strickland’s poetic world. The constellations of Vniverse, which guide the reader to poetic triplets, mirrors the
               navigational process of the medieval reader, as she traverses each representational
               animal and reads the corresponding text and finally remaps the entire process onto a
               human body. 
         

            Navigating Viscera and Axial Structures
            The Vein Man serves as the same sort of prognosticatory guide as the Zodiac Man, and
               is often found side-by-side with the Zodiac Man in medieval manuscripts. 
                  
                These illustrations tell a physician which vein to bleed in order to
               relieve an illness in a particular part of the body. In this example, red
                  veins point outwards from various body parts and lead to brief, explanatory
               footnotes . Like the blood flowing through each vein, the
               reader’s eye follows the path from the body to the narrative — each vein tying the
               body and narrative together. The body itself is carefully sketched in lead while the
               veins are painted bright red, highlighting their function as visual paths for the
               reader and, at the same time, underscoring the function of the veins themselves.
               Here, the body serves as a conduit, or, to take George Landow’s phrase, it forms an
                  axial structure with the torso serving as the main channel through the
               visual narrative .Although Landow does not
                  make this connection, his axial model has much in common with tree structures from
                  mathematics and computer science. In particular, Landow’s axial model is
                  comparable to a rooted tree structure wherein there is one main root
                  from which any additional data is derived. In the case of Landow’s diagram, the
                     root is the literary work’s main narrative while the hyperlinks to
                  definitions and concordances would be the root’s branches.
                Landow uses the axial model as a model to visualize hypertext corpora that employ a single text [...] as an
                  unbroken axis off which to hang annotation and commentary
               . For the medieval audience who read the images
               along with the accompanying text, the body becomes the main narrative access with the
               red veins flowing to the textual corpus.
            
            The opening image in Shelley Jackson’s 
                  Patchwork
                     Girl
               , one of the most celebrated pieces of electronic fiction, is eerily similar
               to the medieval vein man. The first image the reader sees on screen is an image of a
               nude woman, her arms spread out in a Christ-like pose; and, like the vein man, her
               wide-armed stance implores the reader to view her body as she stares blankly across
               the screen back to the reader . Dotted lines traverse the
               image-woman’s body, inviting the reader’s eye to follow each line and participate
               cutting the woman’s body apart. Jackson challenges the notion of the body as a closed
               system with this image, as she tacitly suggests that — at least in her text — the
               navigational system is the patch-worked body itself: The body is a patchwork, though the stitches might not show.
                  It's run by committee, a loose aggregate of entities we can't really call human,
                  but which have what look like lives of a sort. [...] The body is not even
                  experienced as whole. We never see it all, we can't feel our liver working or
                  messages shuttling through our spine. We patch a phantom body together out of a
                  cacophony of sense impressions, bright and partial views .
            
            Both the exposed veins of the Vein Man and the dotted lines traversing Patchwork
               Girl’s body hint at the interworkings and viscera that are usually hidden underneath
               the body’s skin, and Jackson’s accompanying essay, Stitch
                  Bitch, playfully highlights the bodily assemblage of the image-woman and
               of the vein man as well .
            Jackson’s work also highlights the concept of a fragmented, non-linear text. In
                  Patchwork Girl, the narrator ironically muses when I open a book I know where I am, which is
                  restful. My reading is spatial and even volumetric. I tell myself, I am a third of
                  the way down through a rectangular solid, I am a quarter of the way down the page,
                  I am here on the page, here on this line, here, here, here. 
               
            
            When reading Patchwork Girl and the Vein Man, navigation
               becomes a process that challenges our conceptions of linear reading and invites the
               reader to view reading as an embodied process. The reader of both texts must
               negotiate the body — and most importantly, its viscera — in order to progress through
               the narrative.
         

            Entrances and Exits: Rhizomatic Reading Strategies
            In some cases, navigating a text becomes significantly less straightforward in both
               the pre- and post-print world. If a text has no clear entrance, where does the reader
               begin? This question, and the works that engage with this concept, are much harder
               for theorists to define. George Landow gives a visualization of, what he calls, the
                  network structure of some hypertext works .Along with the two models that Landow defines, he also provides
                  three guiding questions to consider: 1. Where does the reader enter the text? 2. Where does the reader leave the
                     text? 3. Where are the borders of the text? which interrogate the
                  boundaries of each type of hypertext .
               Perhaps a more engaging description of Landow’s network structure is Deleuze
               and Guattari’s description of a rhizome. In their work, Deleuze and Guattari abandon
               a traditional informational structure of a tree for a model with significantly less
               linearity: the rhizome is reducible neither
                  to the One nor the multiple [...] it has neither beginning nor end, but always a
                  middle (milieu) from which it grows and which it over-spills [...] the rhizome is
                  antigenealogy. It is a short-term memory, or antimemory. The rhizome operates by
                  variation, expansion, conquest, capture, offshoots .
            
            The rhizome encapsulates models of literary and artistic output that defy traditional
               and structural definitions. Unlike the rooted tree or axial structure, this
               type of hypertext has no directionality, that is to say a reader can enter and exit
               at any point in the text and have any number of reading experiences depending on the
               reader’s path through the text. 
            Visualizing complex and rhizomatic structures on a single page posed a challenge for
               many medieval scribes. 
                  
                This image, from a 12th century manuscript of Boethius’ De Institutione Musica, attempts to visualize musical theory
               through mathematical ratios . The representational image
               is so complex and full of paths and intersections that it is difficult to determine
               the underlying concept. As a reader, there is no clear point of entry or exit, and it
               is difficult to determine where to begin the viewing and reading process. There seems
               to be an axial or tree-like structure that horizontally organizes the diagram, but
               the number of secondary paths differentiates this image from a traditional structure
               of a tree. In this image, the only obvious place for the reader’s eyes to rest is the
               horizontal middle, although as Deleuze and Guattari hint, the middle generates
               multiple middles so there is no final resting place. 
            While the previous figure is particularly emblematic of a rhizomatic model, it is
               somewhat anomalous as far as medieval diagrams are concerned. Diagrams with a
               cohesive visual metaphor are more common in even the most intricate of medieval
               diagrams, suggesting a highly complex process of reading and integrating images and
               text, much like the blend of text and images found on web-pages and advertisements.
                  The medieval page is a hive of activity,
               suggests Graham Caie: full of visual stimuli
                  with the text itself off-centre to make space for marginal illustrations and
                  glosses that parody or interpret text, and lemmata that guide the reader who
                  attempts to assimilate and synthesize what can only be called a multi-dimensional
                  visual experience.
            
            A 13th century illustration from William Peraldus’ Summa de
                  Vitiis, a manual on preaching and pastoral care, presents its reader with
               a complex structure of links and nodes and corresponding allegorical images . 
                  
                The image spans two pages and serves to comment on Peraldus’ text as a
               whole as well as to illustrate and exemplify his message on sin. On the left side of
               the page, the didactic diagrams illustrate the seven main vices as a number of
               sub-vices, which are represented as dragons and worms and correspond to chapters and
               sub-chapters in Peraldus’ narrative. The reader can take any number of paths through
               the various sins and vices and negotiate through the word-image pairings, the path
               echoing the message of Peraldus’ text itself: that once a person commits one sin,
               more egregious sins easily follow. 
            The facing page responds to the sinful images — with the break between the pages
               marking the distinction between good and evil — and instructs the reader as to what a
               person can do to resist vices. A knight on horseback with the shield of faith, and an
               angel opposes the horde of worm-like vices. The allegorical images in the diagram
               from Summa de Vitiis serve to expand the concept of
               vices and virtues that Peraldus introduces in his tract and illustratively turn
               virtues and vices into an epic battle between dragons and a knight on horseback. This
               multi-dimensional experience of which Caie speaks shares many similarities with
               Landow’s network model of hypertext. As Caie reminds us, the medieval page is
               a multi-dimensional visual
                  experience that requires the reader to read images alongside text
                  . New media change our concept of what an image is asserts Lev Manovich;
                  because they turn a viewer into an
                  active user. [...] The image becomes interactive, that is, it now functions as an
                  interface between a user and a computer or other device
               . In the most complex types of medieval data
               visualization, word and image are also inexorably tied together and, indeed, the
               image becomes the interface that functions as a portal into the diagram or data. 
            A reader also encounters an interactive and multi-dimensional reading experience when
               navigating through Mary Flanagan’s narrative, [theHouse]
               . This narrative takes place in a 3-dimensional
               environment and asks the reader to move through the story-space populated by cubes
               that form house-like structures. Snippets of text are interspersed throughout the
               cubes and the reader must navigate through the 3-dimensional architecture of the
               space to explore the literary work itself. Like the illustration of Peraldus’ work,
               the interface mirrors the work itself, with Flanagan playing on computer architecture
               and the structural design of a building itself. The connections continue as the
               reader explores the few lines of text that are readable and soon realizes that she
               must engage with the 3-dimensional space in order to read more of the narrative,
               which revolves around a troubled relationship between two people. There is no clear
               beginning or end to Flanagan’s text, indeed the reader feels as though she eavesdrops
               in the middle of an argument — as if she floats above the action and watches the
               scene from below. Unlike the embodied navigation of Jackson’s Patchwork Girl, this narrative is more reminiscent of the spatiality of
               Strickland’s Vniverse. Flanagan’s text, however, fully
               immerses the reader in a world that is at once architectural and symbolic at the same
               time.
         

            Conclusion
            The digital humanities has quickly generated new ways of thinking about reading
               technologies and continues to inform and change entire disciplines. While it may have
               started as a Hilfswissenschaft, the digital humanities has opened
               up book history to a world beyond the printed page, and medievalists have been there
               since the beginning. What I proposed in this paper is that instead of examining book
               history from the print to the digital era, we instead concentrate on the ways in
               which reading technologies from the pre- and post-print eras anticipate the same sort
               of reader and share similar reading experiences. The first, and perhaps the most
               significant, commonality between medieval and digital reading technologies is a
               simple one, but it is often overlooked: neither digital nor pre-modern books use the
               linear flow of the printed book as their primary means of storing data. This may seem
               incidental, but because of the dominance of the printed book, we forget it is a
               technology altogether. As Kate Hayles comments: five hundred years of print have made the conventions of
                  the book transparent to us
               . If we remove these conventions from the playing field
               altogether, book history becomes something different altogether.
            Reading technologies become multi-sensory when the stable, printed page is not
               dominant. From the embodied reading practices involving parchment and vellum to the
               haptic, forward motion of the drum solo from Dakota,
               reading technologies in medieval and digital texts expand to incorporate sound and
               touch. Bodies also become part of the metaphorical structure of the works themselves,
               especially in the shared image-space of medieval medical diagrams and digital works
               like Vniverse and Patchwork
                  Girl.
            
            Once we look past the reading technologies themselves, the ways the reader engages
               with the text is also another important feature in both medieval and digital texts.
               Specifically, a rhizomatic structure encourages the pre- and postmodern reader to
               approach a text that has neither a clear entrance nor exit. In diagrams explaining
               mathematical approaches to music and illustrated battles between the vices and
               virtues, the medieval reader had to search for complex visual meanings as they read.
               The same types of reading strategies are evident in [theHouse], which introduces a world both complex and user-driven. The
               spatiality involved in these pre- and postmodern texts also hearkens back to Vniverse and other works featuring an embodied reader. 
            Strickland asks us to be Ice Age readers when we approach Vniverse, which is to say, that we must try to approach her work without
               the constraints of contemporary reading practices and not anticipate that Vniverse can be navigated as though it was a traditional,
               printed book. Strickland’s caution is a salient one, especially as we look back and
               research medieval reading practices and technologies. Another way of looking at a
               Janus-faced approach to book history is to take a page from Deleuze and Guattari’s
               more rhizomatic expectations and allow ourselves as critics to make critical as well
               as temporal leaps as we study the history and future of the book.
         
