Title:  Racial Proxies in Daily News: A Case Study of the Use of
                    Directional Euphemisms
Volume:  010
Issue:  4
Date:  8 November 2016
Abstract:  
                
                This study examines the extent of the use of geographic code words in place of
                    racial terms in daily news reporting. This is a case study of the only daily
                    newspaper, the Toledo Blade, in the midwestern city
                    of Toledo, Ohio. A data set was constructed by searching a nine year collection
                    of Blade articles, available in full-text
                    searchable format in a ProQuest database, that included the most frequently used
                    directional terms and had specific street addresses (a total of 981 stories).
                    Besides bibliographic data, each story was coded for its location and the
                    general nature of the story. Street addresses were used to compile relevant
                    census tract information on the proportion of minorities in each area
                    referenced. These references were then plotted over a street map of Toledo
                    revealing geographic distributions that do not relate to actual cardinal
                    directions. Population data corresponding to each data point was then analyzed
                    to show that directional terminology correlates with the concentration of
                    minority population. Additionally, a comprehensive content analysis of all
                    21,667 Blade articles published in this period revealed racial differences in
                    reporting. Such quantified observations are reinforced by examination of
                    particular examples of racialized usage of geographic terms.
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                    ...names...construct social reality
                        as much as they express it…
                    
                
            
 The headline in the Toledo Blade marked a senseless
                tragedy, Police ID apparent hit-skip victim, suspect; Body of
                    Theresa James found early today in West Toledo (Blade, Feb. 21, 2014). According to the news story, twenty-six year old
                Ms. James was run down while walking alone late at night along a road that had no
                sidewalks. According to the Blade her body was
                discovered in West Toledo and Ms. James lived in a neighborhood
                the newspaper described as North Toledo. Curiously, her house
                in North Toledo was about two miles due south (and somewhat
                west) of where she was killed in West Toledo.
 How was it that North Toledo lay south of West
                    Toledo according to the newspaper of record in Northwest Ohio?
                Clearly the papers’ use of these terms is not strictly based on the points of a
                compass. Neither is it based on the city’s official nomenclature for its dozens of
                neighborhoods. According to the city’s published neighborhood designations, Ms.
                James was run down in a part of Toledo called North Towne and
                she lived in a neighborhood called Lagrange. According to the
                official directory, there are no neighborhoods named either West
                    Toledo or North Toledo in the city (City of Toledo Consolidated Plan).
                    Toledo’s Neighborhoods District Map, in City of Toledo Consolidated Plan, FY 2010-2015,
                    p.2. If these terms are not meant to refer to actual places or to
                geography, then they must relate to some other sort of colloquial meaning or common
                local usage. The question is, what do such terms as North
                    Toledo or West Toledo mean? 
One important aspect of this sad story is that Ms. James was a black woman who lost
                her life in a white neighborhood. The area where Ms. James was killed, referred to
                by the local newspaper as West Toledo, is about four-fifths
                white and one-tenth black. The community where Ms. James’ lived in North
                    Toledo is a mirror image of the one where she perished, four-fifths
                black and one-tenth white. The intersection where James was killed is part of
                    census tract 5702 that is 82% white and 9% black. Ms. James’ home is in census
                    tract 8 that is 10% white and 83% black. (Census Map for
                        Toledo, http://projects.nytimes.com/census/2010/map). These
                demographic facts made the mismatch between Ms. James race and the location of her
                accident part of the story that readers would have wanted to read and that the
                newspaper wanted to report. However, modern journalistic conventions did not permit
                race to be a prominent part of a story in which race was not an obvious element of
                the crime. The continuing widespread public belief in the relevance of race
                alongside journalistic standards that prohibit racial reporting has led to the use
                of various proxy terms to indicate race. In Toledo this has led to the adoption of
                directional terms as euphemisms for race.
For much of the Twentieth Century reporting on African Americans was largely limited
                to stories emphasizing black criminality 
                
                
                . This pattern changed slowly with the successes of
                the Civil Rights movement so that by the 1970s most major newspapers included more
                positive public interest stories about African Americans and black neighborhoods.
                Nevertheless, most newspapers continued to be more likely to print stories aligned
                with racial stereotypes than those counter to them 
                
                
                
                
                .
Well into the Civil Rights era it was still common for most newspapers, including the
                    Blade to routinely indicate whether the subject of
                a story was a “negro” or to clarify that the subject was white
                or caucasian when the context was unclear.Such reporting
                    was common in the early 1960s. See for example, 8 Boys
                        Cited In Defacing of Negro Home, Toledo
                        Blade, July 21, 1961, p. 3 or Contractors, City
                        Blame Each Other For Loss of Negro Housing Project, June 29, 1945,
                    p. 17. While this journalistic practice faded in the 1970s and 1980s,
                readers’ beliefs that this information was highly relevant did not. Today
                journalistic standards preclude the use of racial terms except in 
                    biographical and announcement
                        stories,” in cases where suspects or missing persons are sought and racial
                        descriptors are relevant, or “when reporting a demonstration or disturbance
                        involving race
                    
                .See also Associated Press Stylebook, (New
                    York: Basic Books, 2015), p. x.
Thus has arisen a deep journalistic dilemma. Colorblind standards of news reporting
                restrain responsible journalists from routinely identifying their subjects by race.
                Meanwhile, public attitudes, especially those of whites, equate blackness with
                criminality and through this lens view race as relevant to every crime story . Pinched between the two tines of a vice of
                their journalistic ethics and a widespread racial frame through which readers view
                news, some journalists have resorted to the routine use of proxy terms to indicate
                race without actually employing racial terms. 
Among the most common of these racial proxy terms are those that substitute
                geographic for racial identifiers. Because American cities are highly segregated by
                race (and in many instances increasingly so), descriptions of a subject’s
                neighborhood could often function as a proxy for race. For instance,
                    Harlem served this function in Manhattan, the
                    South Side for Chicago, and Watts or
                    Compton for Los Angeles. In the case of Toledo, geographic
                terminology had to be invented before it could be deployed to journalistically mark
                race.
Toledo’s demographics do not permit the simple use of a single neighborhood name as a
                proxy for race. Toledo’s black community is not concentrated in any one neighborhood
                but extends diagonally in a broad band across the middle of the city. Predominantly
                white neighborhoods are scattered on the city’s periphery, with the largest
                populations to the west, south, and north of the city. (See Figure 1) This
                demographic pattern that bisected the city required either the wholesale invention
                of a new set of geographic terms, such as “middle” or “central,” or the stretching
                of existing directional terms beyond both their historical meanings and their actual
                relation to the compass. 

                Distribution of Nonwhite Population, Toledo, Ohio, 2000.City of Toledo Consolidated Plan, 2010-2015
                        (Toledo, Ohio, 2010).
                
            
Complicating the easy substitution of place names or directional references for
                racial descriptors was the fact that two significant directional terms were
                historically misaligned with cardinal directions. When they were first coined,
                neither North Toledo nor West Toledo were
                actually north or west of the city. North Toledo was originally a suburban
                neighborhood that grew up in the 1890s around the terminus of an early streetcar
                line about two miles east and north of the center of the city along the Maumee river
                (See Figure 2). Likewise, West Toledo was originally the name
                of a suburban development platted in the first decade of the Twentieth century to
                the north and west of a neighborhood that had long been known as the West
                    End (today commonly referred to as the Old West
                    End). (See Figure 3). From their origins, these neighborhoods were
                misaligned with their actual geographic namesakes by about forty-five degrees. This
                original misalignment would later give license to a wholesale unmooring of these
                terms from compass points altogether. 

                Toledo 1897The Central Passenger Railroad, a trolley, ran up Erie and
                        Summit streets to the North Toledo terminus. Polk's
                        Toledo City Directory (R.L. Polk & Co, 1889) p. 100; Poor’s Manual,
                        1907, p. 1271; Rand, McNally & Co's New Business
                            Atlas Map of Toledo. Rand, McNally & Co. (Chicago, 1897)
                        David Rumsey Collection.
                
            

                Toledo 1917Toledo, Ohio, Automobile Blue Book, 1917, Vol. 8, Courtesy of
                        the University of Texas Libraries, The University of Texas at
                    Austin.
                
            
Toledo’s racial housing patterns were established during the housing boom of the
                1920s when a flurry of suburban developments were constructed with racially
                restrictive deeds prohibiting sales to Negroes
                . While most of Toledo’s relatively small but
                growing black population had no choice but to live in a handful of integrated
                downtown districts, their neighboring whites enjoyed increasing opportunities to
                relocate to all-white suburbs. During the New Deal the federal government
                constructed subsidized segregated housing in Toledo and underwrote a mortgage
                industry while prohibiting the writing of subsidized loans in integrated
                neighborhoods. Such policies effectively constructed majority black ghettos out of
                previously ethnically mixed neighborhoods. 
Though the black population of Toledo rapidly increased after World War II, the
                housing stock available to black families did not. From 1940 to 1950 the black
                population increased by nearly three-quarters while housing units increased by less
                than one quarter. Due to the pervasive housing discrimination practiced by
                landlords, banks, and realtors, black neighborhoods grew in density and population
                much faster than they grew in area, becoming progressively less diverse over time
                    
                . 
Whites in Toledo consciously nurtured the segregation of their city over many
                decades. In the 1950s white Toledoans responded to the rising black population by
                repealing the city’s decade-old fair housing ordinance in a popular referendum . When pressure mounted for the city’s public schools to
                integrate in the 1960s, city officials ceded its largest white working class
                district to a newly chartered township created for the purpose of establishing a
                separate white school district. So stubbornly did Toledo’s leaders cling to
                discriminatory policies that in the 1970s Nixon’s Department of Housing and Urban
                Development quietly cut funding to the city because of its continuing practice of
                funelling federal housing subsidies meant for black neighborhoods to white ones . As recently as 2000, strong patterns of housing
                discrimination by race have been readily documented by various studies that have
                uncovered strong price disparities for housing along racial lines in Toledo and
                large differences in bank approval rates for mortgages between whites and blacks of
                equal economic standing 
                . 

                Survey of Contemporary Directional Terminology
                 Today the use of directional terms is nearly ubiquitous in the Blade. Of approximately 188,550 articles in the paper
                    between November 2005 and November 2014, 21,667 or eleven percent, reference a
                    directional term.Figures based on searches of Proquest Newsstand database
                        for the Toledo Blade, Nov. 18, 2005-Nov. 10,
                        2014. Of concern here is not simply the overall frequency of the use
                    of these terms but their meaning: do they actually convey geographic information
                    or do they instead signal racial meaning? To gauge the degree that the terms are
                    used either directionally or racially, a data set was compiled by searching a
                    nine year collection of Blade articles for the
                    terms north,
                    west,
                    south,
                    east, and central Toledo. For each
                    story that used one of these directional references, full bibliographic data and
                    the street address of its subject was recorded (nearly five percent of the total
                    number of such directional references in the Blade
                    during that span of time contained specific addresses).Research assistance
                        provided by Keyonte' Ashford, Robert Baker, Kelsey Bates, Robert Beck Jr,
                        Ryan Bellissimo, Janella Blanchard, Domonic Bodnar, Anna Collignon, Bridget
                        Coyne, Logan Elias, Marko Filipovic, Skyler Fleshman, Nicholas Gentile,
                        Trenton Greene, Kennesha Gregory, Jason Grissom, Alexander Hall, Austin
                        Kepling, Jonathan Kovacs, Jeremy Labant, Austin Lesak, Cody Malone, Claire
                        Molitors, Andrew Rellick, Kimber Riley, Zane Ross, Brianna Roys, Timothy
                        Shimrock, Amy Steigerwald, Mckinzey Thompson, Kyle Vandevort, Jordan
                        Weidner, Zaren Wienclaw. Many thanks to Dalton Jones for offering early
                        comments on this article.
                 By plotting these directional references onto a map, the extent and consistency
                    of the usage of these terms can be analyzed. (See Figure 4) While nearly all of
                    the references to West Toledo are in the western half of
                    the city, most of them are also in its northern half. In fact, the number of
                    references to West Toledo in the northern half of the city
                    vastly outnumber the number of references to North Toledo.
                    Overall, a significant majority of the places called West
                        Toledo are in fact more northern than the places called
                        North Toledo.
                
                
                    Location of References to North and
                            West, Toledo Blade,
                        Nov. 2005 to Nov. 2014Geographic locations derived from 981 stories in
                            the Toledo Blade between Nov. 2005 and Nov.
                            10, 2014 searched by directional terms, North,
                            West,
                            Central,
                            South,
                            East,
                            Downtown,
                            Point Place,
                            Old West End,
                            Polish Village, along with
                                Toledo or City. Data
                            mapping done with Google MyMaps with map data provided by Google
                            2015.
                    
                
                
                    North Toledo seems the most inaccurately named region, most
                    of it extending along the eastern third of a central axis of the city, south of
                    the I-75 interstate highway. Much of the region extending north of that same
                    line is highly inconsistent in its nomenclature. Locations described as both
                        North Toledo and West Toledo are
                    jumbled together, especially in the neighborhoods bordering Detroit avenue that,
                    while being clearly in the northern quadrant of the city, are majority white
                    working class communities. 
                 In addition to the cardinal directions, the Blade
                    additionally refers to some subjects as being part of Central
                        Toledo or the Central City. This is a
                    geographically consistent area, as most of the references to it indeed fall in
                    the central area of a map of the city. But while occupying an appropriate area
                    it is also the least coherent area as a wide band of its boundaries are
                    intermixed with other neighborhoods that the newspaper references as
                        Downtown,
                    the Old West End, as well as with West
                        Toledo (See Figure 5).
                
                    Location of References to “Central,” “Downtown,” and “Old West End,”
                        Toledo Blade, Nov. 2005 to Nov.
                            2014.Geographic locations derived from 981 stories in the
                                Toledo Blade between Nov. 2005 and Nov.
                            10, 2014 searched by directional terms, North,
                            West,
                            Central,
                            South,
                            East,
                            Downtown,
                            Point Place,
                            Old West End,
                            Polish Village, along with
                                Toledo or City. Data
                            mapping done with Google MyMaps with map data provided by Google
                            2015.
                    
                
                 The inconsistency of the application of these geographic terms, especially
                        North and West Toledo, cannot be
                    explained by reference to their historical origins. The original North
                        Toledo was considerably east of the city and over a century
                    migrated west and north. West Toledo was originally located in the northwestern
                    area of the city and expanded both north, east and south to cover the largest
                    area of any directional reference. Central Toledo or the
                        Central City does not appear to have been employed for
                    any purpose prior to the 1960s. 
                 While the organization of these terms cannot be fully accounted for by geography
                    or history, they do correlate highly with the segregated racial demographics of
                    the city. To illustrate the overlap of these directional references and racial
                    demographics, the specific location of each directional reference mentioned in
                    the Toledo Blade from November of 2005 to November
                    of 2014 was compared with the percentage of minority population in its
                    associated census tract (See Table 1).
                
                    Nonwhite Population of Toldeo Census Tracts by Directional
                        Reference
                    
                         
                        N
                        % tracts over 50% nonwhite
                        mean % nonwhite
                    
                    
                        West
                        306
                        14.71
                        27.53
                    
                    
                        North
                        352
                        81.81
                        61.96
                    
                    
                        Central
                        140
                        100
                        86.68
                    
                    
                        East
                        63
                        0
                        33.8
                    
                    
                        South
                        49
                        40.82
                        46.72
                    
                
                 It is apparent from these figures that each of these directional terms, while
                    not particularly effective as terms of direction, are effective at indicating
                    each location’s proportion of racial minorities. Fewer than 15% of the places
                    described as being in West Toledo have a majority nonwhite
                    population compared with 82% of places described as North
                        Toledo and 100% of those called Central
                        Toledo.
                
            

                Anomalies of Nomenclature
                 While Toledo has dozens of neighborhoods known by name, the Blade regularly refers to only a handful of such neighborhoods,
                    rolling the rest into its larger directional rubrics. Three small neighborhoods
                    in particular are regularly referenced by their names rather than by the larger
                    directionally-designated areas (North,
                    West, etc.) that they are within. All three of these
                    neighborhoods are white enclaves within communities of color. 
                 A spit of land extending into Maumee Bay in the extreme northeastern part of the
                    city known as Point Place, is usually indicated by this
                    name rather than as being part of North Toledo. Unlike
                        North Toledo, the neighborhood described as
                        Point Place is overwhelmingly white. The boundary
                    between North Toledo and Point Place
                    is very ill-defined as the newspaper variously includes references to either
                    place across a several square mile area in its vicinity.As early as 1940,
                        the Blade distinguished between North Toledo
                        and Point Place: Picnic Planned for Children,
                        July 3, 1940, p. 4; Detwiler Row Stymies Plans…
                        May 25, 1952, p. 8.
                
                One white community, located in the heart of what is referred to as
                        North Toledo, is routinely named separately from the
                    black community that surrounds it. Rather, it is designated as the
                        Polish Village. Typical is the headline, Bank Branch Razed In Polish Village that reported on a
                    building at the corner of Lagrange and Central avenues (Blade, Mar. 18, 2010]). Sometimes the relationship between
                        Polish Village and the surrounding neighborhood is
                    described, such as in North Toledo's Polish Village section
                        (Blade, July 20, 2008]). In other articles the
                    distinction between the two is made more certain, as in Polish Village and adjoining parts of northern Toledo (Blade, Mar. 28, 2006). Generally, white residents of
                    this neighborhood are reported as living in Polish Village
                    while their black neighbors are described as living in North
                        Toledo.
                
                 Likewise, the only neighborhood within the predominantly black region called
                        Central Toledo that has a significant white population
                    is inconsistently referred to by the Blade by its
                    historic neighborhood name of the Old West End. When a bus
                    driver pulled over his bus and rushed to save a suicidal woman he was in
                        Central Toledo, but the Rosary cathedral next door is
                    usually described as towering in the Old West End (Blade, Mar. 29, 2013; Apr. 9, 2007]). Likewise the
                    mostly white St. Mark's Episcopal church is usually noted as being an Old West
                    End landmark but the black Thomas Temple Church, just down a long block on
                    Ashland Avenue, is in the central city (Blade, Jun 28, 2008; Dec. 26, 2008]). The Warren AME
                    church, also on Collingwood avenue, whose congregation is mostly African
                    American, stands in the central city (Toledo Blade,Oct. 15, 2007, B1.) One mile north
                    on Collingwood avenue stands the First Unitarian church, whose pews are mostly
                    filled with white parishioners, but First Unitarian, like the other stately
                    churches on surrounding corners, are rarely described as being in
                        central Toledo. First Unitarian is mentioned as being
                    in the Old West End or even as a downtown church (Blade, July 27, 2008]). However, these practices are
                    not entirely consistent. The Bibleway Temple Church, across the street, was
                    reported as being in the Old West End when it held a mass memorial service for
                    victims of violence. (Blade, Nov. 9, 2006).
                Over years of reporting on Toledo’s neighborhoods the Blade has developed a repertoire of terms that can be applied
                    interchangeably to those neighborhoods where whites and blacks live in nearly
                    equal numbers. Toledo institutions that are overwhelmingly white, such as the
                    Toledo Club, though surrounded by locations referred to as the central
                        city or central Toledo are rarely referred
                    to as being in such a place. Rather they are described as being
                        downtown (Blade, July 29,
                    2007; Apr. 29, 2006; Feb. 5, 2008; May 11, 2009; May 18, 2008]). 13th street is
                    a cross-street that is almost always described as bisecting downtown, except at
                    its southernmost point where a large public housing complex sits near the corner
                    of Washington and Indiana streets. The Port Lawrence Homes, described as being
                    in the central city, are one block from the
                        downtown Easystreet Cafe and next door to the
                        downtown historic St. Patrick’s church (Blade, Aug. 28, 2010; Dec. 27, 2011; Nov. 16, 2013;
                    Mar. 17, 2007). Though, occasionally, Port Lawrence Homes is noted as being
                        near downtown (Blade, Jan.
                    2013). Cherry street is the usual boundary of the downtown, but the Holy Trinity
                    Greek Orthodox church which stands on the far side of Cherry street from the
                    downtown (and therefore is in North Toledo), is usually
                    described as being in downtown Toledo (Blade, Sep. 6, 2007; Sep. 7, 2014; Apr. 30, 2011; June 26, 2010;
                    Sep. 4, 2008).On boundaries of Ward 2 in the central
                            city see Toledo Blade, Nov 7,
                        2013.
                Such discrepancies in the use of directional terms have not gone completely
                    without notice by readers of the Blade. One Blade reader wrote to the paper in 2010: Exactly where is central Toledo? Toledo media have
                        been racial-profiling for years by using the terms ‘central city’ and
                        ‘central Toledo.’ The media use these terms to identify race. If this is not
                        true, someone should inform the public where central Toledo and the central
                        city are located, by ZIP Code or precinct (Blade, July 21, 2010]).
                Similar anomalies are evident in neighborhoods to the west of the city. The
                    Westmoreland neighborhood is generally described as being in West
                        Toledo, though when a shooting occurred west of this area, in
                    another West Toledo neighborhood, its location was referred
                    to as being in Central Toledo (Blade, Aug. 18, 2014; Mar. 21, 2010). Likewise a series of
                    strong-arm robberies that occurred a few blocks further west were also referred
                    to as having taken place in the central city (Blade, Sept. 8, 2012). Westwood Avenue, like its name
                    suggests, is usually considered in West Toledo but when a
                    strangled body was found in the trunk of a car in a tow lot there it was
                    reported as being found in Central Toledo (Blade, Mar. 2, 2006). The Village Players Theater,
                    where mostly white local amateur thespians put on productions, is consistently
                    referred to as being in West Toledo, but the convenience
                    mart a couple of doors down on the corner of the same block was in
                        Central Toledo when it was held up (Blade, Sept. 6, 2007). 
            

                The Journalistic Function of Racial Euphemism
                The use of geographic euphemisms is a characteristic feature of racism in the
                    Twenty-first century. Racism requires that race be marked as meaningful in
                    public discussions but this marking has also to be deniably race-neutral on its
                    face to be consistent with the myth that America is a color-blind society. Thus,
                    in addition to using geographic terms to refer to areas of the city, the Blade routinely uses North Toledo
                    or Central Toledo in order to identify something or someone
                    as Black, and West Toledo when it wants to mark it or them
                    as White. The whole system of geographic euphemism results in the systematic
                    racial mapping of the community. 
                These patterns are evident not only from the anecdotal disparities in directional
                    terms applied to the same neighborhoods, as noted above, but from the overall
                    pattern of stories found in the last nine year run of the paper. Since November
                    of 2006, 21,667 Toledo Blade stories containing
                    directional references to north, east, south, or west have been archived in the
                    ProQuest Newsstand database. Approximately one in five of the stories that
                    included directional references associated with predominantly white areas (west,
                    south, and east) also included terms that indicated some act of violence (shot,
                    shooting, robbery, stabbing, rape, murder, beating, arson). However, the
                    frequency of similar references to violent crimes were far higher for those
                    directional references associated with majority black neighborhoods (north and
                    central). Compared with West Toledo the rate of reference
                    to violent crimes was nearly fifty percent higher for North
                        Toledo and for Central Toledo. (See Table
                    2).
                While disparities in crime reporting by neighborhood could be function of higher
                    crime rates in those neighborhoods most frequently identified by directional
                    references, crime rate data for Toledo does not support this hypothesis. A
                    comparable crime rate for each directional section of the city was calculated by
                    averaging together the overall crime rate of the census tract containing each
                    specific street address mentioned in a Blade story.
                    While the number of stories involving crimes identified as taking place in
                        North Toledo was twice that of similar stories in
                        West Toledo, overall crime rates in the locations
                    referenced in those stories was less than 10% greater than crime rates in the
                        West. Likewise, twice as many crime stories were
                    located in the Central city while the average crime rates
                    of all the locations mentioned was less than 10% greater than those parts of the
                        West city deemed newsworthy. Such results point to the
                    greater likelihood that a story will include reference to a majority black
                    community (by way of directional proxy) if the story includes a crime. 

                
                    Proportion of Crime Stories Among Stories With Directional References,
                        Toldeo Blade, Nov. 2005 to Nov.
                            2014.Directional References plus X-side and
                                X-end; crime stories defined as stories
                            including key terms in shooting, robbery, stabbing, rape, murder,
                            beating, arson, in various tenses. ProQuest Newsstand database accessed
                            11/25/14. Crime rate figures compiled from ESRI Crime Rate Comparison Map, accessed Nov. 13, 2015. Crime
                            rates are an index based on 100 equal to national average for all
                            metropolitan areas. Methodology and sources are listed as: 
                                The crime data is provided by Applied Geographic Solutions,
                                    Inc. (AGS). AGS created models using the FBI Uniform Crime
                                    Report databases as the primary data source and using an initial
                                    range of about 65 socio-economic characteristics taken from the
                                    2000 Census and AGS’ current year estimates...The total crime
                                    index incorporates all crimes and provides a useful measure of
                                    the relative “overall” crime rate in an area.
                                http://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=8125e8f4244a47d986f4cd840824eef3
                            
                    
                         
                        Total References
                        Crime Stories
                        % Crime Stories
                        Crime Rate
                    
                    
                        North
                        2971
                        1066
                        36
                        269
                    
                    
                        West
                        4776
                        850
                        18
                        245
                    
                    
                        East
                        3988
                        819
                        21
                        294
                    
                    
                        South
                        4372
                        1032
                        24
                        267
                    
                    
                        Central
                        2062
                        756
                        37
                        245
                    
                

                Additionally, there is a clear disparity in the proportion of crime stories that
                    employ directional terms as personal adjectives between white and black
                    neighborhoods (See Table 3). Far fewer crime stories, as a proportion of overall
                    stories, refer to a West Toledo man or a West
                        Toledo woman than use directions as an adjective to refer to
                    other areas of the city. Use of the personal adjectival form was two and half
                    times more common for references to men or women of Central
                        Toledo than of West Toledo. This would seem
                    to indicate that the association of particular people with particular areas of
                    the city, thereby marking them by race, was much more common for people from
                    majority African American communities than those from majority white ones. 
                
                    Proportion of Stories Employing Personal Adjectives with Directional
                        References, Toledo Blade, Nov. 2005 to Nov.
                            2014.Directional References plus X-side and
                                X-end. ProQuest Newsstand database accessed
                            11/25/14.
                    
                         
                        Total References
                        Personal Adjective
                        %
                    
                    
                        North Toledo
                        2971
                        99
                        3.33
                    
                    
                        West Toledo
                        4776
                        88
                        1.84
                    
                    
                        East Toledo
                        3988
                        120
                        3.01
                    
                    
                        South Toledo
                        4372
                        149
                        3.41
                    
                    
                        Central Toledo or Central City
                        2062
                        100
                        4.85
                    
                
            

                The Rise of Directional Racial Proxies
                The current pattern of use of directional proxies for race seems to have arisen
                    in fairly recent times. Judging by the frequency of a sample of stories found
                    through a search of issues of the Toledo Blade
                    archived by Google, the practice of using directional references increased
                    dramatically beginning in the 1970s. While references to North Toledo increased
                    modestly, those for West Toledo saw a significant jump beginning in the 1970s
                    and continuing for the next twenty years. The term Central
                        Toledo or Central City seems to only have
                    come into infrequent usage beginning in the 1960s and became common in the
                    1990s. Likewise, older names for smaller white neighborhoods located within
                        North or Central Toledo, such as
                    Point Place, the Old West End, and especially Polish Village, seem to all have
                    jumped in usage in the 1990s.Google newspaper archives are found at
                        site:google.com/newspapers (accessed Nov. 21-Nov.25, 2014). Google’s archive
                        is comprehensive going back to 1940, but because Google’s search engine
                        relies on OCR scans of microfilmed editions of the newspaper, only a small
                        subset of stories are captured by any individual query. While there may be
                        search bias against older newspapers as their microfilmed condition was in
                        many cases worse than more recent years, this bias does not seem to extend
                        past the 1950s. To check for this bias a search was done on a term whose
                        usage is presumably ubiquitous in local news through all decades. The term
                            mayor was selected and it appeared in equal
                        frequency in the decades of the 1960s and the 1990s. Likewise, as can be
                        seen in Figure 1 above, nearly as many references to North
                            Toledo appeared in the 1950s as in the 1990s. Note, figures
                        for the decade of the 2000s are systematically reduced as Google’s archive
                        extends only to 2007. (See Figures 6 & 7).
                
                    Stories in the Toledo Blade Containing
                        Directional References
                    
                
                
                    Stories in the Toledo Blade Referring to
                        Specific Neighborhoods
                    
                
                This timeline showing a substantial increase in the use of these directional
                    terms is consistent with the overall demographic history of the city. Unlike
                    many of its neighboring midwestern cities, Toledo had a relatively small black
                    population until the end of World War Two. The black population only reached ten
                    percent of the total city population in the 1950s and even as late as 1970
                    amounted to only 13.8 percent of the population. But through the 1970s and into
                    the 1990s a steady growth of the black population was accompanied by the rapid
                    flight of whites from the city to surrounding suburbs. By 1990 the black
                    population neared 20 percent of Toledo’s population and by 2000 amounted to
                    nearly one-in-four city residents (See Table 4).
                 Journalistically, the most rapid growth in the proportion of black citizens of
                    Toledo occurred precisely at the moment when, due to the Civil Rights Movement,
                    many newspaper editors consciously worked to scrub gratuitous racial references
                    from their pages. However, the public’s demand for news conveyed in a manner
                    that matched their racial conceptions did not similarly lessen. Between the
                    pressures to report news that conformed to popular psychological maps of the
                    community and the restraint of newly colorblind journalistic standards a dilemma
                    was created that racial proxies were able to resolve. Over the last quarter of
                    the century a new journalistic habit of using directional euphemisms became
                    ubiquitous. 
                
                    Toledo Population (White and Black), 1910-2010 Table 36. Ohio - Race and Hispanic Origin for Selected Large Cities
                                and Other Places: Earliest Census to 1990, Campbell Gibson
                            and Kay Jung, Historical Census Statistics On
                                Population Totals By Race, 1790 to 1990, and By Hispanic Origin,
                                1970 to 1990, For Large Cities And Other Urban Places In The United
                                States (Working Paper No. 76, U.S. Census Bureau, February
                            2005)
                    
                         
                        Black Population
                        % Black Population
                        % White Population
                    
                    
                        2010
                        78073
                        27.18
                        64.83
                    
                    
                        2000
                        73852
                        23.55
                        70.23
                    
                    
                        1990
                        65598
                        19.7
                        77
                    
                    
                        1980
                        61750
                        17.4
                        80.1
                    
                    
                        1970
                        52915
                        13.8
                        85.7
                    
                    
                        1960
                        40015
                        12.6
                        87.3
                    
                    
                        1950
                        25026
                        8.2
                        91.7
                    
                    
                        1940
                        14597
                        5.2
                        94.8
                    
                    
                        1930
                        13260
                        4.6
                        95.4
                    
                    
                        1920
                        5691
                        2.3
                        97.6
                    
                    
                        1910
                        1877
                        1.1
                        98.9
                    
                
            

                Conclusion
                This survey of articles in the Toledo Blade strongly
                    indicates that the newspaper routinely employs terms such as North
                        Toledo or Central Toledo to signal to
                    readers that the subject of a story is African American, and the term
                        West Toledo, to signal that the subject is White.
                    Evidence of this purposeful signaling is that none of these terms are employed
                    in a consistent directional context (as evidenced visually on a map) and that
                    the locations of references to North Toledo and
                        Central Toledo are associated with an
                    overrepresentation of African American subjects compared both with their total
                    share of the metropolitan population and their share of even those census tracts
                    with the most concentrated minority population in the city. Moreover, of the
                    scores of proper names for city neighborhoods, only those that are used to
                    signal whiteness in a majority nonwhite community, such as Old West
                        End,
                    Downtown, and Polish Village, are
                    regularly employed in the newspaper. 
                In the Twenty-First century the use of explicit racial language has declined
                    under the pressure of a reigning ethos of color-blindness. In place of
                    sustaining racist stereotypes of black criminality and shiftlessness by directly
                    referring to the race of individuals or communities being reported about, code
                    words that appear on their face to be race neutral have gained currency instead.
                    Scholars such as Eduardo Bonilla-Silva have shown that the use of such coded
                    language effectively transmits racial meaning while maintaining the appearance
                    of color-blindness  l 
                    . Teun A. van Dijk reminds media scholars that news
                    is not just a matter of what is printed on the page or projected on the screen,
                    but is an entire system of discourse involving both the conventions of
                    journalism and the social knowledge and the historically constructed frameworks
                    through which readers decode the news text. Racial marking through geographic
                    proxies only functions because news consumers supply their own racial
                    assumptions about their community and successfully decode these cues through a
                    racist frame. Thus, even without explicitly using race as a descriptor, news
                    stories can effectively convey that race is a salient element to the story, or
                    even the central aspect of the story itself .
                Geographic marking is not the only form of racial proxy in common use today.
                    Nellie Tran and Susan Paterson have documented how whites denied their racial
                    privilege and maintained their performance of color-blindness by employing the
                    word American as a proxy for white. By
                    switching American for white such individuals allowed themselves to think in
                    terms of racial norms and desired racial privileges while denying racism as a
                    force in society .
                Martin Conboy’s observation of how the news socially functions to define
                    community by reinforcing the feelings of belonging of some and symmetrically
                    categorizing others as outside this core, which he calls narratives of
                        exclusion while originally applied to distinctions of national
                    versus foreign, also applies to how news reporting marks its subjects racially
                    through the mechanism of proxy terms. 
                        One important way of identifying
                            outsiders is not in the direct reporting of the facts of the case but in
                            the metaphorical cluster of words used to generate an implicit picture
                            of the groups described.
                        
                    . See also, . In this way the use
                    of racial proxies works to establish an imagined racial community that
                    reinforces the racial frames that themselves are central to this system.
                Many studies have documented the powerful role media racial stereotyping plays in
                    reinforcing negative racial perceptions among whites 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    . While researchers have documented how such words as
                        welfare,
                    felon, and food stamps have been
                    racially coded, no research has yet been done to discover if even less
                    politically-charged language, such as directional references, have also assumed
                    such a role 
                    
                    
                    . 
                It is beyond the scope of this study to judge the impact of these journalistic
                    practices upon the culture and consciousness of the readers of this newspaper.
                    However, it should be feasible for future researchers using a survey or focus
                    group methodology to delineate the borders and boundaries of Toledoans’ mental
                    geography of race and crime. Likely these lines would align closely to those
                    commonly designated by the directional proxy terms regularly employed in the
                        Toledo Blade, which would seem to both reflect
                    and reinforce the predominate prejudices of the majority white community. 
                It is not this author’s contention that these practices are conscious ones or
                    matters of formal policy. It is more likely that the newspaper’s practices
                    mirror the prevailing implicit biases common at the time and place in which they
                    operate. Any particular news outlets’ continued relevance to its readership
                    depends upon its stories being written in such a way that the values and
                    meanings most important to these readers is conveyed. In spite of the widespread
                    belief that America today is a colorblind society and in spite of a public
                    culture praising diversity and tolerance, Americans continue to view their
                    communities through racialized lenses. As long as the underlying demand for news
                    that is parsed according to race continues, the use of various euphemisms and
                    proxies for race will also continue.
                It is unlikely that the Toledo Blade engages in this
                    practice uniquely or even to any greater extent than any other metropolitan news
                    outlet. As stated earlier some cities have more well defined and specific
                    neighborhood names that serve the same function as directional references in the
                        Toledo Blade. While the journalistic
                    conventions of any particular community will vary for reasons of history and
                    locale, the imperative to racially mark stories for a white readership that
                    implicitly associates crime with nonwhite populations probably is not restricted
                    to Northwest Ohio. 
            
