Title:  Now is the Future Now? The Urgency of Digital Curation in the
               Digital Humanities
Volume:  007
Issue:  2
Date:  10 October 2013
Abstract:  
            
            In their seminal report, Our Cultural Commonwealth
               (2006), the American Council of Learned Societies underscored the need for scholars
               engaged in digital humanities work to leverage their access to data both to expand
               their audience to the general public and to generate new research questions. Now is the Future Now? argues that the progress made in
               digital humanities toward these goals has depended and will depend not only on
               digital data, but also on their appropriate curation. The article defines digital
               humanities, data, so-called Big Data, and digital curation. Next it examines digital
               curation initiatives in the sciences and in the humanities that occurred before the
               release of Our Cultural Commonwealth. It then considers
               and evaluates the digital curation work undertaken in the sciences and in the
               humanities after the report’s publication. In theory and in practice digital curation
               has benefited substantially from practices developed and tested first in the natural
               sciences and subsequently adapted for and extended in the humanities. Finally, the
               piece explores the future work necessary to facilitate symbiosis between digital
               curation and digital humanities. Collaboration and cooperation, transcending
               geographical, disciplinary, and institutional boundaries, data sharing, policies and
               planning, education and training, sustainability — all remain pressing issues in
               2013.
         
Full Body Text: 
Now is the Future Now? The Urgency of Digital Curation in the Digital
            Humanities

            The emergence of the Internet has transformed the
               practice of the humanities and social sciences — more slowly than some may have
               hoped, but more profoundly than others may have expected.
            
               Our Cultural Commonwealth
               
            
         

            Humanists do not lack for questions.
            Amy Friedlander, 
            
         

            This much is clear: big data are not just for
               scientists anymore.
            Christa Willford and Charles Henry, 
            
         
The challenges humanities data stakeholders faced as of the mid-2000s seemed legion: the
            possible loss of, the fragility of, and the inaccessibility of the cultural record; the
            cultural record’s intricacy and complexity; vexing intellectual property restrictions;
            the dearth of incentives to experiment with cyberinfrastructure; uncertainty regarding
            the future mechanisms and economics of publishing and scholarly communication; and
            insufficient resources, will, and leadership . But in its
            sixth report, Our Cultural Commonwealth: The Report of the American
               Council of Learned Societies Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for the Humanities and
               Social Sciences (2006), the American Council of Learned Societies proclaimed,
               digital technology can offer us new ways
               of seeing art, new ways of bearing witness to history, new ways of hearing and
               remembering human languages, new ways of reading texts, ancient and modern
            . The report lobbied for increased investment in
            infrastructure, for policies that fostered openness and accessibility, for public and
            private sector cooperation, for invigorated leadership, for more scholarly workshops and
            fellowships, for more national centers, for consensually reached and open standards and
            tools, and for more extensible and reusable digital collections. 
Most important, Our Cultural Commonwealth forecasted that
            if stakeholders adhered to its recommendations, the next five to six years would see,
            first, an expanded audience among the general public: All parties should work energetically to ensure that
               scholarship and cultural heritage materials are accessible to
                  all — from a student preparing a high-school project to a parent trying to
               understand the issues in a school-board debate to a tourist wanting to understand
               Rome’s art and architecture
            . Digital information was inherently democratizing and represented a public
            good . As one of the report’s authors, John
            Unsworth, later reflected, the general public remains the most important audience for
            the humanities, digital and conventional . Willard McCarty
            (2012) rightly extended Unsworth’s point, noting that Arguing for economic benefits is a long reach for the
               humanities, but the well-being of citizens is not
            .
Second, a larger number of scholars would ask newfound research questions. There would
            be new patterns and relations to be
               discerned, and deep structures in language, society, and culture to be exposed and
               explored
            . Neither disciplinary boundaries nor individual
            institutions nor national borders would constrain digital cultural heritage materials.
            Scholars could see artifacts in new ways through digital imaging, performance footage,
            and mapping technology; they could bring together works from physical collections
            scattered in space and time and study across them; they could collaborate with distant
            colleagues; and they could engage in data mining, simulations, game play, role play, and
            virtual worlds. 

            Our Cultural Commonwealth crystallized the unprecedented
            urgency of digital data curation in the humanities. Many stakeholders since have
            embraced the importance of promoting the digital humanities through democratized access
            to and an expanded audience for cultural heritage materials and through posing new
            research questions — indeed, they have done so at an accelerating rate. Moreover, many
            stakeholders recognize the indispensability of digital curation in underpinning not only
            those specific goals, but also the more general aims of digital humanities scholarship.
            Despite its stakeholders’ marked advances on multiple fronts, however, Our Cultural Commonwealth’s specific recommendations remain of
            pressing importance in 2013. Ultimately, the digital humanities cannot thrive without
            digital data curation.
First, this paper defines and situates the digital humanities and both data and Big
            Data. Next, it probes digital curation, considering it both in the sciences and in the
            humanities. More specifically, it discusses the professionals who curate data, the key
            issues in data curation and how best to approach them, the importance of a lifecycle
            approach, the machinations of sharing and reusing data, and the role of data management
            planning. Third, it explores reports on and case studies of digital curation undertaken
            in the United States and United Kingdom prior to the release of Our
               Cultural Commonwealth. Fourth, it considers the trajectory of digital
            curation efforts in the United Kingdom and United States following Our Cultural Commonwealth. In particular, it examines more recent reports
            and case studies and juxtaposes these findings with those of earlier stakeholders.
            Finally, the paper assesses the state of digital curation in the humanities in 2013. 
In 2009, John Unsworth reflected that the humanities scholars involved in Our Cultural Commonwealth found it very difficult to say exactly why the work they do should
               matter to the general public; in fact, they often did not believe that it
               would
            . But the humanities seemed much better off than the sciences: the public might want the results of
               scientific research, but they are not all that interested in the actual content and
               conduct of that research; in the humanities research does have a general
               audience.
            . Digital curation ensures that research and readership in
            the humanities will be maximized.

            I.
            Like digital curation, the digital humanities represent a hybrid domain, crossing disciplinary boundaries and
                  also traditional barriers between theory and practice, technological
                  implementation and scholarly reflection
               . Even three years later, the definition and scope of
               the digital humanities remained under
                  negotiation
               . But such equivocation obscured a pivotal shift: the
               digital humanities, argued Matthew Kirschenbaum of the Maryland Institute for
               Technology in the Humanities (MITH), were coalescing into something like a movement armed with an
                  unusually strong sense of
                  community and common purpose
               . 
            A year later, Rafael Alvarado of the University of Virginia’s Sciences, Humanities,
               and Arts Network of Technological Initiatives (SHANTI) thought the digital humanities
               constituted a genealogy, viz. a
                  network of family resemblances among provisional schools of thought,
                  methodological interests, and preferred tools, a history of people who have chosen
                  to call themselves digital humanists and who in the process are creating that
                  definition
               . Still, persistent anxiety about the richness and strangeness of the digital humanities lingered . More pragmatically, digital humanities scholarship remained
               a backwater
                regarding hiring, tenure, and teaching and younger
               scholars often felt ghettoized and
                  even disadvantaged as a result . As such,
                  alternative or para-academic jobs have served as a
               frequent recourse . 
            Belying such concerns, however, recent scholarship indicates a visionary and forward-looking sentiment in the
               digital humanities, not least because of a salutary increase in size and diversity in
               the field over the past half-dozen years . Optimally,
               the digital humanities will serve as a
                  laboratory, innovation agency, portal and collaborative initiator for the
                  humanities, and as a respectful meeting place or trading zone for the humanities,
                  technology and culture, extending across research, education and
                  innovation
               . Indeed, work in the digital humanities frequently
                  better serves values such as pluralism
                  and innovation than do the professional values of the traditional academic
                  humanities, which often seem to be crouched in a defensive position
               . Fulfilling such an ambitious agenda in the
               digital humanities depends upon digital data and even more important, upon its
               curation. As historian Dan Cohen (2012) suggests, 
                  Curation becomes more important than publication once publication
                  ceases to be limited
               .
            The digital humanities pivot around data. The Digital Curation Center defines data as
                  A reinterpretable representation of
                  information in a formalized manner suitable for communication, interpretation, or
                  processing.
                Digital Curation Center Glossary: http://www.dcc.ac.uk/digital-curation/glossary#D
                Data may be valuable as a public good, as evidence, or as part of the legal
               record . Our Cultural
                  Commonwealth report characterized digital data as notoriously fragile, short-lived, and easy to manipulate
                  without leaving obvious evidence of fraud
               . Worse, much collected data were neither
               curated nor published whatsoever; numerous data iceberg[s] resulted . Even more challenging,
               just as the humanities depend upon context and a critical mass thereof, so too do
               many humanities data objects maintain intricate structures predicated upon numerous
               structural and semantic internal relationships. Such objects, therefore, are
               exceedingly contextual themselves .
            The notion of data as a vehicle for new scholarship or more rigorous scholarship or
               both in the natural sciences, social sciences, and humanities accrued unprecedented
               cachet with the emergence of Big
                  Data. Big Data amalgamates technology, analysis, and mythology. Ideally
               amenable to study at all levels, it undergirds new forms of analysis or enriches
               existing ones, and nonetheless remains accessible to non-experts . Harnessing computing power and algorithmic accuracy,
               researchers may exploit large data sets not only to tease out patterns, but also to
               inform economic, social, technological, or legal arguments. As Associate Dean for
               Research Data Management at Johns Hopkins University Sayeed Choudhury asserts (2010),
                  Fundamentally, there is a shift
                  from a document-centric view of scholarship to a data-centric view of
                  scholarship
               . Scholarship in this vein, moreover, shows
               that Technology and creativity are not
                  dichotomous, but are mutually dependent
               . Amy Friedlander of the Council of Library and
               Information Resources elaborates: if
                  the infrastructure answers the question, how?, the research program answers the
                  questions what? and why?
               . 
            Big Data evinces other important characteristics besides size. As the Coalition for
               Networked Information's Cliff Lynch insists, Data can be big in different ways:
               stakeholders must consider its size, but its lasting significance and the challenges
               of describing it as well . As such, Big Data may be less about data that is big than…about a
                  capacity to search, aggregate, and cross-reference large data sets
               . More problematic, thought the Aspen Institute’s
               David Bollier, One of the most
                  persistent, unresolved questions is whether Big Data truly yields new insights —
                  or whether it simply sows more confusion and false confidence
               . Big Data engenders seminal challenges for
               stakeholders.
            First, Big Data revamps the definition of knowledge epistemologically and ethically.
               Second, it facilitates unprecedented and possibly unwarranted claims to objectivity
               and accuracy. Third, bigger data are not ipso facto tantamount to better data;
               methodological concerns must not be given short shrift. Fourth, Big Data loses
               meaning when denuded of context. Fifth, ethical issues revolving around
               accountability, power, and control must be weighed. Finally, Big Data may reinforce
               familiar or create new digital divides: the richest and most prestigious institutions
               can purchase the best data . Data, in short, may rupture the
               status quo in the natural sciences, in the social sciences, or in the humanities . Disruptive or not, data requires curation to remain
               usable.
         

            II.
            Though the term was coined in 2001 in the United Kingdom, the array of concerns
               animating digital curation emerged in the middle of the 1990s and engaged a
               variegated cohort of stakeholders . The Digital Curation
               Center posits that digital curation is
                  about maintaining and adding value to a trusted body of digital information for
                  current and future use.
                Digital Curation Centre: http://www.dcc.ac.uk/digital-curation/what-digital-curation
                It constitutes an umbrella term
                  for digital preservation, data curation, and digital asset and electronic records
                  management and brings together the scientific, educational, and
               professional communities with governmental and private organizations . Associate Dean of Libraries at California Polytechnic State
               University Anna Gold (2010) notes that the
                  activities of curation are highly interconnected within a system of systems,
                  including institutional, national, scientific, cultural, and social practices as
                  well as economic and technological systems
               . Digital curation involves the management of digital objects over their entire
                  lifecycle, ranging from pre-creation activities wherein systems are designed, and
                  file formats and other data creation standards are established, through ongoing
                  capture of evolving contextual information for digital assets housed in archival
                  repositories
               . It amounts to a
                  central challenge and opportunity for any data-intensive organization . Neither its complexity nor its importance for humanities
               data can be overstated. Historian Mark Kornbluh (2008) insists, Digital humanities content requires curation
               . Indeed, cultural information is a privileged domain for digital curation
                  . Put simply, curation adds value to
               digital assets.
            Curators of data comprise many stakeholders: individuals using their hard drives or
               networked drives, departments or groups using shared or separate drives,
               institutions, communities of institutions either formal or informal, disciplines,
               publishers, national services or national data services, or other third parties . Key issues in effecting curation include the size of
               the data, the number of objects to be curated and their complexity, the interventions
               needed, ethical and legal concerns, policies, practices, standards, and incentives
                  . More pointedly, a digital curation program must
               have a flexible and scalable infrastructure to ingest content, an economically and a
               technologically sustainable system to provide for data integrity checking,
               reversioning, and other open-ended tasks, and human and machine interfaces that offer
               multiple appropriate access points. Provisions must be made for creating or capturing
               metadata, for recording data provenance, for providing unique identifiers, for hewing
               to intellectual property rights laws, for drawing up appropriate policies regarding,
               for instance, submission and use, and finally, for presenting data collection in a
               cogent and useful context . 
            An optimal approach to curation involves four steps. First, curators should build
               curation or re-usability into their workflow. This allows the easiest capture of
               provenance information and associated metadata. Second, curators should retain the
               ability to process data, not merely the data themselves. Standard data formats and
               file types processed with standard programs are preferable, though in some case open
               source options are advantageous. Third, curators should render transparent any
               questions about ownership and allowable use. Last, curators should make data citable,
               adhering to standard formats and to discipline-specific practices .
            Digital curation depends upon a lifecycle approach: in other words, all stages and
               actions are identified, planned, and implemented in the appropriate order. A
               lifecycle approach implicates multiple processes: appraisal, ingestion,
               classification, indexing, and cataloging, knowledge enhancement, presentation,
               publication, and dissemination, use experience, repository management, preservation,
               goal and usage modeling, domain modeling, and authority management . This approach ensures the maintenance of authenticity, reliability, integrity
                  and usability of digital material
               . As Jillian Wallis and her colleagues (2008)
               contend of ecological sensing data, Shifting the practices of archiving such as appraisal, curation, and tracking
                  provenance into earlier stages of a given material’s lifecycle can increase the
                  likelihood of capturing reliable, valid, and interpretable data — and of
               curating it appropriately .
            Christine Borgman (2012) observes that sharing data allows scholars to reproduce or
               verify research findings, to make findings generated by publicly-funded research
               available to the public, to permit other researchers to ask new questions about
               existing data, and to advance research and promote innovation . But stakeholders who consider sharing must know which
               data can be shared, why it should be shared, by whom and with whom, under what
               conditions, and to what effect . Rationales for sharing
               differ, however, by the arguments advanced in its favor, the motivations of its
               beneficiaries, and the not invariably compatible incentives of stakeholders . 
            Conversely, disincentives to share data persist. For example, researchers may fear
               that they will fail to receive appropriate credit for such labors or that others will
                  scoop them. Second,
               documenting data in a reusable form necessitates much labor. Third, creators of data
               may worry about re-users misusing or misinterpreting the original data or about a
               related concern, intellectual property control. Fourth, confidentiality or privacy
               concerns, legal or otherwise, may motivate scholars to restrict access . Not to be overlooked, though, sharing is only of use if there are others to share
                  with
               . Sharing is purportedly a common practice only in
               the natural sciences, astronomy and genomics prominent among them . But other fields are following; momentum for data sharing
               in the social sciences is evident and
                  growing
               .
            Sharing data presages that data’s reuse. To be reused, data must be translatable and
               thus visible and coherent. Appropriate mechanisms must ensure that data quality and
               provenance can be trusted . The ability to contextualize
               and document both data and pertinent processes hinges on the discipline’s history and
               on the configuration of its particular research community . Indeed, in all disciplines researcher practices around data are always highly
                  specific and qualitative, even within quantitative disciplines, and that the data
                  are always cooked
               
               . Providing for reuse thus requires making explicit their [data’s] context of
                  production and setting up appropriate systems of quality checks and
                  assessment
               . To this end, the National Institutes of
               Health mandated that researchers deposit peer-reviewed, NIH-funded articles in PubMed
               Central as early as 2008. 
            But ensuring data management plans are created, let alone followed, has been
               challenging; indeed, merely ensuring that planning represents a systematic and
               continuous management activity remains a hurdle . More
               recently, the National Science Foundation stipulated that each grant proposal include
               a data management plan explaining how the project intends to disseminate and share
               its research results. The NSF noted, Investigators are expected to share with other researchers, at no more than
                  incremental cost and within a reasonable time, the primary data, samples, physical
                  collections and other supporting materials created or gathered in the course of
                  work under NSF grants. Grantees are expected to encourage and facilitate such
                  sharing.
                National Science Foundation Dissemination and Sharing of Research Results:
                     http://www.nsf.gov/bfa/dias/policy/dmp.jsp
                Yet good data management plans are as important in the humanities as they are
               in the natural sciences. 
            Humanists wisely followed the lead of their brethren vis-à-vis data management plans.
               In 2012, the National Endowment for the Humanities mandated that grant applicants
               submit a data management plan that addressed four broad issues. The Office of Digital
               Humanities deliberately aligned its guidance with the NSF’s, assuming grantees could
               exploit extant or emerging data management initiatives at their home
                  institutions. Data Management Plans for NEH Office of Digital Humanities
                  Proposals and Awards:
                  http://www.neh.gov/files/grants/data_management_plans_2012.pdf First,
               applicants would describe the types of data their project would generate and
               subsequently share, the ways in which they would manage and maintain their data, the
               legal and ethical restrictions that might affect their ability to manage their data,
               and the mechanism(s) by which they would share or make their data accessible. Second,
               applicants would address the period of data retention: based on disciplinary norms
               and best practices, how long would applicants retain their data before sharing it?
               Third, applicants would describe their data formats and how to render those formats
               most amenable to dissemination. Finally, applicants would describe the resources and
               facilities to be used for storing their data and preserving its accessibility. The
               NEH planned to monitor awardees, though primarily through the awardees’ interim and
               final reports. Data Management Plans for NEH Office of Digital Humanities
                  Proposals and Awards: http://www.neh.gov/files/grants/data_management_plans_2012.pdf
                More practically, the NEH plans to conduct workshops in 2013 and 2014 to help
               participants embrace a lifecycle approach to data curation, to model data, to
               calculate and manage risk, to learn about salient tools and systems, to leverage data
               curation skills, and to stay current with developments in the field. Digital
                  Humanities Data Curation: http://www.neh.gov/divisions/odh/institutes/digital-humanities-data-curation
               
            
            Despite the long term importance of digital curation, however, researchers tend often
               to postpone it as that extra burden,
                  the one just beyond what is currently possible, in the queue behind meeting the
                  conference deadline and writing the grant application
               . A 2002 United Kingdom study found, too, that sticks are less effective than carrots — people
                  must want to provide their primary research data and be given incentives to
                  undertake the curation work which benefits the wider research community rather
                  than the individual data creators themselves
               . Information scientist Michael Lesk urges digital
               curation stakeholders to focus on
                     good enough, on when needed, and on getting
                     help
               
               . Sundry researchers have focused on just these sorts of
               issues.
         

            III.
            Reports and specific projects both before and after Our Cultural
                  Commonwealth show how stakeholders — in a variety of situations and from a
               variety of perspectives — have responded to the prospects of digital curation. Well
               before Our Cultural Commonwealth, scholars turned their
               attention to digital curation generally and to specific curation initiatives. By the
               early 2000s, scientists and humanists faced similar problems, namely electronic
               sources and datasets too large for traditional analysis and materials that demanded
               contextual knowledge outstripping what an individual researcher could master. But
               unlike scientists, humanists lacked the resources to construct the new requisite
               scholarly infrastructure. Scientists have been remarkably effective in making their arguments for
               funding to administrators, legislatures, funding agencies, and the general public
                  . Thus investments remained highly uneven by field . In no small measure because of their superior resources, stakeholders
               in the natural sciences took the lead in addressing the curation needs of Big Data in
               the early 2000s. 
            Scholarship produced by the National Science Foundation and the National Science
               Board in the United States introduced a set of concerns that remain relevant —
               indeed, pressing — a decade later. Underwritten by the National Science Foundation
               Blue Ribbon Panel on Cyberinfrastructure, the Atkins Report of 2003 announced, a new age has dawned in scientific and
                  engineering research, pushed by continuing progress in computing, information, and
                  communication technology, and pulled by the expanding complexity, scope, and scale
                  of today’s challenges
               . Such developments triggered considerable
               optimism about addressing priorities such as climate change and natural disasters,
               national security, and public health. Feedback from research communities, meanwhile,
               suggested that such projects necessitated federated resources (namely data and
               facilities), multidisciplinary expertise, and an international reach. The NSF pledged
               to lead the effort . 
            Two years later, the National Science Foundation’s Cyberinfrastructure Council
               revisited the importance of interdisciplinarity and collaboration in supporting new
               research possibilities. The Council queried, What answers will we find — to questions we have yet to
                  ask — in the very large datasets that are being produced by telescopes, sensor
                  networks, and other experimental facilities?
               . Despite converging advances in numerous areas from
               networking to data systems, still more collaborative partnerships were needed on
               national and international fronts and among government agencies, private sector
               organizations, and educational institutions .
               Also released in 2005, the National Science Board’s report on Long-Lived Digital Data Collections stressed
               long-lived digital data’s role in spurring democratization in science and education.
               The report advocated for an agency-wide umbrella strategy in service of this goal . 
            In no small measure due to the leadership of the NSF and the NSB in the natural
               sciences, by 2006 fields such as astronomy, particle physics, and bioinformatics were
               grappling with the research possibilities of Big Data. Industries ranging from
               banking to pharmaceuticals, medicine to aerospace, also sought to use unprecedented
               amounts of data, albeit commercially . Such possibilities
               captured — and in some cases galvanized — public attention. But on the other hand,
               Big Data in the humanities seemed to generate less fanfare among scholars or the
               public. But stirrings in various digital humanities arenas belied observers’
               assumption of stasis.
            Since the early 2000s, for instance, digital humanities centers have been a driving force for digital scholarship
                  ; . The Digital
               Curation Center has shown particularly vital leadership since 2004 ; ; . These hubs have helped transform humanities scholarship and teaching, advocated
               for the humanities’ continuing usefulness in a digital environment, served as
               intellectual sandboxes, offered
               sites for training, fostered interdisciplinarity, attracted new audiences, engaged
               with various professional communities, encouraged collaborations among numerous
               communities, and extended otherwise unavailable operational services to scholarly
               communities . For example, the Roy Rosenzweig Center for
               History and New Media at George Mason University pledges to incorporate multiple voices, reach diverse audiences,
                  and encourage popular participation in presenting and preserving the past.
                Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media: http://chnm.gmu.edu/
                Though siloing, redundancies, and non-integrated digital production may
               undercut the effectiveness of such digital humanities centers, their importance for
               digital curation and thus for recruiting new audiences and addressing new scholarly
               questions cannot be gainsaid .
            Similarly, the emergence and increased visibility of institution repositories (IRs)
               beginning in the early 2000s generated new and stimulated ongoing digital curation
               efforts. Institutional repositories both extend the reach of scholarly communication
               by spurring innovation in a decentralized publishing system and represent tangible
               indicators of an institution’s prestige and public value socially, scientifically,
               and economically . A mature IR, Clifford Lynch proposed in 2003, would
               contain faculty and students’ research and teaching materials. It would document the
               institution itself, namely its events and performances. Most important, it would hold
               experimental and observational data . As with centers, the
               importance of institutional repositories for digital curation, digital humanities,
               and their commingling cannot be overstated. 
            Notwithstanding the leadership evinced by the National Science Foundation and the
               National Science Board, early data-intensive research projects tested the reports’
               assertions at the grassroots and provided salutary lessons for digital curation
               stakeholders. For instance, the Biological Sciences Collaboratory (BSC) at Pacific
               Northwest National Laboratory sought both to offer tools and capabilities to
               facilitate collaboration and sharing and to capture the context(s) in which sharing
               occurred. The BSC enabled biological data and analyses to be shared through metadata
               capture, electronic lab notebooks, data organization views, data provenance tracking,
               analysis notes, task management, and scientific workflow management. But successful
               sharing also required the provision of overall contexts regarding total data space,
               applications, experiments, projects, and the scientific community. Such provision of
               context occurred frequently in one to one situations, whether face to face or through
               email . In short, standards and best practices were
               conspicuously lacking.
            Also in the early 2000s, the Collaboratory for Multi-scale Chemical Science (CMCS)
               cultivated an informatics-based approach to synthesizing multi-scale information that
               in turn supported systems-based research. One group of researchers drew two important
               conclusions. First, they argued, As
                  knowledge grids lower barriers to discovering, analyzing, and generating chemical
                  information, technologies and research processes will need to co-evolve
               . In other words, researchers must avoid letting
               technology outrun research agendas. Second, Myers and his colleagues called for
               flexibility: sub-communities will need to
                  be able to independently develop and evolve their domain resources while
                  contributing to multi-scale goals
               .
            Established by the National Science Foundation in 1980, the Long Term Ecological
               Research (LTER) network by 2006 hosted 26 sites locally and globally, supporting
               disciplines ranging from soil chemistry to stream flows to forest ecology. A 2006
               study of LTER called for further study of actual curation practices over the long
               term to counter the technical
                  overemphasis inherent in near-term planning and with increased computing power,
                  middleware, and shared grid capabilities
               . Second, LTER’s work underscored that growing attention to informatics, education,
                  and social sciences initiates an interdisciplinary coordination within which
                  jointly framed questions create new types of data needs and an arena within which
                  data integration can be explored
               . Third, LTER showed that it is the process of creating standards that is informed
                  by practice and a likely determining factor of success of whether a deployed or
                  adopted standard is enacted in practice
               . Fourth, open access to publicly-funded
               research seemed attractive but had not been implemented or tested. In tackling these
               issues, ultimately, research communities must be involved from the ground up and from
               the project’s germination. 
            Early reports and case studies in natural sciences in the United States both
               evaluated previous work and pushed for expanded and innovative future work. Reports
               by the National Science Foundation and by the National Science Board underscored the
               indispensability of collaboration, namely in sharing resources and strategies across
               geographic and disciplinary boundaries. Similarly, the reports stressed the
               democratic potential inherent in Big Data in the sciences. Early case studies,
               meanwhile, also foregrounded collaboration and interdisciplinarity. But this work
               contributed new findings as well. Perhaps most important, sharing required the
               provision of appropriate context. Second, these cases demonstrated the need for
               balance and flexibility: between new technical advances and new research questions
               and between disciplinary (and even sub-disciplinary) differences and large-scale
               common goals. Third, early cases showed the need for consensually developed standards
               and best practices. Finally, they considered the possibility of open access to
               publicly-funded research data. Subsequent digital curation efforts in the United
               Kingdom and United States, especially in the humanities, built upon and refined these
               priorities while allowing them to be tested empirically.
         

            IV.
            Despite the attention given to developments in the natural sciences, curation in the
               humanities was also progressing, albeit in less high-profile fashion. The United
               Kingdom’s grassroots strategy of the mid-2000s laid important groundwork. For
               instance, the University of York-based Archaeological Data Service (ADS)’s
               Archaeotools: Data Mining, Faceted Classification, and e-Archaeology made available
               40,000 reports of gray literature. Oxford University’s Image, Text, Interpretation:
               e-Science, Technology and Documents deciphered fragmentary, stained, or damaged
               classical manuscripts. Finally, Birmingham’s Medieval Warfare on the Grid: The Case
               of Manzikert permitted a virtual reenactment of the 1071 battle. Such projects not
               only hinted at the potential use of crowdsourcing (and thus democratized knowledge)
               to support data integration for research in the humanities, but also indicated a
                  clear trend toward the
               development and use of new scholarly methodologies . 
            Other case studies in the United Kingdom fleshed out this work. These cases more
               explicitly addressed sharing, reuse, and data management planning — and their
               potential ramifications for new audiences and research questions. For instance, a
               2007 study addressing four United Kingdom interdisciplinary case studies —
               SkyProject, SurveyProject, CurationProject, and AnthroProject — illuminated data
               sharing and reuse practices. These projects suggested two correctives to conventional
               wisdom about data-intensive scholarship. First, knowledge could not be easily
               extracted either from its creators or from its original contexts and be facilely
               reused. Numbers and raw data could never be self-explanatory: how much context was
                  enough? Second, Carlson and
               Anderson found the presumed binary divide between quantitative and qualitative
               sciences spurious. Rather, project team members constructed socio-technical hybrids through collecting,
               processing, annotation, release, and reuse of data . 
            Also addressing sharing and reuse and conducted between 2007 and 2009, the United
               Kingdom’s Sharing, Curation, Reuse and Preservation (SCARP) case studies aimed to understand expectations, risks and
                  constraints, and find appropriate ways to build on current capabilities in
               digital curation  The research groups involved in the SCARP
               cases — Curating Brain Images in a Psychiatric Research Group: Infrastructure and
               Preservation Issues; Curating Atmospheric Data for Long Term Use: Infrastructure and
               Preservation Issues for the Atmospheric Sciences Community; Clinical Data from Home
               to Health Centre: the Telehealth Curation Lifecycle; Curated Databases in the Life
               Sciences: The Edinburgh Mouse Atlas Project; Roles and Reusability of Video Data in
               Social Studies of Interaction; Digital Curation Approaches for Architecture; and
               Curation of Research Data in the Disciplines of Engineering — lacked formalized
               curation practices. Still, they showed commonalities. First, researchers protected
               their own data. Second, they framed reuse as a way to advance their own research
               efforts. Finally, researchers thought interdisciplinary work pivotal in addressing
               data integration, schema development, quality assessment, and pooled storage . 
            A 2009 United Kingdom study returned to the natural sciences, specifically the life
               sciences at the University of Edinburgh. It analyzed seven case studies: Animal
               Genetics and Animal Disease Genetics; Transgenesis in the Chick and Development of
               the Chick Embryo; Epidemiology of Zoonotic Diseases; Neuroscience; Systems Biology;
               Regenerative Medicine; and Botanical Curation. All seven cases examined humans,
               animals, and plants but did so in a variety of research environments: analytical
               laboratory-based, field, and in-silico. The cases produced data ranging from field to
               image, clinical to laboratory-derived. 
            Each group customarily worked in a culture of data exchange in which use and
               generation is recognizably participative,
                  with most groups exhibiting complex levels of identifiable and routine data
                  exchange
               . On the other hand, these researchers shared
               their methods and tools more freely than their experimental data, remaining naturally reluctant to share data that
                  comprise the main means of adding value to their own research and…their
                  careers
               . Personal relationships loomed large in
               researchers’ willingness to share their data externally; conversely, they felt
               apprehensive about cyber-sharing. The Edinburgh study confirmed that national
               strategies and policies must take root in the practices of specific research
               communities. Input from below is as important as input from above. 
            Notwithstanding data sharing and reuse, stakeholders also began to think more
               carefully about data management, especially its planning component. Assessing the
               Rural Economy and Land Use program (RELU) (established in 2004) and the longitudinal,
               qualitative Timescapes program (established in 2007) the Economic and Social Research
               Council (ESRC) in the United Kingdom discerned that researchers needed more
               information about how to plan data management better. They particularly needed
               assistance with implementing informed consent procedures and with ensuring
               anonymization. Beyond data management, the ESRC emphasized that Planning data management does not guarantee its
                  implementation, and research funders need to consider how to ensure that good data
                  management intentions are indeed implemented and revisited
               . Unfortunately, data management plans, much less
               successfully implemented and enforced ones, remain few in number and far from uniform
               in content, especially in the humanities, as of 2013.
            Perhaps the most important United Kingdom digital curation case study, over more than
               a decade (1997-2008) the Arts and Humanities Data Service Performing Arts subject
               center (AHDS Performing Arts) in the United Kingdom safeguarded the digital products
               of more than 60 projects and provided digital resources (music, theater, dance,
               radio, film, television, and performance) to the United Kingdom research and teaching
               community. The AHDS web portal made information about these projects, as well as the
               knowledge of how best to create, to manage, and to preserve such digital content,
               freely accessible. The project ultimately offered a national approach to developing best practice in digital
                  curation, whilst maintaining the subject-based expertise so important for offering
                  appropriate strategies and advice in domains with very specific needs, such as
                  Performing Arts
               . Moreover, it helped create and subsequently
               nurture a variety of research and practice communities and effected knowledge
               transfer to and among them about how to increase the long-term value of their
               performances. Initiatives such as the AHDS Performing Arts and its lessons both
               inspired and complemented digital curation work in the United States. 
            As in the United Kingdom, curation work in the United States in the second half of
               the 2000s accrued momentum in the humanities and retained it in the natural sciences.
               Digital curation efforts revealed both change and continuity. Bolstering earlier
               research, new case studies stressed the importance of coordination-cum-collaboration,
               an interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary approach, and the need for common
               standards. The studies also emphasized challenges such as the expense of curation and
               the recruitment of new audiences. But these studies highlighted progress in
               attracting new audiences and in addressing new research questions as well. In the
               same vein, other projects demonstrated the potential payoff of crowdsourcing,
               democratized access to and scholarship based on such opportunities, and how these
               possibilities related to ever-expanding computing power. Last, the first Digging into Data challenge inaugurated in 2009
               represents perhaps the most promising development yet vis-à-vis new research
               possibilities and new audiences by dint of digital curation.
            First, a 2007 workshop underwritten by the National Science Foundation and the Joint
               Information Systems Committee embraced the sciences, the social sciences, and the
               humanities and attracted American and European stakeholders from government, higher
               education, and industry. Participants agreed that unprecedented amounts of digital
               content necessitated a new and qualitatively different form of research and
               scholarship: cyberscholarship. But
               prospective scholars needed to develop national and international coordination,
               interdisciplinary research and development efforts, and consensual standards .
            Three contemporary projects in the United States showed cyberscholarship’s nascent
               possibilities. The National Science Foundation-funded National Virtual Observatory
               (NVO) brought together disparate sets of astronomical data, coordinated access to
               this distributed data, and allowed users to select data extracts and download them to
               personal computers. Second, the National Center for Biotechnology Information (a
               division of the National Library of Medicine) developed Entrez, which pulled together
               sources ranging from PubMed citations and abstracts to content from databases such as
               Genbank. Moreover, Entrez provided cross-domain search capacity across its 23
               databases and allowed researchers to use their own machines to explore data. Third,
               Cornell University’s Web Lab (WL) copied large chunks of the Internet Archive’s
               content to the Lab, mounted it on their computer system, organized it, and offered
               effort-saving tools and services to researchers .
               Ultimately, these three projects enabled new types of research and broadened the
               potential audience for producing and consuming such research.
            Meanwhile, American scholars in the liberal arts also came to realize the research
               and scholarly potential of large quantities of data — and how that potential ramified
               into questions of audience . Cyberscholarship
               supported two new analytical approaches. First, data-driven scholarship depended upon
               algorithmic selecting and sorting. A second type of scholarship explored the culture
               of computer and social networking. In either case, as the Perseus Project and the
               Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities (IATH) at the University of
               Virginia showed, liberal arts cyberscholarship takes a village; in these cases, cyberscholarship
               depended upon collaborators ranging from faculty members to software programmers,
               designers to project managers, digitization specialists to copyright lawyers. 
            Cyberscholarship in the liberal arts as elsewhere faced obstacles. Its sheer expense
               could exacerbate the digital
                  divide. One promising way of democratizing services was to develop
               templates to help with the creation of scholarship, as at the Institute for the
               Future of the Book’s Sophie or the New Media Consortium’s Pachyderm. Second was a
               problem of audience: how could stakeholders seed projects, get them germinate, and
               finally facilitate their spread nationally and internationally? Potential options
               included privatization, open source and thus pay as you say, or transinstitutional associations
               like the National Institute for Technology and Liberal Education (NITLE) .
            A specific example of fruitful cyberscholarship emerged with the Quilt Index, a
               project that gestated in the late 1990s. A National Endowment for the Humanities
               planning grant awarded to Michigan State University allowed the conversion of quilts
               into digital representations. Collaboration among scholars and curators then yielded
               a standardized vocabulary and standardized database fields to capture core
               information. The Quilt Index therefore achieved maximum flexibility and pointed
               toward future growth and cross-institutional collaborations. 
            The NEH subsequently funded the creation of Michigan State University’s MATRIX: The
               Center for the Humane Arts, Letters, and Social Sciences On-line. Partnering with the
               Alliance for American Quilts and four collecting institutions, MATRIX created a
               searchable database and a web interface usable across diverse institutions. Next, a
               second-generation digital repository financed by the NEH and the Institute of Museum
               and Library Services both provided for long-term preservation of data in the Quilt
               Index and developed crosswalk tools to assist institutions in formatting data and in
               ingesting quilt materials from their own records. After another round of development
               funded by the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS), any individual or
               institution could contribute to the Quilt Index. Supplementary materials accumulated:
               journals about quilts, pictures and photographs, published quilt patterns, and oral
               histories. Most recently, the Index has added 2.0 capabilities, including tools that
               facilitate using the product pedagogically. 
            Ultimately, the Quilt Index allowed contributors to build new content, to publish new
               scholarship, and to critique quilts and exhibitions. The project cultivated new and
               enlarged audiences and engendered new research questions. As historian Mark Kornbluh
               noted, My ultimate goal for the Quilt
                  Index is to be able to ask questions in a way that no one has been able to ask
                  before
               . 
            As the Quilt Index suggested, digital curation of data in the humanities garnered new
               appreciation in the latter half of the 2000s, but it continued to mature in the
               natural sciences, too. Most notably, the National Science Foundation inaugurated the
               Sustainable Digital Data Preservation and Access Network Partners (DataNet) in 2007
               to support national and international data research infrastructure organizations.
               DataNet integrated library science, archival science, computer science, information
               science, domain science expertise, and cyberinfrastructure. By demonstrating feasibility, identifying best practices, establishing
                  viable models for long term technical and economic sustainability, and
                  incorporating frontier research, the program solicitation noted, these exemplar organizations can serve as the basis for
                  rational investment in digital preservation and access by diverse sectors of
                  society at the local, regional, national, and international levels, paving the way
                  for a robust and resilient national and global digital data framework.
                Sustainable Digital Data Preservation and Access Network Partners (DataNet):
                     http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf07601/nsf07601.htm
                Data Conservancy and DataNetONE proved path-breaking projects in just this
                  sense. The DataNet Partners: Sharing Science, Linking Domains, Curating
                  Data: http://www.asis.org/Conferences/AM09/panels/41.pdf
               
            
            DataNet aside, by 2009 projects in the natural sciences had addressed crowdsourcing,
               democratizing access, and exploiting increased computational power in service of
               descrying needles in data haystacks. For example, through
               crowdsourcing the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) tested the claim that more galaxies
               rotate in an anticlockwise than in a clockwise direction. Using custom code, project
               staff created a webpage that provided pictures of galaxies to members of the public
               willing to play Galaxy Zoo, a game that focused on classifying the handedness of the galaxies. The
               project’s first year drew over 50 million classifications. The work of such citizen-scientists was as
                  accurate as work done by astronomers, a propitious development for digital
               curation stakeholders . 
            In a related project, Microsoft’s WorldWide Telescope (WWT) democratized access to
               online data stored in the cloud. A user could enlist WWT to pan or zoom around the
               sky at nearly any wavelength; to examine an observationally-derived three-dimensional
               model of the universe; to discern correspondences between features at multiple
               wavelengths at some point(s) in the sky and then examine relevant publications linked
               to them; to connect a telescope to a computer running WWT and overlay new images atop
               the existing online images of the same piece of the sky; and to use user-provided
               narrative tours as guides. Most
               important, WWT surmounted its standalone capabilities, comprising part of an ecosystem of online astronomy that will
                  speed the progress of both citizen and professional science
               . WWT’s potential uses in collaborative and
               educational initiatives appeared truly
                  limitless
               .
            Finally, generally increased computational power enabled scalability and introduced
               new ways of handling, analyzing, and making accessible scientific datasets.
               Researchers could triage and identify unique objects, events, and data outliers and
               subsequently route them to citizen-scientist networks for verification.
               Citizen-scientists’ participation could be increased and enhanced through
               better-defined interfaces that rendered work into play. These three developments —
               crowdsourcing, democratized access, and increased computing power — were equally
               applicable to data-intensive research efforts in the humanities . 
            Capping more than a decade of evolving digital curation work, the first Digging into
               Data challenge (2009-2011) demonstrated the promise of revelatory explorations of our cultural
                  heritage that will lead us to new insights and knowledge, and to a more nuanced
                  and expansive understanding of the human condition
               . The Office of Digital Humanities of the
               National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH-ODH), the National Science Foundation, the
               Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC), and the Canadian Social Sciences and
               Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) funded the eight projects. Digging into Data is
               likely the most important digital curation initiative yet attempted in the
               humanities; its projects augur well for synthesis of the recommendations and lessons
               of Our Cultural Commonwealth. Using Zotero and TAPOR on
               the Old Bailey Proceedings: Data Mining with Criminal Intent (DMCI); Digging into the
               Enlightenment: Mapping the Republic of Letters; Towards Dynamic Variorum Editions
               (DVE); Mining a Year of Speech; Harvesting Speech Datasets from the Web; Structural
               Analysis of Large Amounts of Music Information (SALAMI); Digging into Image Data to
               Answer Authorship Related Questions (DID-ARQ); and Railroads and the Making of Modern
               America — all showed previously
                  unimagined correlations between social and historical phenomena through
                  computational analysis of large, complex data sets
               .
            All eight projects grappled with heterogeneous data corpora far larger than what
               could be exploited by an individual scholar. Additionally, all eight projects applied
               some form of computational analysis to their corpora, refined their tools and data
               periodically, and adopted similar research processes. Common concerns also earmarked
               the projects. Each team struggled with scarce funding, with managing time, with
               communication, and with the labor-intensive nature of sharing data or with making it
                  diggable or both. 
            On the other hand, differences arose among the projects. These differences stemmed
               from varying disciplinary traditions, from the choice of collaborators seemingly most
               suitable for particular data sets, from the proportion of manual to automated work,
               from the need for continual adaptation of analytical tools, and from the
               (un)likelihood of attaining major outcomes in only fifteen months. 
            Digging into Data awardees offered recommendations based on their project
               experiences. Once again, these recommendations reflected long running concerns and
               challenges, albeit in new and more sophisticated contexts. Digging into Data
               participants emphasized the need to increase incentives for collaborative and
               multidisciplinary work, especially for students and junior faculty, to establish
               standards for assessing such work, to nurture cross-disciplinary research tools and
               methods, to underwrite travel expenses, to facilitate inter-institutional sharing of
               hardware, software, and data, to clarify legal and ethical obligations, to encourage
               multi-institutional strategies for data management, to increase the range of
               publication options for data-rich and multimedia products, and to emphasize open
               access to research data.
            Most important, the Digging into Data teams vividly showed the possibility of
               attracting new and larger audiences to digital humanities projects and indicated the
               emergence of new research avenues. Participants saw computers and their associated
               technologies as a moveable and
                  adjustable lens that allows scholars to view their subjects more closely, more
                  distantly, or from a different angle than would be possible without it
               . Even so, they chose not to jettison more
               traditional disciplinary concerns, framing their work as augmenting and transforming, rather than supplanting,
                  research practice within their disciplines
               . Overall, however, it remains unclear to what
               extent researchers are posing new research questions as a result of the eight
               projects or to what extent the project have cultivated new or expanded audiences or
               both. The potential is there. 
         

            V.
            By the end of the 2000s, digital curation stakeholders aiming to develop new research
               questions and expand audiences found themselves in an ambivalent position despite
               their considerable investment in curation and its concomitant payoff. Curation could
               appear a Sisyphean endeavor. Even in 2009, Nature
               inveighed against scientific data’s shameful neglect
               . Similarly, Science lamented
               that data-intensive scientific research had been slow to develop due to the subtleties of databases, schemas,
                  and ontologies, and a general lack of understanding of these topics by the
                  scientific community
               . Despite these travails, the most obvious and profound impact of
               data-intensive research lay in the natural sciences . By implication, then, digital humanists were hamstrung further. 
            For their part, digital humanists needed to supplant boutique projects with innovative
               collaborative strategies; the outstanding question was whether and how to stimulate large-scale coherence
                  without stymieing individual enterprise, frustrating existing self-organization,
                  or threatening… individualism.
               . Indeed, one recent study suggested that
               collaboration was not proceeding as smoothly as hoped; it noted that Although sharing with close, trusted
                  collaborators happened regularly, sharing with anyone outside this inner circle,
                  sometimes including other members of a project team, took place through just in
                     time negotiations
               . Too, researchers held primarily speculative views on sharing data with
               the public — most had shared only within collaborations or by request . Last, the data most commonly shared were those
               either easiest to share or the most presentable — but not always those most valuable for curation,
               particularly for researchers in other disciplines .
               Clearly much work remains to be done in delineating the best mechanisms for
               sharing.
            Reports released in 2009 and 2010 highlighted both advances and continuing
               challenges. The National Academy of Science concluded that researchers were in fact
               using data to probe new research questions. Simulations could steer theoretical
               approaches or validate new experimental ones; interdisciplinary and international
               teams could capitalize on myriad intellectual perspectives; and scholars could use
               data generated by others to supplement their own data or to address research
               questions earlier researchers did not. Such approaches could benefit researchers in
               the humanities as well as those in the sciences. According to the Blue Ribbon Task
               Force on Sustainable Digital Preservation and Access, however, obdurate challenges
               for digital curation stakeholders such as time considerations, diffused stakeholders,
               misaligned or weak incentives, and lack of clearly defined roles and responsibilities
               persisted . 
            The National Academy of Science report’s recommendations, however, reiterated
               familiar priorities — priorities applicable to curation in the humanities as well as
               in the sciences. The report foregrounded data integrity, proper training,
               professional standards developed consensually, appropriate recognition for
               contributions, public accessibility of data and results, data sharing, clear policies
               regarding management of and access to data, and the importance of data management
               plans developed at the project’s inception . Similarly,
               the Blue Ribbon Task Force urged stakeholders to make the case for use, to create
               incentives to preserve data in the public interest, and to define explicitly
               stakeholder roles and responsibilities throughout the lifecycle not only to ensure
               the efficient use of resources, but also to minimize free riding . 
            Ultimately, the overlapping digital humanities and digital curation communities must
               collaborate even more extensively in the future among themselves and among other
               professional communities such as librarians, curators, and archivists and experts in
               law, business, and science. Such collaborations must traverse geographical,
               disciplinary, and institutional boundaries. Indeed, the United States federal
               government should serve as a reliable and
                  transparent partner and as a coordinating entity, as should the government
               in the United Kingdom . 
            Ideally, a symbiotic and even synergistic partnership will mature between digital
               curation and digital humanities. This partnership must be nurtured both top-down and
               bottom-up. All the same, stakeholders must remember that collaborative approaches are far from a panacea; success
                  requires good faith and investment from all the players
               . In this vein, digital curation projects have
               been developed at an alarmingly fast rate,
                  producing a useful but bewildering array of theoretical frameworks, diagrams,
                  software and services
               . Nor can stakeholders afford not to engage with
               the human factor. As Gunther Weibel contends, The social engineering of incentives and services will be
                  as critical to success as the business models and cost structures
               .
            At the highest level, stakeholders must focus on long-term sustainability. Sustainability is not merely about money;
                  it is about organizational commitment and the ability to build persistent
                  collaborations to address the ongoing needs for repository services and
                  infrastructure
               . Long-term sustainability in turn hinges on
               policies and planning and on compliance. The National Science Foundation's and
               National Institute of Health's policies for data planning constitute a major strategic move; on the other
               hand, planning requirements are not particularly specific and provisions for
               accountability remain nebulous . As Paul
               Schofield and his colleagues (2009) point out, It is one thing to encourage data deposition and
                  resource sharing though guidelines and policy statements, and quite another to
                  ensure that it happens in practice
               . 
            Such high-level concerns notwithstanding, at the grassroots digital curation is also
               a pressing concern. Perhaps most important in addressing technological issues and the
               human factor in tandem is education and training. Professionals engaged in digital
               curation often end up in these roles by accident and thus tend to skill up on the job. Ideally, digital
               curation professionals have a research
                  background together with a technical aptitude and finely-tuned advocacy and
                  interpersonal skills
               . As Youngseek Kim and his colleagues (2011)
               observe, a significant demand will arise for
                  individuals with eScience professional skills in terms of data curation and
                  cyberinfrastructure, that numerous other institutions of higher education will
                  need to join the process of educating them, and that a significantly expanded
                  supply of students to join these programs will be required
               . Indeed, debate continues over the feasibility
               of integrating digital curation skills into undergraduate curricula . Of the 58 accredited Library and Information Science
               programs in North America, moreover, merely 13 (22%) offer one or more courses in
               data management or curation . Furthermore, approximately
               half of these data-related courses are offered only online. Suffice it to say, LIS
               graduate programs have a substantial opportunity to engage more aggressively with
               data curation as a lodestone of the curriculum . 
            These educational endeavors facilitate the spread of digital curation initiatives,
               which have clustered in a handful of research universities. But these universities
               constitute only 297 of 1,832 four-year institutions; therefore, stakeholders have an
               opportunity to integrate curation education into Master’s and Baccalaureate
               institutions . Yasmeen Shorish enjoins, Smaller institutions can engage with data
                  curation on some level, however minimal, to ensure that the research data of
                  teaching institutions are not lost or hidden
               . Liberal arts colleges may prove well-suited
               for digital humanities and digital curation projects ; .
            But even research universities such as the University of Minnesota and Cornell
               University struggle still with operationalizing digital curation. A large unmet need for assistance
               with data curation persists . In late 2010,
               Minnesota inaugurated a workshop on data management planning for grant applications.
               Scalable and flexible, the workshop exerted an overwhelmingly positive impact
               . Meanwhile, a full 62% of National Science
               Foundation Principal Investigators at Cornell wanted assistance in crafting their
               data management plans. Gail Steinhart and her associates determined a great deal of uncertainty among PIs
                  about what the new NSF requirement means and how to meet it, and that researchers
                  welcome offers of assistance — both with data management planning, and with
                  specific components or data management NSF asks them to address in their
                  plans
               . 
            Campus libraries have a pivotal role to play in educating researchers about curation.
               They must evolve into vibrant knowledge
                  branches that reach throughout their campuses to provide curatorial guidance and
                  expertise for digital content
               . Resembling numerous other institutions
               wrestling with the creation and implementation of systematic and active curation
               programs, the Georgia Institute of Technology has found its progress incremental and characterized by the
                  reallocation of existing library resources to data curation
               . More specifically, librarians’ roles vis-à-vis
               digital curation will embrace three broad areas. First, as part of a national
               infrastructure including research libraries, government bodies, professional
               organizations, and industry, librarians will help establish national curation
               strategies that include economic models and that will remain viable over the
               long-term. Second, a robust campus infrastructure will depend on resources created by
               research library leaders collaborating with campus information technology leaders.
               Third, librarians will spearhead professional development and education . In short, libraries and librarians can increase awareness of
               digital curation’s importance, can provide archiving and preservation services
               through institutional repositories, and can develop new professional practices
               suitable for data librarianship .
            Like libraries, institutional repositories, archives, and centers show great
               leadership potential. The Distributed Data Curation Center of Purdue’s University
               Library, for instance, integrate[s]
                  librarians and the principles of library and archival sciences with domain
                  sciences, computer and information sciences, and information technology to address
                  the challenges of managing collections of research data and to learn how to better
                  support interdisciplinary research through data curation
               . Similarly, archives, particularly in tandem with
               institutional repositories, should be at the forefront of curation education and
               practice . Not to be overlooked, the Digital Curation Center
               continues to break new ground with the assistance it offers stakeholders, for example
               with its recent 5 Steps to Research Data
                  Readiness
               . Overall, campus-wide initiatives or centers or
               partnerships with domain researchers, computer scientists, and campus information
               technology at Cornell University, Purdue University, the Massachusetts Institute of
               Technology, the University of Minnesota, the University of Massachusetts, and the
               University of Virginia have flourished . As Michael Witt
               (2009) concludes, a critical mass of
                  similar data that is archived and shared in one place can become fertile ground
                  for the congregation of virtual communities and the emergence of shared tools and
                  formats — perhaps even new standards for interoperability — as researchers come
                  together to use the data and contribute their own data to the collection
               . Digital humanists and digital curators, take
               note. 
            Ultimately, it remains unclear when a critical mass of case study evidence will be
               assembled to address these stubborn concerns. How much data has been shared? How much
               has been reused? What specific audiences have been cultivated and what research
               questions have been developed? Regardless of what has been done or not done with
               digital humanities data, digital curation will be indispensable in securing such
               digital assets for the indefinite future. Stakeholders must avoid the digital
               humanities community learning about the seminal importance of digital curation only
               after losses and the hard lessons such losses impart. After all, Reaching out to determine what data are generated and
                  whether it should be curated requires a cooperative audience and time but no
                  additional infrastructure or financial investment
               .
            In 2009, Christine Borgman asserted that Digital content, tools, and services all exist, but they are not necessarily
                  useful or usable
               . Despite obvious progress in digital curation in the
               humanities, she issued a call to
                  action to stakeholders and insisted the future is now. Three years later, we may — we
               must — ask the same question, lest we are reduced ultimately to exclaiming, along
               with Michael Buckland, What a
                  waste!
               .
         

            Acknowledgments
            Sincere thanks to Helen R. Tibbo of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
               the staff of Digital Humanities Quarterly, and the
                  Quarterly’s anonymous reviewers.
         
