Title:  Theoretical Permutations for Reading Cybertexts: A Review of
                    Markku Eskelinen, 
Volume:  007
Issue:  3
Date:  19 December 2013
Abstract:  
                
                    Theoretical Permutations for Reading Cybertexts is
                    a review essay on Markku Eskelinen, Cybertext Poetics: The
                        Critical Landscape of New Media Literary Theory (London: Continuum,
                    2012), and C.T. Funkhouser, New Directions in Digital
                        Poetry (London: Continuum, 2012). Both books engage new media works
                    and practices in ways that are transformative of the conceptual apparatus and
                    tools of literary theory and literary analysis. Moving between the deep analysis
                    of the Funkhouser’s and the high-level abstraction of Eskelinen’s will give
                    readers an exhilarating sense of just how new media is changing our aesthetical
                    experience and our way of thinking and writing about the textual experience.
                Markku Eskelinen’s Cybertext Poetics and C.T.
                    Funkouser’s New Directions in Digital Poetry set
                    new standards for the theory and analysis of digital texts. Eskelinen’s
                    groundbreaking book synthesizes his research of the last decade into a theory
                    for the new media textual condition with profound implications for the entire
                    field of poetics. Through Eskelinen’s transmedial reframing of the operative
                    categories of the field, it becomes clear how certain universals of
                    literary theory have been in fact strongly dependent on a limited corpus of
                    print-based situations. Funkhouser’s close readings of digital poetry are also
                    deeply informed by a hands-on poetics of digital writing and reading practices
                    on the web. Building on his historical account of computer poetry , his main concern here is to analyze the
                    multimedia and programmable specificity of post-WWW digital poetry. Eskelinen’s
                    permutational descriptions of the narratological and ludological variables
                    involved in ergodic and non-ergodic works, and Funkhouser’s close attention to
                    the signifying dynamics sustained by the variability of programmable forms
                    extend the critical landscape for thinking about literary poiesis,
                    digital and otherwise.
            
Full Body Text: 
Theoretical Permutations for Reading Cybertexts

                Eskelinen: Playing the Game of Theory
                
                    Cybertext Poetics is an extraordinarily ambitious
                    work whose argument successfully challenges the explanatory power of current
                    literary theories for digital practices. A few chapters into Eskelinen’s book,
                    the reader will begin to realize the scale of what he is up to, and to
                    understand the momentous implications of this book. This is not simply a lucid
                    expansion of Espen Aarseth’s theory  about
                    cybertextual ergodicity, or a postmodernist post-digital critique of narratology
                    informed by transmedial modes and game ontologies. Cybertext Poetics offers a systematic reconceptualization of basic
                    categories of literary theory in the light of a large array of new media
                    positions which imply a decentering of print narrative as the main model for
                    literary theory. Eskelinen’s critique of classical and postclassical narratology
                    (chapters 6 through 12), for example, shows how cybertextually-challenged those
                    theories are for ignoring many twentieth-century textual experiments that
                    precede programmable media. Once narratological categories are tested upon
                    Oulipian works or upon programmable digital works, they begin to show several
                    shortcomings. A premise of Eskelinen’s approach is that the permutational
                    aesthetics of both print-based Oulipian works and programmable new media works
                    activate a number of cybertextual dimensions that have yet to be accounted for
                    in narratology.
                The 20 chapters of the book are neatly divided into short sections that allow for
                    multiple entries into the two main strands of its genetic code: narratology and
                    ludology. Eskelinen is systematically rigorous in his description of the many
                    categories that he borrows from the vocabularies of others, meticulous in his
                    critiques, and insightful in highlighting the cybertextual features of specific
                    works as arguments for revising, refining, and expanding those categories. As
                    readers move back and forth between main text and endnotes, they will gradually
                    begin to grasp Eskelinen’s mapping of the combined territories of narratological
                    and ludological studies, his familiarity with a significant corpus of
                    experimental and digital literary practices, his impressive analysis of computer
                    games and playability, and his thorough knowledge of literary and new media
                    theory. Here is the Aristotle of the digital age. This is a book that no
                    literary theorist or new media scholar can afford to ignore: a balanced survey
                    of the field coupled to an ambitious and original contribution which will steer
                    theoretical discussion for the next decade.
                In order to understand the implications of Eskelinen’s title, we should recall
                    the specific meaning of cybertext, which he adopts from Aarseth’s
                    1997 study: cybertexts are works that have ergodic features, i.e., works whose
                    material and verbal instantiation is not completely determined until an
                    extranoematic intervention by the user/reader occurs. The discontinuity between
                    textonic and scriptonic strings of signs is another defining feature of
                    cybertexts, one that has been increasingly explored in programmable media.
                    Texton/scripton difference, user interactive manipulation, reading-time
                    temporalities, and kinetic transience and mutability of programmable texts can
                    have many different forms, but their major consequence is that a whole new set
                    of variables has come to define the textual situation. Cybertext Poetics attempts to think through multiple permutations
                    of that set of variables in ergodic and non-ergodic texts in both print and
                    digital media, with a particular emphasis on supplementing and revising standard
                    narratological categories. Actual cybertexts – such as Stuart Moulthrop’s Hegirascope (1995) and Reagan
                        Library (1999) or Wardrip-Fruin et al.’s The
                        Impermanence Agent (1998-2002) – as well as potential cybertexts
                    resulting from possible combinations of the proposed variables, are used for
                    showing the limits of current narratological categories. Print narratology thus
                    becomes a subdomain of cybertextual narratology.
                In Chapters 5 through 10, Eskelinen puts classical (Gerard Genette) and
                    post-classical narratological theories (Brian McHale, Monika Fludernik, David
                    Herman) to the test by applying them to print and digital cybertexts. The
                    narratological categories of tense, mood, and voice are critically refined to
                    accommodate the possibilities created by the seven cybertextual dimensions of
                        textual dynamics, determinability, transience, perspective, access,
                        links, and user function
                    . This refined cybertextual
                    narratology should be able to account for new textual combinations and
                    possibilities which imply (1) expanding the relations between registers of time
                    (system time, reading time, story time), orders of time (achronies,
                        polychronies, linear, non-linear, random), durations of time
                        (pseudo-time, true time), and between system and reading time
                        (aspect, duration, frequency, speed) ; (2) expanding the categories of
                    narrative distance and focalization, according to changing interactions between
                    user’s discourse, narrator’s discourse, and character’s discourse ; and (3) expanding the categories of
                    voice (for instance, through the concept bidiegetic narrator –
                        narrators that either
                        reversibly or irreversibly shift their position between homodiegetic and
                        heterodiegetic positions
                    ), narrative levels, and modalities .
                Eskelinen’s relentless formalism, evidenced in the sixteen tables that summarize
                    cybertextual and game variables and their factorial combinations, is a powerful
                    antidote to under-theorized fuzzy thinking about hypertextual, generative, and
                    kinetic textuality, or about games and playability. However, this multiplication
                    of categories is also gesturing towards a closed system whose internal formal
                    logic and taxonomical coherence may sound, at times, divorced from actual works,
                    aesthetical experiences, and cultural practices. Given the theoretical nature of
                    the work, it would be unfair to expect more interaction between theory and
                    analysis. Since a significant number of permutations are only hypothetical
                    possibilities without actual instances in existing digital narratives or poems,
                    more consideration of the aesthetical and signifying implications of actual and
                    possible combinations of cybertextual variables would help to justify the
                    zero-count combinatorial instances beyond the internal coherence of the
                    cybertextual system. At points, the theory sounds too carried away with its
                    minute distinctions, as if they had to be made simply because the mathematical
                    theoretical logic of the system requires them, rather than by any proved
                    aesthetical and communicative significance. 
                One such case is the discussion of reading time and system time
                    (Chapter 8 ), where too much is made
                    of the difference between constrained reading time in programmed cybertextual
                    literature and unconstrained reading time in print fiction. Although this
                    difference can indeed become a significant aspect of the work (such as when
                    speed, duration, and frequency of reading are used for specific cognitive and
                    aesthetical effects), most digital works – including kinetic texts that
                    approximate screen time or hypertexts whose nodes are locally temporized – can
                    be stopped, reloaded, replayed, and reread. This means that measurable reading
                    time in digital works will share properties with measurable reading time in
                    uncontrolled random access print works. Programmed time sometimes implies
                    controlling the access to the whole text or incremental textual modifications
                    (caused by the passage of time and/or by previous interactions with the textual
                    nodes and strings), but temporalization should be considered as a textual rather
                    than a reading property. Reading time is always variable (in both ergodic and
                    non-ergodic works) and, in my view, it is better described as the relation
                    between the simultaneous presence of a given string of signs and an actual
                    reading interaction with those signs, regardless of the constraints of system
                        time and of the dynamic alteration of texts caused by controlled access,
                    external supplements, or changes over time. Limits to speed, duration, and
                    frequency can of course be determinant if the text is displayable only once or
                    if its display conflicts with the limitations of the human body, but if repeated
                    interactions are generally possible and readers can define their reading time,
                    why equate reading time with constrained clock-time?
                Eskelinen’s lucid prose and vibrant style, which is a pleasure to read, sometimes
                    shifts into truculent polemics – see, for instance, his criticisms of what he
                    describes as the narrative bias in accounts of games by Henry Jenkins, Janet
                    Murray, Marie-Laure Ryan, and Rune Klevjer . At the beginning of the second part of the book, he argues
                    against describing games as narratives and insists on the limitations of
                    narratology in explaining the specifics of games, namely, the rules, variable outcomes, and player
                        activity
                    . Ludology and game studies are
                    strategically claimed for his theorization of a cybertext poetics, and help him
                    to address also the limitation of narratological categories for cybertexts.
                    Beginning with a survey of game studies, based on his own work, and also on
                    research by Espen Aarseth, Christian Elverdam, Gonzalo Frasca, Jesper Juul,
                    Katie Salem, Eric Zimmerman, and others, Eskelinen then analyzes at length the
                    medium-specific features of computer games. Chapters 14 (Game Ontology), 15 (Games and Configurative
                        Practices), and 16 (Game Time) offer a
                    synthesis of the main models in current theoretical discussions and provide
                    clear discussions of their implications. Claiming that games have to be
                    understood as simulative practices based on rule-based configurations dependent
                    on player activity, Eskelinen convincingly reframes the discussion beyond the
                    representational paradigm that equates games with film, theatre, cartoons, or
                    written narratives. 
                Eskelinen’s final theoretical move (Chapters 17-20) is to attempt an integration
                    of cybertext theory and game ontology, in the hope of advancing our
                    understanding of different ergodic modes (explorative, configurative, textonic)
                    in their relation to gameplay. This integration leads Eskelinen to propose and
                    explore a number of new cybertextual variables, including user position (possible presence and influence of
                        other users in the realization of an ergodic work and requirements for the
                        user’s physical location and bodily mobility,
                    ), user objectives (traversals that have
                    a specific finality: consulting,
                        completion, winning, and improvisation,
                    ), as well as different types of
                    feedback loops and modes (simulative modes, modes of representation, modes of
                    action). In the continuum between ergodic literature and gaming, the
                    interpretive user function dominates at the literary end while the ergodic user
                    function dominates at the gaming end .
                    The final chapter is devoted to the emergence of textual instruments and instrumental
                    texts. Building on theoretical and artistic work by Wardrip-Fruin, John
                    Cayley, Stuart Moulthrop, and Jim Andrews, the author describes textual
                    instruments as an emerging genre of ergodic literature which maximizes the role
                    of play, and maximizes the dynamics of text and user interaction even beyond the
                    kinds of textual relations that a cybertextual poetics is able to recognize. 
                The two major contributions of Cybertext Poetics are
                    (1) its revision and expansion of narratological categories, and (2) its close
                    examination of the configurative nature of game-like procedures in cybertexts.
                    Narratological and ludological theories are productively combined in ways that
                    advance our thinking about literature and about games in the new media age.
                    Eskelinen’s cybertext poetics expands Espen Aarseth’s cybertext theory, and can
                    be seen as an alternative to N. Katherine Hayles’s recursive intermediation , Philippe Bootz’s procedural model , and Noah Wardrip-Fruin’s expressive processing ,  – all of which are
                    more concerned with the specifics of human-computer interaction and
                    programmability than with a general theory of literary communication or literary
                    narrative. Eskelinen’s high-level of abstraction in the conceptualization and
                    description of variables and features, and his appropriation of game studies
                    concepts for describing ergodic textuality give a strong explanatory power to
                    his cybertext model. His recognizing the presence or absence of features, and
                    describing their permutations, remain invaluable theoretical moves, which may
                    anticipate future developments in the aesthetic exploration of the expanded
                    capacity of digital media to tell stories and play (with) texts in ways that
                    continue to challenge the narrative modalities, genres, and conventions of oral,
                    print, and film narratives.
            

                Funkhouser: Close Reading a Web of Writings
                
                    New Directions in Digital Poetry analyzes a sample
                    of digital poetry on the World Wide Web, including works across several genres,
                    and argues for the critical and aesthetical value of these works as explorations
                    of the poetic possibilities of the networked digital medium. Through a
                    combination of technical and literary analysis, C.T. Funkhouser’s close readings
                    of electronic literature contain an original contribution to the canon of
                    digital literary studies. His analysis of the signifying strategies and reading
                    possibilities of programmed works is carefully nuanced and deeply attentive to
                    their intermedia textualities and procedural dynamics, and reflects his long
                    involvement in the field as artist, critic, and historian. His book is a timely
                    addition to a growing body of close readings of digital literature which include
                    works by N. Katherine Hayles ; , Philippe Bootz , Leonardo
                    Flores , Tallan Memmott ,
                    Dave Jhave Johnston , Roberto Simanowski et al.
                        ; , Schäfer et
                    al. , Brian Kim Stefans , John Cayley , and others.
                Aware of the hybrid multiplicity of forms resulting from programmability,
                    intermediality, and social interaction in the current state of the WWW as a
                    writing/reading/viewing/listening space, Funkhouser does not insist on his
                    earlier structuring of the computer poetry field into visual kinetic text,
                    generative text, and hypertext , since many
                    post-WWW works combine audiovisual, kinetic, generative, and hypertextual forms
                    in ways that challenge not just that triple genealogy, but also conventional
                    perceptions of what poetry is or can be . The first chapter, Poetic Mouldings on
                        the Web, is entirely devoted to characterizing digital poetry on the
                    web as an evolving series of forms and practices that have endowed our online
                    writing and reading space with a new level of plasticity. Multiplication of
                    hybrid forms with increased levels of interactivity and mixed modalities reflect
                    diverse creative and communicative practices and present new challenges for the
                    critical reader: Digital poetry, as
                        a literary and artistic form, is an equivocal organism, with many identities
                        and iterations. As an expressive form, it matters not only as a free-ranging
                        serious practice, but because it invites vibrant, multimodal engagement for
                        its practitioners and audience alike. 
                    
                
                As an educator concerned with the place of contemporary media art practices in
                    the university classroom, Funkhouser is aware of the demands, but also of the
                    rewards of reading and playing with digital poetry, and that awareness shapes
                    the analysis, style, and structure of his book. Chapter 2 is a general
                    introduction to the problem of reading a digital poem, the main focus of this
                    book, which could be summarized as a series of experiments in reading digital
                    works. Funkhouser’s aim is not to simply teach us how to read a digital poem –
                    although we can learn by paying attention to his method – but to fully engage
                    the works aesthetically and critically, exploring their material and formal
                    possibilities for signifying. If there is didactic value in his effort (and
                    there is plenty) it comes not from any directive or formulaic program, but from
                    his ability to reveal his own nuanced and complex acts of reading as intimate,
                    critical encounters with demanding computer-mediated forms. 
                 Several works in each of the chapters have been analyzed before by other
                    writers, but generally not with the depth of detail or with the balance between
                    the compositional, technical, and reading aspects of each work that we find
                    here. It is the author’s ability to move seamlessly between the material and
                    algorithmic level of the works and the semantic implications of their ergodic
                    structures that gives readers a sense of the open-ended nature of current forms
                    of digital poetry as an exploration of digitally-mediated signifiers. Funkhouser
                    structures his analyses of digital poetry into three sets of digital works, each
                    of which contains multiple genres and forms. Case Studies
                        1: diversity & continuity in online works
                     includes works by mIEKAL aND, Jim
                    Andrews, John Cayley, Deena Larsen, Jim Rosenberg, and Alan Sondheim. Case Studies 2: digital poetry early in the 21st
                        century
                     includes works by Serge
                    Bouchardon, Jim Carpenter, Angela Farriolo, Mary Flanagan, Mary-Anne Breeze
                    (Mez), Jason Nelson, and Stephanie Strickland. Case Studies
                        3: poems of the Web, by the Web, for the Web
                     looks at forms or practices that
                    feed upon the internet itself as a database, including works by Jim Andrews,
                    Eric Sérandour, Eugenio Tisselli, and Jody Zellen.
                In this third group of works, programmability is tightly coupled with the
                    networked nature of digital media. Those works are based on interactive
                    applications that aggregate, filter and restructure information from the WWW,
                    with the help of transient mechanisms such as search engines, RSS feeds and
                    other automatic procedures. These forms of net-poetry may be described as one
                    particular genre within the growing field of Internet Art, in which artists
                    explore the formal and expressive possibilities of the internet itself as an
                    evolving system of databases and algorithms. The use of Google searches for
                    producing particular word strings according to formalized rules of permutation
                    is a good example of internet-based text generation. Funkhouser gives examples
                    from his own experiments with the Google Poem
                        Generator (2003), an application programmed by Leevi Leetho. Its
                    automated output could be edited according to more or less conventional poetical
                    expectations (in terms of syntax, pauses, indirectness, ambiguity, etc.), but it
                    could also be read in its machine-like redundant and incoherent form. 
                Machines seem to be teaching us not just new ways of writing but also new ways of
                    reading. Meditating on the interpretative possibilities opened up by
                    machine-generated output assembled from the WWW, Funkhouser writes: One learns to disregard the debris
                        or alphanumeric noise and read what conventional narration allows, or to
                        regard and accept this debris and noise as intrinsic to this type of
                        poetry
                    . John Cayley and Daniel C. Howe have
                    also taken the exploration of the internet as a language database for poetic
                    production into new territories in their series Writing to
                        be Found
                    . In this programmed work they use machine-generated
                    collocations to liberate language from the noise of conventional discourse,
                    recharging the dynamics of meaning transfer through unanticipated and unrecorded
                    associations. With the help of Google’s search algorithms the internet itself is
                    treated as a large corpus of language utterances that can be harnessed for terms
                    that do not co-occur in the database. Automatically-generated verbal strings,
                    which bring into close proximity words with variable degrees of syntactic and
                    semantic distance, become a tool for the proliferation of poetic meaning through
                    permutation of signifiers. Reflecting the procedure that originated it, this
                    form of writing creates a new field for reading – one in which the proliferation
                    of meaning seems to originate in the computer’s exponentiation of the machine of
                    language.
                An equivalent example, which uses mostly graphic expression rather than verbal
                    content, is Jim Andrews’s dbCinema (2007). dbCinema uses Google Image search and it also allows
                    readers to specify other directories of images, private or public, as the work’s
                    database. Compiled images are continuously layered on the screen and the work’s
                    interface offers tools that allow readers to define parameters for configuring
                    various aspects of what is happening on the screen. The work’s visual and
                    kinetic dynamics is thus highly interactive and emergent, constantly generating
                    unique configurations in terms of geometric pattern, language strings, and image
                    motion that respond to user-fed parameterization and to the continuously
                    changing content of its database. dbCinema's
                    transience and ergodicity as an image instrument and evolving animation is a
                    perfect object for testing the variables proposed by Eskelinen’s cybertext
                    poetics. It is also a cinematic and textual experience entirely dependent upon
                    programmed networked media in which Funkhouser seems to recognize a new viewing
                    and reading aesthetics .
                
                    New Directions in Digital Poetry is a
                    methodological demonstration of how close reading can be applied to the
                    multimodal and transient character of current digital literature. Funkhouser
                    engages the intermedial, the verbal, and the ergodic components at the same
                    level, showing that the polyformal pluritextualities of digital poems do not
                    have to be subsumed under the hermeneutics of the verbal text. His analysis of
                    the interplay between language, program, and media elements addresses all the
                    major levels of close reading digital works recently summarized by David
                    Ciccoricco : (a) analysis of the textual topology
                    of networked nodes; (b) reading bibliographical units that are peculiar to
                    digital works, such as paths of nodes; (c) reading the relations between
                    image-text; (d) reading the relations between kineticism/audio/video-text; (e)
                    reading the interface and its navigation; and (f) reading the application and
                    its programming code. 
                Funkhouser’s close readings of networked programmable media explore the
                    open-endedness of ergodic forms of poetry in ways that show the need and
                    relevance of the conceptual distinctions made by Eskelinen’s obsessive
                    cyberludonarratology. In effect, to read both books at the same time, as I have,
                    is to experience the irreducible yet mutually illuminating practices of analysis
                    and theory. It is also to experience how objects and perceptions are constituted
                    through specific modes of writing. While Funkhouser remains faithful to the
                    minutiae of the materiality of each work’s signifiers, struggling to describe
                    how our experience of making meaning with machine-mediated signs takes place,
                    Eskelinen charts a large-scale map of the media plurality of our transmedia
                    condition, playing the game of theory as an architect of permutations. Moving
                    between the deep analysis of the first and the high-level abstraction of the
                    second will give readers an exhilarating sense of just how new media is changing
                    our aesthetical experience and our way of thinking and writing about the textual
                    experience.
            
