Title:  Expertise vs. statistics. A qualitative
                    evaluation of three keyness measures (logarithmic Zeta, Welch’s t-test, and
                    Log-likelihood ratio test) applied to subgenres of the French novel 
Volume:  019
Issue:  3
Date:  31 October 2025
Abstract:  
                
                This paper continues an ongoing investigation of measures of distinctiveness
                    (also known as keyness measures), this time employing a qualitative, comparative
                    evaluation of three different measures: logarithmic Zeta, Welch’s t-test, and
                    Log-likelihood ratio test. Our domain of application is the contemporary French
                    novel, more specifically four types of French novels from the period 1970-1999,
                    namely: sentimental novel, crime novel, science fiction, and littérature blanche (literary
                    fiction).
                 Our evaluation proceeds in the following steps: First, we establish important
                    abstract characteristics of specific literary subgenres based on a synthesis of
                    close readings of scholarly literature on these subgenres, resulting in
                    qualitative, expert-based subgenre profiles. Second, we use a purely
                    statistical approach, namely three different measures of distinctiveness, to
                    identify words that are expected to be statistically typical or characteristic
                    of groups of texts such as subgenres, when compared to other texts. Finally, we
                    compare expertise and statistics, that is, attempt to establish, for each of the
                    four subgenres, a mapping between individual words found to be statistically
                    distinctive of this subgenre and specific aspects contained in the relevant
                    subgenre profile and count the matches.
                It turns out that each measure yields a different list of most distinctive words
                    that therefore, relates differently to the subgenre profiles. The analysis of
                    these varying degrees of overlap contributes to a better understanding of the
                    characteristics of and differences between the three measures, while also
                    serving as an example of a qualitative evaluation of a statistical measure. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                The identification of distinctive words for a certain group of texts has become a
                    common task in corpus linguistics and computational literary studies. Therefore,
                    measures of distinctiveness lie at the core of many widely used digital
                    humanities tools, from keyword analysis in corpus software (e.g., TXM , AntConc , WordSmith
                    Tools ) to stylometric frameworks (e.g., Stylo for R
                        ). These tools typically rely on established
                    statistical procedures to calculate what counts as key or
                        distinctive, often defaulting to a certain frequency- or
                    distribution-based measure, e.g. the log-likelihood ratio test. However, such
                    defaults are rarely questioned, despite their significant impact on the results
                    of literary and linguistic analysis. The present study addresses this issue by
                    comparing different statistical measures for extracting distinctive words from
                    subgenres of literary corpora. It has been conducted in the framework of a
                    project in which several statistical measures to identify distinctive words –
                    based on the frequency, the distribution and/or the dispersion of words in
                    corpora – are being investigated. The project Zeta
                            and Company has been conducted at Trier University, Germany, and
                        is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2019-2023, project ID
                        424211690) as part of the priority programme on Computational Literary Studies (SPP 2207).  For this
                    purpose, we created a corpus consisting of several different sub-genres of the
                    French novel of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s – namely science fiction,
                    sentimental novel, detective novel, and littérature blanche (literary fiction).
                        Littérature blanche designates
                        high-prestige literary fiction, the color term being an allusion to the
                        color of the book covers of French literary fiction being typically white,
                        as for example in the case of the Éditions Gallimard, a publisher that even has a long-running
                        and very prestigious book series called Collection Blanche.
                     The corpus was created with the aim of comparing distinctive words in
                    different genres, as well as comparing different statistical measures for
                    extracting distinctive words. In a previous study, we have compared nine
                    different keyness measures quantitatively . For the
                    present study, we decided to select one very well-performing measure from each
                    of three groups of measures: logarithmic Zeta as a dispersion-based measure 
                    , Welch’s t-test as a distribution-based measure
                        , and log likelihood ratio test as a
                    frequency-based measure . 
            

                Previous work
                The statistical evaluation of word frequencies and distributions has a long
                    history in linguistics, dating back (at least) to Yule's analysis of noun
                    frequencies in his 1944 study De Imitatione Christi
                    . Yule's aim was to use these statistical
                    evaluations to determine authorship, an application of word frequency studies
                    often called stylometry that remains popular and in active development to
                    this day 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    . The goal in our research project, on the other hand,
                    is to extract distinctive words per subgenre and to gain a deeper understanding
                    of the performance and particularities of different measures of distinctiveness. 
                In the realm of automatic genre detection, Brett Kessler, Geoffrey Nunberg, and
                    Hinrich Schütze (1997) have made an attempt to correlate genre with various
                    linguistic surface cues. These cues include a range of structural, lexical,
                    character-level, and derivative features. Structural cues involve passives,
                    nominalizations, and topicalized sentences, while lexical cues include terms of
                    address or Latinate affixes, and character-level cues encompass punctuation cues
                    and other separators. By using these linguistic surface cues, their approach
                    aims to automatically identify the genre  and brow (high brow, uppermiddle brow, middle brow,
                    popular) of a given text using logistic regression and neural networks.
                    Theoretically, distinctive words should also be useful lexical cues. 
                Expanding on the findings of Kessler, Nunberg and Schütze (1997), Joseph Worsham
                    and Jugal Kalita (2018) have worked on the problem of classification-based genre
                    identification but update it with more recent methods like deep learning and
                    text classification models. They emphasize the unique challenge of computational
                    literary studies: Rather than communicating succinct and
                        directed information, literature is artistic and conveys complicated themes
                        over the course of very long narratives
                    . Using data from Project Gutenberg
                    with six different subject headings – Science fiction, Adventure stories,
                    Historical fiction, Love stories, Detective and mystery stories, and Western
                    stories – the authors evaluate different machine learning approaches as
                    solutions for assigning genre. The machine learning approaches evaluated
                        by Worsham and Kalita are Convolutional Neural Networks, LSTMs, HAN, Naive
                        Bayes, k-Nearest Neighbors, Random Forests and XGBoost . Their results show that
                    the tree-based method XGBoost outperformed all models with the highest accuracy
                    at 84% and F1-Measure at 81%. This suggests that machine learning methods can
                    effectively automate genre identification, enabling efficient text
                    classification and retrieval (for another major study of narrative subgenres
                    using machine learning, this time applied to Spanish novels, cf. ).
                Concerning the extraction of distinctive words for genre classification, Magali
                    Paquot and Yves Bestgen (2009) used three statistical tests, including the
                    Log-likelihood ratio test, the t-test, and the Wilcoxon/Mann-Whitney test, to
                    extract and compare the number and type of keywords from a corpus of academic
                    writing against a corpus of fiction. Their goal was to identify keywords that
                    are evenly distributed across its component parts (corpus
                        sections or texts) and display a higher frequency and a wider range than in
                        a reference corpus of some kind
                    . They found that the t-test was an
                    adept solution for this task. However, their research also showed that the
                    Log-likelihood ratio test, the T-test, and the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test
                    yielded quite different results for the extraction of distinctive words.
                    Overall, their work highlights the importance of carefully selecting the
                    appropriate statistical measure for a given task, as different measures can lead
                    to varying results. 
                As the previous research has demonstrated, the question of identifying words that
                    are particularly characteristic of a corpus or text can be addressed using a
                    variety of methods and statistical measures . However, due to the large number of available options, it can
                    be challenging to select the most appropriate measure (or measures) for a given
                    research question or corpus. To address this challenge, the Zeta and company project worked on shedding some light on the
                    multitude of available options. See the acknowledgements section for
                        details.  We first conducted a comprehensive study of qualitative
                    definitions of keyness or distinctiveness , then
                    underscored the importance of considering not only frequency but also dispersion
                    in keyness analysis , and also conducted an empirical
                    quantitative evaluation of nine different measures of distinctiveness within the
                    realm of Computational Literary Studies by comparing their performance as
                    feature selectors for document classification . 
            

                Measures of distinctiveness
                Several statistical measures and tools have been introduced and implemented to
                    investigate and analyze large volumes of textual data from a comparative
                    perspective. These measures have been developed and applied in different
                    disciplines, such as Corpus and Computational Linguistics (CL), Information
                    Retrieval (IR), or Computational Literary Studies (CLS). As mentioned earlier,
                    the aim of our research project Zeta and Company
                    was to explore several different measures of distinctiveness and provide a
                    better understanding of their characteristics. To achieve this goal, we have
                    implemented nine measures of distinctiveness in a Python framework called pydistinto. While these measures all compare the
                    properties of all words in the vocabulary in a target and a comparison corpus to
                    establish a ranked list of distinctive words, they differ according to the way
                    in which they identify distinctive words. We distinguish three groups:
                
                    Frequency-based measures primarily concentrate on the frequency of the
                        words and consider the corpus as a bag of words, without considering
                        whether the words are evenly distributed within the corpus or not. Measures
                        falling into this category include the following: Ratio of relative
                        frequencies, Chi-squared test, Log-likelihood ratio test.
                    Distribution-based measures are based on a quantification of the words'
                        distributional properties (such as mean / median / mode and standard
                        deviation). The t-test and Welch’s t-test belong to this category.
                    Dispersion-based measures calculate the degree to which words are more or
                        less evenly spread across a corpus. The following measures belong to this
                        category: Burrows Zeta, logarithmic Zeta, Eta , a
                        TF-IDF-based measure We proposed this TF-IDF variant, which compares
                            the difference between the TF-IDF-weighted absolute frequency of a word
                            in the target and the comparison corpus. Although in the following we
                            refer to it simply as TF-IDF, it is an adaptation of TF-IDF.,
                        Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
                
                In our prior research, based on the results of the classification accuracy (cf.
                        ), we found that measures within one group exhibit
                    roughly comparable behavior and results (Fig. 1). 
                
                     Results of document classification based on distinctive words extracted
                        using 9 different measures .
                    
                
                In this research, the performance of the measures relied on their ability to
                    identify words that serve as features for classifying unseen texts by subgenre.
                    An intriguing observation is that the performance of various measures varied
                    significantly between different groups. We decided not to include all measures
                    available in our framework into the present study, but selectively chose three
                    with the highest performance in their respective groups. The selected measures
                    are logarithmic Zeta (Zeta), Welch’s t-test (Welch), and Log-likelihood ratio
                    test (LLR). 
                The Log-likelihood ratio test, a standard measure in computational linguistics,
                    is a statistical distribution test with inherent hypothesis testing. This
                    measure finds extensive application in computational linguistics (CL) and has
                    been integrated into various corpus analysis tools, including WordSmith Tools
                        , AntConc , and
                    Wmatrix . One of the main issues with this measure
                    is that the hypothesis test is formulated to compare statistically independent
                    events and to treat corpora as a bag of words. Additionally, frequency-based
                    measures rely on the total word count in a corpus, overlooking the potentially
                    uneven distribution of words within it . This
                    means that the LLR may favor high-frequency words even if they only occur in a
                    low number of documents. 
                Welch’s t-test, named after its creator, Bernard Lewis Welch, serves as an
                    adaptation of the Student’s t-test . In contrast to
                    the classical t-test, Welch’s t-test is more reliable when dealing with two
                    samples that exhibit unequal variances and potentially unequal sample sizes . Similar to the Log-likelihood test, it employs
                    hypothesis testing, but distinguishes itself by considering not only the
                    frequency of a feature but also taking into account the sample mean, standard
                    deviation, and sample size in the calculation of the t-value. This implies that
                    the distribution of words within an entire text collection plays a crucial role
                    in the calculation of Welch’s t-test.
                Originally, Zeta was created in the context of authorship attribution analysis,
                    but it later gained popularity in other tasks in the field of Computational
                    Literary Studies, like genre analysis 
                     or gender analysis .
                    In contrast to measures based on statistical tests, Zeta is mathematically
                    straightforward. To calculate the Zeta score, the longer texts such as novels
                    are initially segmented, e.g. into 5000-word segments. The binary document
                    frequency of each word in each part of the corpus is determined as the document
                    proportion of that word. In the subsequent step, the normalized document
                    proportion value for each word in the comparison corpus is subtracted from the
                    corresponding value in the target corpus, resulting in the final Zeta-Score for
                    each word. The higher the Zeta-score, the more significant the word. As a
                    measure of distinctiveness, Zeta was initially introduced by John Burrows  and is mathematically defined as: $$Zeta_i=docp_i(T)-docp_i(C)$$ where
                        \(docp_i(T)\) and \(docp_i(C)\) are the normalized
                    document proportions of the word \(i\) in the target corpus and the comparison corpus,
                    respectively. The normalized document proportion is calculated as: $$docp_i(T)=\frac{docf_i(T)}{n(T)}$$
                    where n(T) is the number of documents in the target corpus, where word \(i\) occurs at least once.
                    Fundamentally, Zeta quantifies the degrees of even dispersion of a feature in
                    two text collections and compares them. The logarithmic Zeta used in our current
                    research was adapted from Burrows Zeta by . 
                In the following section, we describe the corpus of contemporary French novels
                    that we curated and employed as the foundation for our research.
            

                Application Domain: The Contemporary French Novel
                The French popular novel has a long history, going back at least to the mid to
                    late nineteenth century and the age of industrialisation. Popular novels
                        can be defined as print stories that are mass-produced
                            and mass-consumed
                         and structured under specific
                        genre conventions in a predictable formula.  It is true that the
                    period from 1860–1920 is often seen as the golden age of the popular
                    French novel, when phenomena like the roman-feuilleton and the serial
                    novel (with recurring protagonists like Rocambole and Rouletabille) occurred. As
                    a consequence, earlier studies of the French popular novel tended to focus on
                    the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries 
                    .
                However, there is a large and differentiated landscape of popular novels in the
                    second half of the twentieth century as well .
                    These novels are published by long-standing publishing houses (e.g. Harlequin,
                    Fleuve noir, Librairie des Champs-Élysées, Tallandier) in specialized
                    collections with large print runs, high publication frequency and distinct
                    audiences (e.g. Harlequin’s collection Rouge
                        passion as opposed to Fleuve noir’s Anticipation or the Librairie des Champs-Élysées'
                        Le Masque). Note that the
                        subgenre assignment for the works in our corpus is determined by the works
                        belonging to a given publishing house’s subgenre-based collection.
                    Specific popular genres did receive particular critical attention, however,
                    whether it is the roman policier
                    
                    
                    , the science-fiction novel 
                    
                    
                    
                    , or the roman sentimental
                    
                    
                    . 
                Recently, renewed attention has been given to the contemporary French popular
                    novel from a linguistically inflected perspective, notably in the context of the
                    project Phraséorom as well as in a
                    French research group called Motifs.
                    Both groups have been focusing on developing techniques for extracting
                    distinctive lexico-grammatical patterns from corpora structured by subgenres,
                    such as the roman policier and roman sentimental (e.g. ). Our domain of application connects to this
                    research, focusing on (popular and high-prestige) novels from the period 1970 to
                    1999. 
                Series of crime or science fiction novels are examples of serial storytelling,
                    which can look back on a long history in French literary history. Examples
                        of serial storytelling can be found in the French novel of the 19th century,
                        for example in the Rougon-Macquart story cycles by Émile Zola or in La Comédie humaine by Balzac. Famous
                        examples from the 20th-century include the Nouveaux Mystères de Paris by Léo Malet (crime
                        fiction) or the Compagnie des
                            glaces series by Georges-Jean Arnaud (science fiction). 
                    Sentimental novels, crime novels, and science fiction novels also belong to the
                    broader category of popular novels, sometimes pejoratively called littérature
                        de gare in France, as the novels are often sold in train stations and
                    similar spaces. Also termed schema or formula literature, it uses recurring
                    formulae of structural elements, typical protagonists and character
                    constellations, narrative patterns, typical settings, characteristic linguistic
                    patterns, or a recurrent narrative structure. Bertolt Brecht describes the
                        phenomenon of formula literature within his essay on the crime novel Über die Popularität des
                            Kriminalromans: The crime novel is about
                            logical thought and demands such logical thought from the reader. (...)
                            Correspondingly it has a formula and displays its strength in variation
                            thereof. (Brecht, 1967 [1938], p. 450–458; English translation
                        as in ).  Recurring patterns
                    and schemes within these subgenres make them particularly suitable for a study
                    of extracting distinctive words per genre using different measures of
                    distinctiveness, since the horizon of expected patterns of thematic clusters, of
                    settings, tonalities, or linguistic patterns is more restricted within these
                    popular novel subgenres than in the wider and more heterogeneous domain of
                    literary fiction more generally. 
                To identify the common features of crime stories, science fiction novels,
                    sentimental novels, and literary fiction, we began by qualitatively compiling a
                    list of typical elements such as thematic concepts, main characters, linguistic
                    patterns, tonality, and narrative form mentioned in relevant scholarly
                    literature on these subgenres. Our aim was to construct general profiles of
                    these subgenres through a close reading of secondary sources. These
                        profiles serve as abstract representations of the typical traits associated
                        with each genre, not necessarily formulated in respect of distinctive words
                        (for example: irony or ellipses). The profiles are written by a domain
                        expert (Romance literary studies); the used references are listed in the
                        repository: https://github.com/Zeta-and-Company/expertise-statistics .
                    
                
                Using scholarly literature on these subgenres, we condensed typical elements for
                    each subgenre into concise qualitative textual profiles structured around
                    thematic concepts, main characters, language patterns, settings, tonality,
                    narrative form, and narrative structure. These textual profiles were written
                    prior to extracting distinctive words per subgenre and were meant to capture
                    salient aspects of crime novels, science fiction novels, sentimental novels, and
                    literary fiction that are frequently mentioned in the scholarly literature. Our
                    approach was to then, in a second step, align distinctive words identified by
                    the statistical measures of distinctiveness with these subgenre profiles in
                    order to gauge the level of interpretability of the distinctive words in
                    relation to the subgenres.
            

                Data: Four Subgenres, Three Decades 
                In a first step, a corpus of contemporary French fiction was built. It is
                    composed of 600 entire novels balanced along two categories: four subgenres
                    (sentimental novels, crime novels, science fiction novels, literary fiction) and
                    three time periods (1970s, 1980s, and 1990s). For the full overview of
                        metadata, see the repository linked in the section Code
                            and Data. The average length and median length of the
                    novels are 55,050 and 46,935 words, respectively. The longest and shortest of
                    these novels contain 240,064 and 12,883 words, respectively. In total, the
                    entire corpus contains over 33 million words and 207,207 distinct word
                    types.
                
                    Year of publication of the novels in the corpus.
                    A bar chart showing the year of publication of the novels in the
                        corpus. The years with the most publications are 1989 and 1990; the least,
                        1982.
                    
                
                Concerning the year of first publication, the corpus consists of 50 novels per
                    decade and per subgenre. The decades are evenly represented, but Figure 2 shows
                    that there is a peak of novels in the corpus in 1989–1990 across all subgenres. 
                As one can observe in Figure 3, the gender balance per subgenre is not even.
                    Crime novels, literary fiction, and science fiction novels have a much greater
                    share of male authors in the corpus (81.3% on average), whereas the share of
                    female authors is much greater in the sentimental subgenre (91.2%). Not only the
                    part of female authors is greater, but the share of female readers is also
                    immense (cf. ). It is true that
                    statistically-speaking, then, the subgenre distinction is in an undue
                    correlation with author gender, in our corpus. However, this aspect of corpus
                    composition does reflect the publishing situation in the French popular novel.
                    Results based on a corpus in which male and female authorship were represented
                    equally across all subgenres, or results based on stratified sampling from our
                    present corpus, would, therefore, not be an accurate representation of the
                    literary landscape. In addition, with many of the authors of popular
                        fiction being little-known, we can often only assume the author gender from
                        the gender conventionally associated with their first names. This also means
                        that there is likely to be a certain proportion of cross-gender pseudonymy
                        involved in the corpus whose extent we are currently not able to
                        ascertain.
                
                
                    Overview of author gender per subgenre in our corpus.
                    A bar chart showing the overview of author gender per subgenre in our
                        corpus. Crime novels, science fiction, and literary fiction are dominated by
                        male authors; sentimental novels by female authors
                    
                

                Concerning the publishers, Figure 4 gives an overview of the corpus composition.
                    While Harlequin is a big and international
                    publisher of romance novels, the French publishing house Gallimard  is known for publishing literary fiction. With a
                    decidedly worldwide marketing strategy for an international public and
                    explicitly formulated writing guidelines for authors, Harlequin is a special case among the publishers in the
                        corpus. Harlequin novels are a product of an
                            industrialization of fiction, as  points out (cf. ). 
                    Fleuve Noir is an influential publisher of French
                    science fiction and crime fiction (as well as espionage novels, which are not
                    currently included in our corpus, however), whereas Librairie des Champs-Élysées specializes in crime
                    novels.
                
                    Most frequent publishers per subgenre in our corpus.
                    Bar chart showing frequency of subgenres in the corpus. Gallimard
                        published the most literary fiction; Librairie des Champs-Élysées the most
                        crime novels; J'ai lu the most science fiction; and Harlequin the most
                        sentimental novels.
                    
                
                All novels in the corpus are still protected by copyright, which hinders the full
                    publication of our research data concerning the full texts. However, we have
                    published the corpus in the form of derived text
                        formats (also known as extracted
                        features), an innovative format which transforms the original text
                    in such a way that the resulting files are still suitable for some computational
                    methods of analysis, but no longer readable by humans (cf. 
                    ). With the help of this strategy, we hope that
                    transparency of data and the possibility of a reproduction of our study is
                    possible for interested scholars . 
            

                Methods: Expertise vs. Statistics
                Because our goal is to track the words which are characteristic for each subgenre
                    using the three different measures of distinctiveness, we carried out our tests
                    by comparing each single subgenre to the other three subgenres in our corpus. In
                    this case, the comparison takes place between a target corpus (containing 150
                    novels of one subgenre) and a comparison corpus (containing the remaining 450
                    novels spread across three subgenres). 
                French is a highly-inflected language; therefore, all the texts were lemmatized
                    using spaCy . We used the fr_dep_news_trf model: ​​https://spacy.io/models/fr#fr_dep_news_trf, last access: 19
                        February 2024.  They were then processed using the python package
                        pydistinto, which has been developed within the
                    project Zeta and Company. See: https://github.com/Zeta-and-Company/pydistinto, pydistinto v0.1.2, DOI: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6327967
                        . 
                     We did not use stopword lists, as we are interested in the entire output
                    of the different keyness measures in our evaluation. To support the calculation
                    of Zeta (see above), the novels were also split into 5000-words-segments. As
                    mentioned before, we applied three measures of distinctiveness in our test, at
                    the level of the lemmas: Zeta, Welch, and LLR. As a result, we obtained three
                    lists of distinctive words in each of the four comparative tests (one for each
                    subgenre), resulting in 12 lists of distinctive words. Our initial finding
                    revealed a certain level of overlap in the distinctive words identified by the
                    three measures for the same genre. To quantify this overlap, we calculated the
                    Jaccard similarity (see ) for the top 50
                    words. The average similarity (where higher values indicate greater overlap) was
                    0.43 between Zeta and Welch, 0.21 between Welch and LLR, and 0.05 between Zeta
                    and LLR. We then selected the top 50 words from each list for the alignment with
                    the qualitative subgenre profiles.
                
                    Workflow of statistics vs. expertise.
                    Workflow of stastistical steps taken alongside the human expertise
                        steps taken.
                    
                

                Our expectation was that the extracted distinctive words per subgenre, contrasted
                    against the texts in all remaining subgenres, would yield words characteristic
                    for the subgenre in the categories described in the genre profiles: thematic
                    concepts (such as murder), typical language patterns (such as sociolect), main
                    characters (such as detective), space/setting (such as urban setting), tonality
                    (such as emphasis on emotion), narrative form (such as dialogue), narrative
                    structure (such as Cinderella plot involving a dramatic
                        event and a final reunion). 
                The approach was to then match each of the top 50 most distinctive words to these
                    subgenre profiles and count the hits per category as words that were both expected, based on the subgenre profiles, and in fact observed in the statistically-generated most distinctive
                    word lists (expected and observed words). The process of matching
                    involved some more straightforward matches (e.g., matching the word
                        murder to the thematic concept of murder in the crime novels),
                    but also words that had to be interpreted to see whether they fit into the
                    semantic field described (e.g., identifying the words soldier and
                        german as belonging to the thematic field of history or
                        war in literary fiction). All matches are documented in the
                        repository. Code and research data: https://github.com/Zeta-and-Company/expertise-statistics. 
                
                We also consider that a matching between a distinctive word and a particular
                    aspect of the genre profile provides an indication of the interpretability of
                    the extracted word. For the purpose of this study, we define interpretability at
                    the granular level of individual words: A word is defined as interpretable if a
                    human annotator can associate it with a specific section of a genre
                        profile. In a similar sense,  designed an
                        approach where a human evaluator is tasked with identifying the odd one
                            out from a set of topic modeling results, using this task to assess
                        the interpretability of the topic words. As  succinctly state, to interpret means to explain the meaning of something. In addressing
                    interpretability, the overarching question is furthermore: Can we trust the
                    model ? In our case, this question
                    translates into: Can we trust the keyness measure? The higher the proportion of
                    interpretable words, the more reliable the measure becomes for similar
                    tasks.
                The goal of our procedure was to quantify the proportion of interpretable,
                    matching distinctive words per measure of distinctiveness. For a further
                        discussion of salience, distinctiveness and aboutness in the context of
                        keyword extraction (cf. ). Within the
                    logic of our evaluation, words that are present in the word lists, but cannot be
                    matched to any aspect of the subgenre profiles are indicated as unexpected
                        and observed words. Note that some of the extracted keywords may
                        be plausible for the subgenre post hoc, but did not match to the profiles as
                        we had previously established them. If a high number of words from a
                    given word list can be matched to the relevant subgenre profile, we interpret
                    this to mean that the measure of distinctiveness used to generate the word list
                    has performed well. 
                The matching between word lists and subgenre profiles was performed independently
                    by three scholars of French literature. Since the distinctive words were
                    interpreted without surrounding text, it is not surprising that different
                    scholar's matching can vary. We can report a mean inter-annotator
                        agreement (Krippendorff's alpha) of ɑ=0.083 for matching of words to a
                        specific category and a mean of ɑ=0.139 for the agreement on the
                        interpretability of words.  Therefore, we have discussed the results
                    of the matching, in a second step. If there were at least two scholars with the
                    same matching results, then their annotations were used. If all three were
                    different, then the word was marked as unclear. In the following, we
                    describe the matches for each measure and subgenre, summarizing the findings
                    supported by the more detailed data that can be found in the data
                    repository.
            

                Results
                Based on the procedure described, we obtain the following results, organized here
                    by measure of distinctiveness. Figure 6 provides an overview of the results. 
                
                    Comparing interpretability of distinctive words per keyness measure: log.
                        Zeta, LLR, and Welch’s t-test.
                    Comparing interpretability of distinctive words per keyness measure:
                        log. Zeta, LLR, and Welch’s t-test.
                    
                
                
                    Logarithmic Zeta
                    Starting with logarithmic Zeta, and concerning the matching with the
                        sub-genre profile for detective fiction, we see that distinctive words in
                        the categories language patterns and main characters were frequently found.
                        The expected use of sociolects, informal register, or direct speech was
                        observed within the distinctive words. However, the category tonality was
                        hard to grasp with distinctive words: none of the 50 most frequent words
                        that Zeta had identified reflected phenomena like cynicism or sarcasm,
                        features that are hardly visible on a word level. Distinctive words relevant
                        to the consumption of alcohol and tobacco such as cigarette (cigarette), bouteille (bottle), bière (beer) were also found for the subgenre of crime
                            fiction. These words were not matched with the subgenre profiles.
                            For a corpus-stylistic study on alcohol and tobacco consumption in
                            English and French novels since the 1950s, see . 
                    
                    With respect to science fiction, the extracted content words could be matched
                        to narratives typically delving into the core fears and aspirations of
                        humanity, addressing issues such as overpopulation, totalitarian society,
                        evil forces, (intergalactic) colonialism, or self-destruction of mankind by
                        technical progress. Concerning language patterns in science fiction, we
                        observed a lot of technical vocabulary extracted by logarithmic Zeta. 
                    For sentimental novels, the deliberate emphasis on emotion, antitheses, and
                        direct appeals to the reader's emotions, fostering a heightened sense of
                        pathos, was visible in the extracted distinctive words. The classic
                        Cinderella plot structure involving a dramatic event – visible in lemmata
                        like surprise (surprise) or brusquement (suddenly) – and a
                        final reunion of the couple in a happy ending was also visible in the
                        resulting distinct words in Zeta with épouser (to marry) or mariage (marriage).
                    The genre of literary fiction or littérature
                            blanche was certainly the most heterogeneous and therefore also
                        the most difficult for abstracting into a profile and for matching
                        distinctive words to the categories. However, thematic concepts like
                        political problems of the present, dissolution of families, postmodern
                        lifestyle, and narratives exploring history or war were reflected in the
                        extracted words with logarithmic Zeta. Unexpected words visible in the
                        distinctive lemmata of literary fiction are words relating to animals like
                            cheval (horse) and oiseau (bird) or plants like fleur (flower) and rose (rose), which may also
                        indicate a color. 
                    Overall, we can note that Zeta’s strength lies in its ability to extract
                        content words: in comparison to the other measures, the highest share of
                        interpretable words could be extracted when using Zeta. See also  who discuss the explainability and
                            interpretability of models distinguishing fictional and non-fictional
                            texts  and the life cycles of genre
                            (Underwood, 2016).
                    
                
                
                    Welch’s t-test
                    Next, we report on the matching of the distinctive words obtained using
                        Welch’s t-test with the subgenre profiles. With respect to crime novels, the
                        narrative structure with a central axis of elucidation and investigation was
                        reflected in extracted words like enquête (investigation), and téléphone (telephone). Other than thematic
                        concepts, an urban setting being characteristic within the detective genre,
                        the distinctive words voiture
                            (car), bureau
                        (office) could be matched with these expected literary spaces within
                        the detective genre. 
                    Concerning science fiction, Welch’s t-test extracted a relatively large
                        quantity of content words. The language pattern of technical vocabulary was
                        very dominant in the distinctive words extracted by Welch’s t-test. As Ted
                        Underwood noted, adjectives denoting size such as huge, gigantic and even
                            tiny serve as reliable indicators that a book may be classified as
                        science fiction . In our analysis
                        of extracted words, we observed several terms, including centaine (hundreds), mètre (meter), nombre (number), and nombreux (numerous) as belonging to this category of
                        textual clues for the genre science fiction. A bit surprisingly, very few
                        typical main characters such as scientists, doctors, robots, or artificially
                        intelligent beings were extracted, except for the abstract term créature (creature). More hits
                        were found for spaces and settings of science fiction. 
                    For the sentimental subgenre, the expected thematic concepts of passions,
                        evolving relationships, and sensual scenes had several matches within the
                        extracted words. The most visible category of matches, however, was the
                        category of narrative form for the sentimental genre. When in general, the
                        category of narrative form was hard to grasp with distinctive words for the
                        other subgenres, the sentimental novels were an exception here: A
                        significant proportion of the content in sentimental novels is conveyed
                        through dialogue, and this large proportion of dialogue in the genre was
                        reflected by a multitude of verbs of communication and further signs of
                        direct speech in the extracted distinctive lemmata.
                    In literary fiction, problematic, failing relationships or failing happiness
                        is typical and is visible in the extracted malheur (unhappiness). Furthermore, urban spaces can be
                        characteristic and are reflected in the extracted words with Paris and rue
                            (street). Other than that, Welch’s t-test extracted typical
                        thematic concepts for the genre similar to Zeta. In a study on the
                            authorial style of Collins and Besant, D. Hoover compares the overlap of
                            words extracted by Zeta versus words extracted by t-test. Concerning
                            Zeta words, he states, that fewer function words
                                and more meaningful words are extracted compared to t-test
                                . The specific
                        textual pattern of écrire (to
                            write) in literary fiction is an element extracted by both
                        logarithmic Zeta and Welch’s t-test and something that has also been
                        described by researchers within the Phraséorom project . 
                
                
                    Log-likelihood ratio test
                    Moving on to LLR, when comparing all three measures, it is noteworthy that
                        the proportion of unexpected and observed words (i.e.,
                        uninterpretable words) is consistently highest across all four subgenres.
                        For the crime genre, distinctive words primarily revolve around typical main
                        characters like inspector, commissioner, police,
                            murderer, policeman, sheriff, sergeant.
                        However, many proper names were also extracted with this measure. Given the
                        introspective dimension often found in popular detective novels through
                        first-person narration, the pronoun je
                            (I) was also identified. 
                    In the science fiction genre, a limited number of thematic concepts like humain (human), terrien (earthling) and typical spaces like
                            planète (planet), espace (space) and univers (universe) were
                        extracted. However, it is noteworthy that 23 out of the top 50 distinctive
                        words could not be matched to the genre profiles (see Figure 6). 
                    Similarly, for sentimental novels, a significant proportion of distinctive
                        words comprised words that could not be matched to the genre profiles, in
                        particular pronouns, articles and other highly frequent grammatical words
                        and proper names. 
                    An overall finding across all subgenres is that Log-likelihood ratio test –
                        which is implemented in a lot of corpus analysis tools – performed the
                        weakest in extracting relevant distinctive words per sub-genres according to
                        the qualitative profiles in our setting. 
                    According to general remarks in , a
                        limitation of this study is that the choice of the reference corpus affects
                        the results. In our case, the reference corpus consists of the total of all
                        texts minus the subgenre currently under investigation; this affects the
                        results in so far as features that are shared by the reference corpus and
                        the subgenre subcorpus will not surface. For example, distinctive words that
                        are specific to popular literature in general, rather to any one particular
                        popular subgenre, might not be extracted, because in our experimental
                        design, there are popular novels in both target and comparison corpus. Only
                        features where there is a significant departure from the reference corpus
                        (serving as the norm) will be visible in the lists that were matched with
                        the qualitative profiles. 
                
            

                Conclusion
                What can we learn from our findings? We have shown that measures of
                    distinctiveness are able to extract distinctive words per genre, which reflect
                    to a certain extent what one would expect to find as typical for a certain
                    genre. Some subtle elements of certain literary genres like tonality or
                    narrative form or narrative structure are harder to grasp through distinctive
                    features at the single word level. Similarly, sociolect and other informal
                    registers were more observable in crime fiction, but difficult to grasp in other
                    genres. Main characters, spaces, but above all thematic concepts of genres are
                    more accessible categories for matches between distinctive words and qualitative
                    genre profiles. 
                Differences between popular genres (sentimental novel, crime novel, science
                    fiction novel) and literary fiction persist in our setting, insofar as the
                    popular genres showed more hits per category than the literary fiction. To a
                    certain extent, this is to be expected, as literary fiction is a broader and
                    more heterogeneous category.
                When comparing the measures, we found that the measures showed different
                    performances for the task of finding characteristic distinctive words for a
                    certain subgenre. 
                
                    Zeta proved to be the most effective in extracting content words with a
                        high degree of interpretability, particularly for detective fiction, science
                        fiction, and sentimental novels. The extracted words matched well with the
                        subgenre profiles.
                    Welch’s t-test also performed well, especially for sentimental novels
                        where a significant number of dialogue-related words were extracted. The
                        test captured narrative patterns and thematic concepts effectively, though
                        it did not extract as many main character types for some subgenres.
                    LLR performed the weakest in aligning distinctive words with subgenre
                        profiles. A high number of extracted words were either grammatical words or
                        proper names, which were often categorized as unexpected.
                
                In comparing the output of three measures of distinctiveness with human made
                    literary genre profiles, our evaluation showed that logarithmic Zeta and Welch’s
                    t-test have a higher share of interpretability of distinctive words than LLR for
                    French novels. Interpretability was operationalized as a match between a
                    distinctive word and a human crafted subgenre profile in prose. LLR’s
                    performance may come as a surprise, considering its widespread implementation in
                    numerous corpus analysis tools, such as Antconc or Wordsmith Tools. We can
                        agree with  in this regard, that
                        there is growing evidence that log likelihood used for
                            corpus comparison is prone to identifying far too many keywords (false
                            hits). See also . Alessia Tranchese
                        also discusses the pitfalls of Log-likelihood in her study on rape coverage
                        in the British press. She states that there could be words with relatively high frequency - but uneven distribution - which
                            an LL calculation could still retrieve as key. This might happen,
                            for instance, if a word is rather unique, like the name of a person, or
                            the name of a city
                        . The reason might be that
                    the data in corpus linguistics differs often in its form, for example news
                    texts, political speeches and similar textual genres that, among many other
                    differences, are usually shorter than literary fiction. In addition, in
                    presidential debates texts, proper names (e.g. Kamala Harris, Donald
                        Trump) are meaningful or interpretable distinctive words.
                For the domain of Computational Literary Studies, our finding raises questions
                    about the default measures of distinctiveness incorporated into tools. It
                    suggests that a critical revision of these default measures is warranted, at
                    least in scenarios where the application domain is long-form narrative fiction.
                    With the implementation of pydistinto, we offer a
                    framework with nine different keyness measures, openly available on GitHub . Three variants of Zeta are available furthermore in
                    Stylo, a tool developed by Maciej Eder, Jan Rybicki and Mike Kestemont . 
                More generally, we believe this method of comparing texts and extracting
                    distinctive words, due to its relevance and ease of use, can be widely applied
                    to research in other fields in the humanities. In many cases and scenarios, it
                    is meaningful to conduct large-scale text comparisons by dividing text
                    collections into two corpora (a target and a comparison corpus) and extracting
                    distinctive words across different eras, political spectrums, religious domains,
                    etc., in order to obtain some (new) insights about these texts from a
                    statistical perspective.
                As future work, we plan to extend our research by using more complex and
                    semantically-richer linguistic features such as multiword expressions or topics
                    and we are expecting more insights into the distinctiveness of the investigated
                    subgenres. 
            

                Author contributions 
                
                    Julia Röttgermann: Investigation, Formal Analysis, Visualization, Writing
                        - original draft, Writing - review and editing. 
                    Keli Du: Investigation, Visualization, Software, Writing - original draft,
                        Writing - review and editing. 
                    Julia Havrylash: Investigation, Methodology, Writing - original draft,
                        Writing - review and editing. 
                    Christof Schöch: Funding acquisition, Data curation, Supervision, Writing
                        - review and editing. 
                
            

                Data and code 
                
                    Corpus and metadata: https://github.com/Zeta-and-Company/dtf600, DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10853581. 
                    Code and research data: https://github.com/Zeta-and-Company/expertise-statistics, DOI:
                            10.5281/zenodo.10853663. 
                    Pydistinto: https://github.com/Zeta-and-Company/pydistinto, DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.6517683. 
                
            

                Acknowledgements
                Zeta and Company. Measures of Distinctiveness for
                        Computational Literary Studies is funded by the German Research
                    Foundation (DFG, project number 424211690) in the framework of the Priority
                    Programme Computational Literary Studies (2020–2023). Many thanks to Dr. Élodie
                    Ripoll (Trier University) and Ariadne Baresch (Trier University) for annotating
                    the lists of distinctive words.
            

                
            
