Title:  Undergraduate Students and Digital Humanities Belonging:
                    Metaphors and Methods for Including Undergraduate Research in DH
                    Communities
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  02 October 2017
Abstract:  
                
                How can alternate histories of DH through feminist criticism, participatory art,
                    and design shape undergraduate pedagogy in DH? In this article, we argue for
                    explicitly employing a scholar-citizen model as a principle
                    of pedagogical design, making explicit many of the latent assumptions of DH
                    belonging and community. By adhering to these design principles we have been
                    able to question some of the assumptions of pedagogical theories like Research
                    Based Learning and public–facing scholarship, demonstrating these theories’
                    complex relationships public, semi–public, or private dissemination; classroom
                    and non–classroom spaces; complexity of the assigned task; and the role of
                    assessment. Our experiences as Director and Assistant Director for a combined
                    Summer intensive undergraduate Field School in DH occasion this article. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                In the short history of Digital Humanities pedagogy, arguments for the
                    transferability of DH skillsets permeate the field. The pragmatic motivations
                    for these arguments are clear. We live in a time of proscribed employment
                    prospects across humanistic disciplines, whether that employment consists of
                    academic, journalistic, or artistic pursuits. The humanities finds itself
                    defending its utility, and as a scholarly community we insist upon the
                    desirability of humanities skill sets. A desire to challenge the dominant
                        cultural narrative about the value of humanities degrees is evident in the
                        number of recent popular press pieces focused on the employability of
                        graduates and the degree to which they possess sought after skills in a
                        range of industries. For a sampling of these pieces in chronological order
                        see , , , . DH pedagogy
                    can be said–whether in praise or as a point of criticism–to respond to the
                    current crisis of the humanities. Its emphasis on collaboration and
                    project–based learning stems from the labour practices of DH scholarship,
                    namely, the project and the need to employ research assistants on those
                    projects. In both the research project and in the classroom, DH frequently aims
                    to provide undergraduate students with transferable skills. 
                Little research exists to establish whether DH skills are, in fact, transferred,
                    but recent scholarly activity has depended on this perception. For example, the
                    Cambridge University Centre for Research in the Arts, Social Sciences and
                    Humanities (CRASSH) recently 
                        lead a six–month project on the digital humanities and
                            Transferable Skills Training [which] focuses specifically on the
                            transferability of digital skills, and aims to increase awareness among
                            early–career researchers of how the digital skills they have learnt in
                            one context (social, academic or professional) can be applied in
                            another
                        
                    . CRASSH directs its efforts towards graduate and early career researcher
                    training; a similar set of pragmatic concerns emerges as regards undergraduate
                    students in online fora like the ACH Digital Humanities
                        Questions and Answers. For example, Scott Kleinman expresses
                    concerns over how best to support student acquisition of skills useful to their
                    future employment: 
                        As we try to transfer DH research culture to the
                            undergraduate classroom, it seems to me increasingly important to make a
                            case that studying DH provides skills that are in demand by
                            employers–and that give graduates a leg up in the job market–but one
                            especially geared towards undergraduates, the majority of whom are not
                            going to pursue graduate school. I think many of us treat the advantages
                            as self–evident: coding skills, data analysis, project management, to
                            name a few types of knowledge not emphasized in the traditional
                            humanities. These are all skills in demand.
                        
                    Concerns for the future employment of undergraduate students are
                    legitimate, and they have shaped both DH pedagogy and how we market the value of
                    DH courses. In Kleinman’s words, it is 
                        increasingly important to make a case that
                            studying DH provides skills that are in demand by employers
                        
                     (emphasis added). The activity of justifying digital humanistic learning
                    is often the activity of justifying its utility. 
                 Our experiences as Director and Assistant Director for the Undergraduate Summer
                    Field School in the Digital Humanities (DHFS) occasion this article. In
                    marketing the program, we have certainly engaged in discourses of utility
                    similar to the ones we have cited. The Bader International Study Centre (BISC),
                    Queen’s University’s website describes the DHFS in terms of its utility: 
                        Along with facilitating a new kind of engagement with
                            questions long central to humanities disciplines, participation in the
                            DHFS will also provide students with transferable skills in digital
                            culture that can assist their transition into graduate opportunities or
                            an identified career path.
                        
                    In our own promotional materials, we insist both on the acquisition of
                    humanistic skills–the engagement with questions long central to
                        humanities disciplines–and on transferable skills in
                        digital culture. Like Kleinman, we respond to the exigencies of
                    the job market and the perceived needs and desires of undergraduate students
                    drive our appeal to their identified career path. Further,
                    much of our teaching practice was to attempt to offer course content that was
                    relevant to students’ diverse career interests. 
                 Another driving factor is our need to justify the utility of our program to an
                    increasingly corporatized university. Within this framework, instrumentalist
                    knowledge is privileged, and the impulse to defend the utility of the humanities
                    writ large is a response to this instrumentalism. But the opposite is also true:
                    in the face of increasing demands to defend the utility and instrumentality of
                    humanistic–and, by extension, digital humanistic–work, scholars have defended
                    the value of the humanities despite, if not because of, a lack of
                    utility. Maggie Berg and Barbara Seeber’s The Slow
                        Professor
                    , for instance, draws on the principles of the Slow
                    Food movement to argue for the pleasures and politics of slowness and
                    resistance. Similarly, in response to Daniel Allington, Sarah Brouillette, and
                    David Golumbia’s article, Neoliberal Tools (and Archives):
                        A Political History of Digital Humanities, scholars have cited
                    alternate histories of DH that challenge the text analysis history of DH that
                    Allington, Brouillette, and Golumbia purport to be neoliberal. Tara McPherson,
                    for example, locates the roots of DH in design and the digital arts, citing
                    engagements with the expressive capacities of screen
                    culture and digital technology as driving forces in a critical humanities
                    approach to technology, an engagement that provides an alternate genealogy to
                    the text–analysis–dominant history that has persisted in origin stories of the
                    field . For McPherson, the history of computation
                    is intertwined with the sensory and the embodied. Scholars like Jacqueline
                    Wernimont continue this hybrid artistic and scholarly approach with projects
                    like Vibrant Lives, demonstrating how the on–going
                    history of DH is deeply rooted in creative critical engagements with the
                    materiality of the digital . It is also
                        worth mentioning Amy Earhart’s work in Traces of the
                            Old, Uses of the New: The Emergence of Digital Literary Studies
                        . Earhart does not concentrate on design
                        histories like McPherson. However, she does trace lost genealogies of
                        cultural critical scholarly work even within the types of projects that we
                        more traditionally read as DH projects. Her major contribution is to
                        demonstrate our contemporary politics of canonization and historiography and
                        to perform a feminist recovery of recent disciplinary history. This
                    vein of scholarship asks a fundamental question: Can design foreground the
                    values of a given field? 
                 It is in this context that we insert our pedagogy. Alongside our own engagement
                    in discourses of utility in humanistic education, we found that these alternate
                    genealogies of DH were equally insistent in our thinking as we established and
                    developed the DHFS. We contend that the alternate genealogies of DH research
                    that have been traced by a growing feminist digital humanities body of
                    scholarship may be brought to bear on the development of undergraduate DH
                    pedagogy. The history of undergraduate pedagogy in DH has not yet been subject
                    to historical recovery work. But we may take inspiration from feminist
                    genealogies of DH scholarship as we participate in creating a potential history,
                    a future anterior, of DH pedagogy. In order to explore this contention, this
                    article takes two approaches. It traces the brief and recent history of how
                    models of undergraduate DH pedagogy have conceived of the student, and it
                    explores the models that have informed our own pedagogical practice.
                    While we include examples drawn from our experience of designing, implementing,
                    and running an undergraduate–focused DH summer program, the aim of this article
                    is not to provide a report of what we did. Rather, it is to theorize and
                    contextualize our praxis. After providing a brief program description, the
                    article will move on to discuss persistent formulations of the undergraduate
                    student in DH before offering our own theorization of that relationship drawing
                    on a range of influences from inside the DH community and adjacent to it. We
                    account for our model’s intellectual history, and illustrate it with a small set
                    of examples. We conclude by drawing attention to the practical and ideological
                    limitations of our work.
            

                Program Description
                The DHFS ran for two years at the BISC. In both those years it had a two–part
                    structure: a classroom–based Field School at a satellite campus, and a one– to
                    two–term paid Student Assistantship at Queen’s University’s home campus.
                        The Field School portion of the DHFS did not run in the 2016 Summer term.
                        However, the assistantship will run independently of the Field School for
                        the first time in the 2016–2017 academic year.  The Field School is a
                    6–week intensive program that consists of two half–year course credits designed
                    to introduce undergraduate students to the digital humanities. Through these
                    accredited courses which count towards their degrees, students participate in
                    making, primarily using TEI technologies, and in critical engagement with both
                    scholarly and popular digital culture. Content delivery occurs in classroom
                    spaces and through academically integrated experiential learning
                        opportunities The Bader International Study Centre emphasizes
                        experiential learning as a required component of all courses offered at the
                        satellite campus. Experiential learning in this context is 
                            a formal element of the curriculum which is usually
                                active in some way, or more active than other elements of the
                                curriculum
                            
                        . It involves an organized student experience, unmediated by the
                        instructor, and a structured process of reflection and academic assessment
                        within the framework provided by the relevant course. Students are required
                        to participate in experiential learning opportunities and instructors are
                        required to provide a review panel with academic justification and
                        assessment frameworks for those opportunities., guest talks from UK
                    and North American DHers, and community-organized events. 
                After they complete the intensive Field School, students are eligible to apply
                    for a one- to two-term paid assistantship with the W.D. Jordan Special
                    Collections Library at Queen’s University, in which they continue their DH
                    training by taking ownership of a small-scale digitization project that aligns
                    with priority areas in Special Collections. The aim of the program is to provide
                    undergraduate students with an introduction to the field comprised of a
                    DH-oriented skill set, an informed critical perspective on digital culture, and
                    an application of that perspective to real research needs at their university.
                    One student occupied the role of Student Assistant each year, Tiffany Chan in
                    the first year and Jenna Mlynaryk in the second year. 
                The metaphor that drove our theoretical approach to the DHFS was that of the
                        scholar-citizen. Of the metaphors that exist in DH
                    approaches to pedagogy, the scholar-citizen is persistent, but is perhaps the
                    most implicit. In our organization of the Field School, it took some time for us
                    to perceive the permeation of this metaphor throughout DH pedagogy. Two more
                    explicit models presented themselves to us first: the ever-persistent and
                    problematic digital native model and the
                        apprentice-research assistant model. In many ways, our
                    experience of parsing these metaphors in order to arrive at the
                        scholar-citizen frames how we read the history of
                    pedagogical metaphors in DH. In line with this experience, we discuss both the
                        digital native and the apprentice-research
                        assistant models below. 
            

                Digital Native and Apprentice-Research
                        Assistant: The Brief History of DH Pedagogy
                Much of the discussion of the undergraduate and the digital maintains a
                    problematic sticking point on the concept of the digital
                        native, Marc Prensky’s infamous characterization of the
                        new generation of learners in 2001 . For example, when John Unsworth and Patrik Svensson
                    envision the graduate student who 
                        learned to do research with digital tools
                        
                    , they rely upon the trope of the digital native undergraduate student who
                    preceded the graduate student. And scholarship skeptical of this discourse has
                    asked questions like, Digital natives: Where is the
                        evidence?
                    , maintaining the validity of the digital
                        native as a critical category even as it attempts to debunk it.
                    Scholarship on the relationship between the undergraduate and the digital is
                    primarily concerned with questioning whether digital native
                    is an accurate characterization of the skill set of the undergraduate student,
                    identifying this concept as problematic for the inaccurate perceptions that it
                    perpetuates. 
                As our current project is to examine the metaphors of undergraduate belonging in
                    DH, we find the digital native problematic for a different reason. The
                        digital native mystifies the role of the undergraduate
                    in digital pedagogy broadly and DH more narrowly. This metaphor prevents us from
                    analyzing exactly what the undergraduate’s relationship is to the digital and
                    their potential relationship to the digital humanities. And, as a feminist
                    pedagogical lens is an intersectional one, the term digital
                        native casts belonging in binaristic terms: native or
                    immigrant.
                To unpick how this metaphor works is to recognize that it is about belonging and
                    exclusion, with connotations of both national identities, and racialized ones.
                    It also depends on a binary of stasis and movement, with natives not needing to
                    move and immigrants desiring, if not enacting, mobility. Recently, Assiniboine and
                    Blackfeet activist and writer Lauren ChiefElk and the intersectional feminist
                    Twitter account @colorcriticism have opened up a parallel critique of
                        digital native to the one we are engaging in here.
                    Using the Twitter hashtag #digitalnatives, contributors to the Twitter thread
                    work to reclaim the term  and to draw
                    attention to the presence of Native Americans and indigenous peoples in a
                    digital space. To continue to deploy the digital native
                    metaphor in a depoliticized DH pedagogical context not only obscures the
                    student’s role in DH pedagogy, but it also ignores and even silences the
                    potential identities and subject positions of students participating in the
                    digital–individuals who might elect to identify as #digitalnatives. If we take
                    as a starting point that the conceptual dimensions of our teaching are as
                    important as their implementation, then our political allegiances demand that we
                    move away from conceptual frameworks that risk flattening pedagogical
                    politics.
                If the digital native has been the metaphor which has
                    received the greatest critical attention, the metaphor of the
                        apprentice-research assistant has been a more implicit
                    one. While the ostensible digital native may speak the
                    language of the digital, the apprentice is not assumed to possess the necessary
                    skills for DH work; instead, she learns skills within the hierarchies and
                    economies of the DH project. In this second model, the undergraduate student’s
                    typical first exposure to DH is as the necessary labourer in faculty-led
                    research projects; she is indoctrinated into the discipline by means of
                    witnessing a project’s inside operations. This model has underpinned many of the
                    more practical discussions of DH pedagogy. The exigencies of the DH project,
                    particularly those that depend on the labour of undergraduates, find their way
                    into pedagogical practice. A pedagogy that concentrates on project-based
                    learning fulfils the goals and needs of the DH project. In more explicit
                    examples, some of the major innovations by such projects as the Map of Early Modern London hinge on careful
                    experimentation with the pedagogical potential of project-based learning. 
                The apprentice model has at least one conceptual advantage. It does not assume
                    that a life-long participation in the digital equals either a knowledge of the
                    underlying structures of digital products, or a knowledge of the skills required
                    to perform research in the digital. The apprentice model, unlike the
                        digital native model, retains a useful distinction
                    between the digital and the digital humanities, recognizing one as a cultural
                    phenomenon and set of products and the other as discipline.
                However, the apprentice model figures the power relationship of digital research
                    differently from the assumed power relationship of naturalized digital knowledge
                    possessed by the digital native. In Prensky’s depoliticized
                    formulation, nativeness retains the locus of power due to
                    its assumed naturalized knowledge. The apprentice model, despite its emphasis on
                    praxis and self-directed learning, reinforces a conventional academic
                    distribution of power between mentor and apprentice, assuming that the
                    researcher’s critical knowledge is something to be shared with the apprentice in
                    a top-down relationship. The apprentice model likewise communicates a kind of
                    community, but one that is primarily about induction into a profession. The
                    apprentice-research assistant model is a kind of economic transaction. If
                    belonging is important to DH research communities, then the economic metaphor
                    doesn’t express a robust understanding of the structure of that belonging beyond
                    this hierarchy. 
                A third metaphor, is the scholar citizen which is latent in the culture of the DH
                    pedagogical field and which at times overlaps with these previous two models; it
                    can be especially intertwined with that of the apprentice-researcher, though we
                    maintain it is distinct from it. Imagining undergraduate membership in the DH
                    field as a form of citizenship offers us a way of thinking about issues that
                    arise as a result of interdisciplinary collaboration, namely those associated
                    with labour and intellectual property.
            

                The Scholar-Citizen in Theory
                In identifying those models from within DH that have influenced our own
                    pedagogical practice, we first pay particular attention to scholars who engage
                    in a critical digital pedagogy. Drawing on the works of radical pedagogical
                    theory such as Paulo Freire’s Pedagogy of the Oppressed 
                    , such models are interested in challenging
                    traditional academic power structures. They push for the cultivation of a
                    critical awareness and praxis that continues for both students and instructors
                    after they leave the classroom. 
                Melanie Kill’s work with undergraduates and Wikipedia and Jesse Stommel’s
                    discussions of a critical digital pedagogy as a response to virtual learning
                    environments of various scales are part of the genealogy of the scholar-citizen.
                    In writing of her undergraduates’ work with Wikipedia, Kill emphasises how
                    student involvement in content development for the site allows the instructor to
                    direct students’ critical gazes on the digital public sphere and its dominant
                    discourses. In turn, this becomes an opportunity to 
                        educate students as citizens capable and responsible to
                            share what they know about the world around them
                        
                    . Kill is careful to qualify that she is not advocating merely for the
                    development of transferrable skills; rather, this combination of undergraduate
                    praxis and criticism is a means by which to 
                        offer a long view of the humanities and the critical
                            skills of analysis and communication
                        
                    . In establishing her pedagogical framework, Kill notes her reliance on
                    the work of The New London Group, a collective of 10 academics from the US, UK,
                    and Australia, who advocate for the teaching of multiliteracies as a response to
                    linguistic diversity and the multimodal nature of contemporary communication.
                    The New London Group place an emphasis on students’ use of newly gained critical
                    perspectives outside of the educational context, something which Kill
                    understands as essential to her own pedagogy. See also 
                
                This emphasis on facilitating undergraduate interaction with the digital as a
                    means of helping students develop the capacity to speak up, to negotiate, and
                        … to engage critically with the conditions of their working lives rather
                    than be 
                        docile, compliant workers
                        
                     is echoed in Jesse Stommel’s articulation of a critical digital pedagogy.
                    For Stommel, it is important for both students and instructors to remain ever
                    critically aware of the digital environments within which much pedagogical work
                    takes place. If Kill locates in undergraduate engagement with the digital an
                    opportunity to cultivate a broader critical perspective, then Stommel is certain
                    that heightened critical awareness needs to be present in order to facilitate a
                    radical encounter with the digital. As Stommel notes, 
                        [w]e are better users of technology when we are
                            thinking critically about the nature and effects of that technology.
                            What we must do is work to encourage students and ourselves to think
                            critically about new tools (and, more importantly, the tools we already
                            use)
                        
                    . Freire is central to Stommel’s attempts to define critical digital
                    pedagogy, as both Freire and Stommel offer a challenge to the power structures
                    inherent in traditional educational models.
                 Like Kill and Stommel, we embrace the critical potential of undergraduates’
                    engagement with the digital and we recognize that such an engagement needs to
                    foster and reinforce a certain degree of autonomy for those involved. As such,
                    equally influential in determining our formulation of the scholar–citizen is the
                    work behind such documents as the Collaborators’ Bill of
                        Rights 
                    , and UCLA Digital Humanities’ Student Collaborators’ Bill of Rights
                    . If adopting a continuing critical
                    perspective on different forms of the digital–both within the academy, and as
                    part of public digital culture–engenders a vital community, important to the
                    growth and health of that community is the acknowledgment of intellectual
                    property and the value of the individual’s labour. In recognising the power and
                    current prevalence of such rights discourses in DH, we must also be cognisant of
                    the role such discourses play in political contexts that we might understand as
                    antithetical to our pedagogy and our practice.
                The metaphors of citizenry in DH pedagogy have been compelling ones as we
                    conceptualize our own pedagogical practice. But so, too, has the body of
                    scholarship that has built up around critiquing citizenship in other
                    disciplines. Disciplines like the practice and critique of participatory art
                    provide models that respond to questions about autonomy and community. If
                    contemporary discussions of critical digital pedagogy are important in thinking
                    about DH pedagogy more broadly so, too, is the work being done in participatory
                    art. When scholars like McPherson and Earhart trace alternate genealogies of DH
                    through digital art and lost digital projects considered to be outside the
                        DH canon, they do so in opposition to the received
                    history of DH as stemming from surviving text–analysis projects, and they push
                    against the perception that DH is unconcerned with the politics of the digital.
                    The creative field of participatory art–and the scholarly work interrogating the
                    practice and the politics of this art form–offers alternative modes for thinking
                    about pedagogical practice as it relates to the introduction to, and inclusion
                    of, undergraduate students in DH.
                 Central to the critical digital pedagogies articulated by both Kill and Stommel
                    is an idea of both students and instructors actively engaged in the assessment
                    of digital objects and the methodologies and discourses framing those objects.
                    Participatory art places a similar emphasis on activity and engagement, seeking
                    to disturb the traditional idea of the singular, isolated viewer and offer
                    instead a 
                        new understanding of art without audiences, one in
                            which everyone is a producer
                        
                    . The spectator-consumer is replaced with multiple participant-producers;
                    the one who looks becomes a community of those who do. We see in this challenge
                    to dominant modes of viewer engagement with art a model that offers potential
                    for countering the construction of undergraduates as individual consumers of
                    knowledge and time, a construction which pervades the administrative and
                    promotional discourses increasingly amplified on our campuses.
                While all participatory art requires the involvement of those traditionally
                    designated spectators, one stream of participatory art is specifically
                    interested in experimental pedagogy as art. As such, this stream offers striking
                    models for critical undergraduate pedagogy. Participatory art’s interest in
                    experimental pedagogy can be traced back to Joseph Beuys’s lecture-actions on
                    social and political structures and his Bureau for Direct
                        Democracy at Documenta 5 . These projects
                    provided early points of reference for work by artists such as Tania Bruguera,
                    Thomas Hirschhorn, and Paul Chan. A history of such projects presents us with a
                    timeline that runs in parallel to the growth of the field of DH, and like some
                    DH projects, the work of pedagogic participatory artists responds to 
                        the different urgencies of their moment
                        
                    . Pedagogic participatory art can point up a lack of resources and
                    infrastructure, as did Tania Bruguera’s 2002-2009 art school, Cátedra Arte de Conducta in Havana Vieja . It can also function as a critical response to
                    academic capitalism. Thomas Hirschhorn’s 2009 Bijlmer-Spinoza Festival which was staged in an Amsterdam suburb
                    and focused on breaking down barriers between art historians, critics, and local
                    residents is one such example, as is the 2006 collaborative conference and
                    exhibition titled A.C.A.D.E.M.Y which situated
                    itself in opposition to the European Bologna Process. Due to the
                        transitory nature of participatory art, we have included Reference entries
                        that direct the reader to the documentary traces of these events, including
                        interview transcripts , artists’ statements , video footage , and
                        event programs . Pedagogic participatory
                    art shares what Claire Bishop defines as the larger goals of all participatory
                    art: 
                        to restore and realize a communal, collective space of
                            shared social engagement
                        
                    . Through different mechanisms and practices, such works seek to 
                        forge a collective, co-authoring, participatory social
                            body
                        
                    . In looking to such creative work, we recognize the resonances between
                    these artistic projects and our own, specifically in the ways they engage with
                    ideas of autonomy and community.
                Autonomy and community are the core ideas in our formulation of the
                    scholar-citizen model in undergraduate DH pedagogy, and they are ideas
                    implicitly shared by documents like the Student
                        Collaborator’s Bill of Rights. We propose the scholar-citizen
                    metaphor to be a particularly appropriate way of modeling undergraduate pedagogy
                    as it responds to some of the tensions that exist in the previously discussed
                    formulations. That is, a metaphor of citizenship allows for belonging to be
                    gained. In the digital native formulation, a digital
                    immigrant can never become a native. In the apprentice-research assistant model,
                    a student gains skills through hierarchical labour, but does not necessarily
                    gain belonging in a community. In a scholar-citizen model, a migrant to the
                    digital can become a DH citizen, she can gain skills and community. 
                We identify five aspects of DH scholarly citizenship in our pedagogy. First, the
                    structure of the DHFS works to acknowledge the local
                    identity of the student. Undergraduate students migrating to the DH field bring
                    with them skills and methodologies from their home disciplines; these are used
                    as a starting point for the acquisition of DH skills and DH-inflected critical
                    perspectives. Second, we seek to break down academic and generational divides
                    across learning environments by regularly bringing undergraduate participants
                    into contact with a range of DH–practicing and DH–adjacent researchers and with
                    those whose cultural heritage is the subject matter of DH scholarly inquiry.
                    Third, we preserve students’ intellectual control over the work produced in
                    courses; whether or not it will be added as an accredited contribution to an
                    affiliated DH project, for example, is at the student’s discretion. This
                        attempt has exposed some of the fuzzy and frustrating aspects of
                        intellectual property at our university. Fourth, where possible, we
                    seek to provide multiple opportunities to interested students to deepen their
                    investment in DH scholarship inside and outside the classroom, in particular
                    supporting the development of their own networks and communities within DH.
                    Finally, we seek ways to explicitly value student labour–to provide them with
                    paid positions–particularly when their work benefitted academic or research
                    units at Queen’s. Together, these five aspects of the scholar–citizen model
                    emphasize the student’s individuality and choice while also enhancing access to
                    the scholarly communities that shape the values communicated in the DH
                    classroom. They offer students the opportunity to belong in DH communities,
                    while valuing their unique perspectives on the field and on their own research.
                
            

                The Scholar-Citizen in Practice
                In the design of the DHFS, we have attempted to organize student activities and
                    assessment around these five core principles. The practical application of these
                    principles, however, begins to reveal the complexities of our pedagogical model
                    across learning spaces. As we now turn to demonstrate how we have put some of
                    these principles into practice, the coherence of this model in the classroom
                    tends to be shaped by the stakes tied to the learning activity at hand. Janelle
                    Jenstad and Kim McLean-Fiander’s contribution to this issue emphasizes
                        high–stakes learning and publishing opportunities. They
                    draw on research in Research-Based Learning by Angela Brew and Evan Jewell that
                    claims that high–stakes learning 
                        will motivate [students] to produce their best
                            work
                        
                    . For pedagogical projects like MoEML, the
                        stakes of a learning activity lie in its
                        publicness–the stakes are high in this kind of public
                        scholarship–while the audience of one entailed in the traditional
                    classroom does not elicit students’ best work. Our experiences and our filter of
                    the scholar–citizen pedagogical model complicates this definition of the stakes
                    of DH learning. In Jenstad and McLean-Fiander’s pedagogical program, the
                    high–stakes demands of public scholarship apply to assessed classroom learning
                    opportunities; that is, students’ assessed classroom work was the same work that
                    could be contributed to a public scholarly project. The structure of the DHFS,
                    by contrast, tended to separate high-stakes learning from assessment. The
                    concept of the stakes of learning and the necessity for assessment in the
                    classroom is further complicated by our conceptual pedagogical model. If we
                    maintain that belonging and community are equally central to DH and to DH
                    pedagogy, assessment and the stakes of learning represent two points of tension
                    in how we imagine the DH undergraduate. 
                 The Student Assistantship and the Field School together shed some light on the
                    ways that design can change the questions we can ask of teaching and research.
                    The Assistantship and Field School alike frequently divorce the public-facing
                    aspects of learning opportunities from grades-based assessment. As a result, we
                    have observed three tiers of stakes in learning
                    opportunities. Low-stakes opportunities, as we have come to define them, may
                    have public-facing features traditionally associated with high-stakes learning,
                    such as participation in on-going, real-life projects, but they ask students to
                    rely on existing skill sets and do not require that students develop complex
                    projects. Medium stakes learning asks students to gain new skills and apply them
                    synthetically and creatively, but it restricts public-facing aspects to remain
                    within small, controlled communities and peer groups. High-stakes opportunities
                    provide students with high levels of project autonomy, the results of their
                    learning are widely disseminated, and the assignments expect that students will
                    perform complex synthetic tasks. As will emerge in this discussion, each level
                    of stakes has a complex relationship to the quality of work
                    that students produce. Additionally, assessment appears to adversely affect the
                    quality of work produced by students. 
                
                    Low- and Medium-Stakes Learning in the Classroom 
                    Two elements of the scholar–citizen model–(1) the acknowledgement of a
                        student’s local identity, and (2) the condensing of
                        academic divisions–frame some of the more concrete examples of how the
                        DHFS’s curriculum development fits this model. First, in line with the first
                        principle of the scholar–citizen model, we draw from students’
                            local identities, be they disciplinary, cultural,
                        or social, and we maintain that these identities should be used as a
                        starting point in the acquisition of DH critical skills. In the context of
                        the Field School, students’ various disciplinary identities have been among
                        the most impactful factors in the classroom. Approximately half of the
                        students in the program came from humanistic disciplines like English and
                        History. Half came from other disciplines not normally understood to be
                        within the purview of DH: Psychology, Politics, Tourism, and Chemistry. In
                        response to this heterogeneity, we endeavoured to create instructional space
                        that recognizes and respects this component of the student’s local
                        disciplinary identity. 
                     More concretely, students in the 2015 Field School prepared a presentation
                        as part of their participation in a one-day symposium with a local charity.
                        Co-organized by the DHFS and the Hastings Pier Charity, the symposium
                        brought together the Field School’s students and the charity’s project
                        developers and engineers to discuss the digital popular memory archive being
                        assembled as part of a government-funded restoration of a Victorian pleasure
                        pier on the Southern English coast. The students’ presentation detailed a
                        range of possible digital projects the charity could undertake using the
                        assembled archival resources in order to provide a public-facing digital
                        presence for the physical site. In doing so, not only did the students draw
                        on class discussions of digital archives, DH project management, metadata,
                        citizen scholarship, and folksonomies, but they also found valuable one
                        student’s previous degree work in Tourism and his experience developing a
                        digital platform for the crowdsourced writing and rewriting of public
                            histories.Our approach echoes the claims of Research-Based
                            Learning that gives students the tools to ask and answer legitimate
                                questions (Jenstad and McLean-Fiander), but as the discussion
                            will show, such learning may not always be high
                                stakes.
                     This experiential learning activity asked students to apply their classroom
                        knowledge of digital cultural heritage to an on-going cultural preservation
                        project. The activity of drawing on students’ local disciplinary identities
                        distinguishes the specific knowledge base of one student, while promoting
                        the contribution of individual knowledge to the classroom community. The
                        recognition of the students’ local disciplinary identities, then, also
                        contributes to the second principle of the scholar-citizen model, the
                        flattening or condensing of academic hierarchies. This learning opportunity
                        seems to conform in many ways to the definition of high-stakes learning. It
                        is public–facing, and it is tied to a tangible,
                            real–world project; it asks that students make
                        concrete suggestions that may change the direction of a project. Notably, it
                        also elicited high–quality suggestions and engagement from the students.
                        However, by our definition, high stakes does not
                        accurately describe the complexity demanded of students in this learning
                        opportunity. The learning opportunity was tied to assessment only
                        circuitously, and it required students to draw on their own backgrounds and
                        skill sets. But it does not ask students to display or share a project of
                        their research. The task at hand for students was application
                        rather than the more challenging task of production or
                            creativity. 
                     Other aspects of curriculum development similarly seek to flatten
                        hierarchies and allow students access to scholarly conversations they might
                        otherwise be proscribed from. These more academic-facing learning
                        opportunities also rest on the principles of community engagement that can
                        only be circuitously assessed. In providing students with these
                            opportunities we make an implicit argument about the relationship
                            between the undergraduate student and DH as a discipline.
                            Disciplinarity, however messy or broadly defined, is fundamentally
                            important in undergraduate pedagogy. The successful integration of
                            students’ local identities has also relied on the knowledge base that
                            accompanies their disciplinary backgrounds. And our attempts to compress
                            academic generational divides depend on the values of DH itself to
                            question academic hierarchy. Our choice to make disciplinarity explicit
                            in the DH classroom is a departure from some of the existing arguments
                            about disciplinarity and DH pedagogy. Unlike scholarly adherents to DH,
                            undergraduate students tend not to have not yet made the choice to enter
                            the professions they come across in their university courses. The
                            as-yet-undecided position of the undergraduate has prompted scholars
                            like William Pannapacker and Ryan Cordell to argue that the term
                                Digital Humanities does not make sense to an
                            undergraduate audience. Pannapacker suggests Digital Liberal
                                Arts as an alternative, but Cordell goes further to
                            suggest that even the term Humanities holds little
                            meaning for undergraduates 
                            . However, our claim that design,
                            particularly conceptual design, reveals the values of a given field
                            prompts us to approach disciplinarity in the undergraduate classroom
                            differently. DH, in our understanding, is a field interested in
                            critiquing underlying structures, whether technological or in
                            humanistic. DH is a discipline particularly invested in questioning its
                            own boundaries. Experimentation and community are immanent to DH
                            research, and they are likewise integral to DH pedagogy, as are the
                            disciplinary boundaries that shape communities of research and teaching.
                         In line with the fourth principle of providing students access to
                        their own DH networks and communities, we attempted to challenge academic
                        generational divides by fostering opportunities for scholarly conversation
                        between undergraduate students and established DH and DH-adjacent scholars.
                        Imperative to the successful crossing of generational divides is providing
                        students with the necessary tools and vocabulary to participate as scholars
                        in their own right. In this capacity, the DHFS collaborated with the Digital
                        Curators at the British Library in order to organize a colloquium for
                        students with the staff of the British Library Labs. In addition, we
                        facilitated student participation in more traditional scholarly forms like
                        the recent King’s College London early career research conference, Blue
                        Skies Above, Solid Ground Below (2015). Prior to participation in these
                        events, students were supported in the articulation of their own digitally
                        inflected research interests and questions about the field through
                        one-on-one dialogue with instructors.
                     The principles of experimentation and community, similarly to the principle
                        of community as citizenry, connote a protection by community for the kinds
                        of experimentation that DH learning and research entail. In other words,
                        learning with community safeguards for failure is low-stakes
                        learning. Indeed, in the examples above, students demonstrated their ability
                        to contribute to scholarly and cultural communities in thoughtful and
                        sophisticated ways in circumstances that were not directly tied to
                        assessment. The scholar-citizen principles of recognizing students’ local
                        identities, facilitating students’ participation across hierarchical and
                        generational academic divides, and providing them with the opportunities to
                        forge their own scholarly communities can be said to be a successful
                        pedagogical model in light of the quality of student engagement. But it also
                        sits uncomfortably with the necessity for evaluation in the classroom. For
                        both students and instructors, the reality of evaluation necessitates the
                        possibility of failure. Failure is the denial of community belonging. 
                     Following from this principle, we attempted to mitigate the risk of
                        failure–to offer low–stakes learning opportunities–in work completed for
                            assessment. This is not to say that the evaluated course material
                            was easy or simplistic. In fact, on anonymous student evaluations, one
                            student remarked that the DHFS was the one of the hardest – if not
                                the hardest – course [he or she has] taken during [his or her]
                                undergraduate career.
                         For example, the students’ major project drew from a partnership
                        with the Amelia Alderson Opie Project, a SSHRC–funded archival project
                        housed in the Department of English at Queen’s University. The Project and
                        the DHFS teaching team provided the primary source materials, namely letters
                        written by Opie and her close circle of friends, from which students
                        selected an object to become the centre of an individual DH markup
                        microproject. Students were provided with a robust framework of digital
                        editorial theory and were expected to gain familiarity with TEI in an oXygen
                        editing environment, a technology that we chose as it lays bare minute
                        encoding decisions but remains relatively accessible. The end product
                        entailed an .xml representation of the students’ chosen object, an optional
                        customized schema (created in Roma), and a prose editorial statement on the
                        student’s theoretical and practical editorial decisions. We attempted to
                        retain student ownership over their own work in line with the third
                        principle of the scholar–citizen model. Distinct from student work that is
                        contributed to a larger project with or without attribution, the
                        micro–projects are designed as stand–alone entities, complete with an
                        account of how the student understands her intervention into a single
                        object. The markup project is then the subject of individual student
                        presentations to their peers and the broader community on the satellite
                        campus. 
                     The major assignment was neither designed as a high–stakes learning
                        opportunity in the same sense promoted by Research Based Learning, nor as a
                        low-stakes opportunity like the ones discussed above. Instead, the
                        assignment may be read as medium stakes: each student’s markup and
                        presentation is assessed on a traditional grade scale and the project is
                        presented to a small, controlled public of peers. Students were provided
                        with large amounts of individual attention from the instructors, and
                        supported in developing presentation skills. Nevertheless, this small
                        increase in the stakes of the learning opportunity had perhaps a paradoxical
                        effect: students felt a great deal of anxiety about the assignment, as
                        though it were a high-stakes situation; in contrast to the students’
                        impressive engagement in community and scholarly settings, student
                        performance on assignments was good but not overwhelmingly so. One trend is
                        that students are able to reiterate, synthesize, and analyze theories of
                        digital editing, but they are not able to apply those theories in the
                        detailed work of encoding. While they have the skills for argumentation in
                        prose, they did not necessarily gain competency in some primary DH critical
                        mechanics. Some of this failure we may attribute to the short, six-week
                        term. And some of it we may attribute to a natural variation in student
                        aptitudes. It seems, furthermore, that the introduction of assessment
                        correlates with increased levels of student anxiety and has little positive
                        correlation with increased quality of work. 
                     The practical application of the scholar–citizen model in the Field School
                        portion of the DHFS exposes some of the complexities of DH ideas of
                        belonging, the risks of failure, and the stakes of learning. No students
                        received a failing grade in the Field School–the small class sizes and our
                        ability to respond with agility to student needs have been a great help in
                        this respect. However, the varied responses among student participants in
                        the program to low– and medium–stakes learning opportunities prompts us to
                        critically question the often powerful claims the scholar–citizen model
                        makes for inclusion and autonomy. If academic failure is a possibility–as it
                        becomes with the introduction of traditional assessment methods–then
                        community membership is not always guaranteed. 
                
                
                    High-Stakes Learning in the Assistantship
                    To our knowledge, the Assistantship is unique as a pedagogical project that
                        financially rewards the on-going pedagogy of undergraduate students outside
                        of the classroom and outside of the professor-directed research project. The
                        Assistantship has run for two academic years as a paid position open to
                        Queen’s students who attended the Field School. It is offered in partnership
                        with Special Collections at the W.D. Jordan Library at Queen’s,
                        co-supervised by the Curator of Special Collections and the members of the
                        DHFS teaching team with support from subject-matter specialists and some
                        technical support from the IT department of Queen’s University libraries.
                        Students digitized priority, underutilized collections at Jordan Library and
                        designed and implemented a small-scale digital exhibition in line with their
                        own research interests and in keeping with Queen’s Libraries’ aim to
                        increase public access to their holdings. Tiffany Chan worked on a
                        collection of nineteenth-century stereoscopic photographs, producing an
                        exhibition that took advantage of contemporary animation techniques to
                        visualize the three-dimensional photographic mode. Jenna Mlynaryk worked on
                        a unique collection of nineteenth-century women’s magazines that prominently
                        features unused, full-color fashion plates. Her exhibition attended to the
                        material histories of both the Victorian fashion industry and Victorian
                        magazine culture. As a condition of the Assistantship, students were
                        expected to present their work in an on-campus undergraduate colloquium and
                        to blog about their research process in online fora like HASTAC. The design
                        of the Assistantship attempts to apply the pedagogical principles of the
                        scholar-citizen model: (3) students are given ownership over their own work,
                        and (5) labour that contributes to the research needs of Queen’s University
                        or a broader project is explicitly valued in a paid position. While the
                        Assistantship may count as Research Based Learning, it does not conform
                        entirely to the power dynamics of the apprentice-research assistant model.
                        Students were not assessed and they did not provide assistance for a project
                        under a professor’s direction. 
                     The low– to medium–stakes learning opportunities offered in the Field School
                        portion of the DHFS complicate some existing research on student engagement,
                        quality of work, and assessment. The Student Assistantship portion offers a
                        counter–example of high-stakes learning, but one that is nevertheless not
                        assessed. The public–facing, high–stakes aspects of the Assistantship appear
                        to have produced in students a desire to contribute their best work. The
                        quality of student work provides some evidence of this desire. For example,
                        Chan produced an extremely thorough online exhibit. She has provided links
                        to materials available in the W.D. Jordan library that support her research
                        claims. The flipping animation and the 3–D animation–a technique known as
                        tweening–curate the photographs as three-dimensional objects, communicating
                        their materiality and the manner in which they would be viewed by
                        contemporary audiences . Mlynaryk produced a
                        dynamic timeline to demonstrate changes in fashion trends across the 1870s
                        as reflected in unique holdings of the Young Ladies’
                            Journal Canadian edition . In
                        addition, students performed complex, synthetic, and creative research. Both
                        projects are thoroughly and carefully researched and thoughtfully presented.
                        Both rely on an impressive depth and breadth of research, in addition to
                        demonstrating a keen eye for effective presentation of humanistic research
                        in a digital environment.
                    The Assistantship fits more closely with existing definitions of high–stakes
                        learning than the Field School portion of the DHFS. Public–facing
                        dissemination is built into the requirements of the Assistantship. Students
                        are explicitly expected to situate their work on widely disseminated
                        platforms, and to perform complex, original research tasks. The high–stakes,
                        public nature of the digital exhibit may result in the high quality of work
                        in the students’ projects in line with the causal arguments of Research
                        Based Learning. However, Mlynaryk suggests in a blog post that the
                        Assistantship–ostensibly a higher-stakes learning opportunity–paradoxically
                        mitigated the risk of failure. Mlynaryk writes that she relies on the idea
                        of working failures in her DH research: 
                            Being able to work with a tangible set of mistakes,
                                as discouraging as it can initially be, has taught me to take better
                                pride in my ideas and objectives. Accepting my failures as part of
                                both an immediate and grander solution is the best way that I've
                                learned to keep moving forward. So many of my traditional humanities
                                courses would benefit from promoting working failures as a part of
                                student success, and I hope to one day see failure embraced in all
                                classrooms.
                            
                        In Mlynaryk’s articulation, the learning environment developed by the
                        Assistantship helped her develop the metacognitive skill of managing her
                        on–going learning, perhaps especially when that learning is experienced as
                        failure. Mlynaryk notes that, in the assessed classroom learning
                        environment, 
                            traditional humanities courses often lack a good
                                model for analyzing failure
                            
                        , as correction and criticism rarely accompanies the offer to improve
                        on the work at hand. Mlynaryk’s reflections on her changing relationship to
                        failure, and her assertion that space for failure would benefit all
                        classrooms seems at first to be contradictory in the context of
                            high-stakes learning opportunities, in which the
                        consequences of failure may be more deeply felt. However, Mlynaryk also
                        lights upon the central digital humanities values of experimentation and its
                        concomitant potential for failure. 
                     Mlynaryk’s insights are also valuable for the way that she perceives a
                            good model for analyzing failure–an aspect of the
                        kind of learning that she did outside of the classroom–to be a
                        valuable corrective to the classroom experience. This tension between modes
                        of learning in inside and outside the classroom space permeates pedagogical
                        design and student experience in the DHFS. The classroom space and the
                        realities of assessment–the possibility of failure in terms of grade point
                        and financial loss and the attendant increase in student anxiety–go
                        together. What Mlynaryk calls for may be extended to entail a thoughtful
                        re-evaluation of what a good model for analyzing
                            failure may be within the classroom, including a
                        re-evaluation of how it is tied to assessment. As our experiences with both
                        the Field School and the Assistantship have suggested, the relationships
                        between the stakes of learning and the
                        anxiety-producing effects of assessment is one that would benefit from
                        further study and experimentation. 
                
                
                    Students as Scholar-Citizens
                    Perhaps the most palpable ways in which students embody the principles of the
                        scholar-citizen model is in public reflections on the nature of belonging
                        and on the communities that they found through their research. These
                        reflections are part of blog posts required by the Assistantship, but their
                        topics and content were entirely student produced. These reflections are
                        public-facing, but their purpose is to be exploratory and to allow students
                        a way to refine discrete aspects of their projects. The reflections, again,
                        expose some of the ironies of DH pedagogy: they were purposefully designed
                        as low-stakes learning opportunities not tied to assessment, but students
                        produced sophisticated accounts of their place within DH and the nature of
                        their work, performing the kind of synthetic work that we would expect from
                        high-stakes learning opportunities. Thematically, the posts claimed that
                        community and autonomy were centrally important to the students’ scholarly
                        development. 
                    For example, in a blog post for HASTAC Tiffany Chan details the way
                        undergraduate students who are integrated into the Queen’s DH community
                        develop ‘hard’ skills like metadata/archival work and web
                            development, at the same time that they are given an opportunity to
                        apply 
                            ‘soft’ skills in a context outside of class [so as
                                to] better understand how they transfer
                            
                        . Perhaps most importantly, however, she also discusses the way in
                        which involvement in this aspect of the Field School and the accompanying
                        Assistantship helped her to cultivate a critical perspective on the DH field
                        and her own place in it. Chan writes, 
                            The traces of my intersecting communities are
                                everywhere–all over my project, in and between every line of this
                                blog post, and churning in the back of my mind...Because DH favours
                                openness…and because my educators and mentors have been frank about
                                them, I am aware of discussions about critical pedagogy, contingent
                                academic labour, the corporatization of
                                post–secondary education, etc. that I would likely never have
                                discovered otherwise
                            
                        . Chan, unprompted by either of her instructors, articulates her role
                        in the digital humanities, and in her education more generally, as one of
                        awareness and knowledge, of critical perspectives, of a specific local
                        subject position, all aspects of the scholar–citizen model on which we had
                        attempted to shape the pedagogical approach of the Field School. 
                     Chan’s continuation of what may be read as the scholar–citizen model into
                        her developing career speaks to some of the ways that this model can
                        facilitate an expansion of the role of the undergraduate beyond the
                        classroom and even beyond the limited–term research project. Outside of the
                        paid assistantship position, Chan has also contributed to the on–going DH
                        project of demystifying such DH work and democratizing DH skills. Chan has
                        independently produced a project resource for undergraduate students
                        entitled How Did They Make That? For Undergraduate
                            Projects, modelled after Miriam Posner’s own How Did They Make That? This project includes
                        screencasts of undergraduate projects, listing the technologies used to make
                        the featured projects, resources for using those technologies, and
                        alternative technologies that could accomplish similar tasks. Chan’s goal is
                        to showcase undergraduate projects to undergraduates, but she has
                        incidentally produced an extremely useful teaching resource, demonstrating
                        to instructors what engaged undergraduates can reasonably be expected to
                        accomplish for a university project. Her contribution has the potential to
                        shape the projects by which students may be evaluated and to encourage
                        instructors who may not otherwise have chosen to allow digital projects in
                        their classrooms. As a result of Chan’s work in this area one of the DHFS
                        instructors has successfully petitioned for the inclusion of digital
                        microprojects as a form of assessment at other courses on the BISC’s
                        satellite campus. If a student project may offer an articulation of
                        belonging and citizenship in a scholarly discipline, this is precisely what
                        Chan has produced; she has drawn on her specialized, local knowledge, and
                        contributed it to the scholarly community at large. 
                    The students in the Assistantship seem to have developed a scholarly
                        community and a scholarly identity. But it would be too easy to claim that
                        the scholar–citizen pedagogical model directly produced the students’ sense
                        of belonging and elicited their best work. Freire instructs us to be
                        vigilant of the power dynamics of pedagogical spaces, and as such we believe
                        that credit is due more to the students than to our pedagogical efforts.
                        Both Chan and Mlynaryk are strong, imaginative students, in whom it is easy
                        to recognize a great deal of the positive qualities that DH wishes to claim
                        for its own and which it actively seeks to cultivate. Each has flourished
                        within the scholar–citizen framework that the DHFS modelled itself on, but
                        their successes are their own. The DHFS cannot yet claim that it has found a
                        model that can make a consistent impact on its students or that has affected
                        systemic change in the way that undergraduate students are taught and
                        encouraged to participate in DH research. We simply don’t have a large
                        enough sample set, and these students may well just be exceptional. 
                
            

                Limitations and Assumptions
                But it is this exceptional quality of the students in the DHFS, and in particular
                    in the Assistantship, that allows us to question of the limit of the
                    scholar–citizen model. That is, citizenship and belonging may depend on a kind
                    of engaged participation that is rare, a criticism that we may launch at many of
                    the optimistic political science definitions of democracy, in which individuals
                    each have a voice and a vested interest in a system. Our attempt to unpack the
                        scholar citizen metaphor in relation to undergraduate
                    students in DH is a conscious and hopeful one. Tracing its use in current DH
                    discourses about critical pedagogy has helped us to understand other concepts
                    that make up our current constellation of thinking about undergraduates. Out of
                    the available metaphors–digital native,
                        apprentice researcher,
                    scholar citizen–it is the latter metaphor that has
                    inflected our program design and our teaching practice. In situating both our
                    theoretical and practical critical engagement with the term in the current
                    scholarly landscape, we have had occasion to investigate how DH understands
                    critical (digital) pedagogy and to locate how this heritage runs in parallel to
                    other models of radical pedagogy.
                Most resonant for our undertaking was pedagogical participatory art’s engagement
                    with radical pedagogy. Further, this branch of participatory art resonates with
                    the alternate, feminist genealogy of DH research through digital art and design.
                    In turn, we are able to question the way that design may shift our understanding
                    of some of the principles of DH teaching and learning. By designing the DHFS in
                    line with the scholar–citizen model that we have observed latent in discussions
                    of DH pedagogy, we have exposed new and necessary avenues of research and
                    experimentation in DH. In particular, the high–stakes
                    learning opportunities that have characterized many of the more innovative
                    approaches to DH pedagogy come under new pressure within the design structure of
                    the DHFS. The observations that this program design allows suggests that
                    discrete aspects of high stakes learning–public, semi–public, or private
                    dissemination; classroom and non–classroom spaces; complexity of the assigned
                    task; and the role of assessment–do not always have a direct correlation to
                    either student engagement or the quality of student work. Furthermore, students’
                    belonging in DH communities hinge on these design questions.
                In working to establish the scholar-citizen as a viable
                    model of undergraduate DH pedagogy, we, like others, draw on discussions of
                    power in the classroom, as laid out by Paulo Freire and others; however, we
                    understand such a dynamic in a slightly different way than has been articulated
                    by current DH scholarship. For example, in his definition of critical
                        digital pedagogy, Jesse Stommel locates in Freire the possibility
                    of levelling traditional classroom hierarchies, emphasizing the how radical
                    pedagogical approaches can transform the learning environment into 
                        a space for asking questions–a space of cognition not
                            information
                        
                    . According to Stommel, in such a space 
                        [v]ertical (or hierarchical) relationships give way to
                            more playful ones, in which students and teachers co–author together the
                            parameters for their individual and collective learning. Problem–posing
                            education offers a space of mutual creation not consumption
                        
                    . We maintain, however, that while critical pedagogy needs to continually
                    challenge hierarchical notions of power, it is never fully free of them.
                    Scholar–citizenry should be about reflexive awareness of the power dynamic on
                    the part of both students and instructors. Part of that reflexivity is an
                    acknowledgement of just how challenging it can be to attain citizenship, and
                    that citizenship can also be a function of a certain kind of privilege.
                        The attendees of the DHFS are privileged in very real–world,
                        non–metaphorical ways. In terms of physical access, the program runs during
                        an optional third term in the academic year and thus is not necessarily
                        logistically, or financially accessible. The necessity of aligning the
                        program’s budget model with institutional requirements means a program cost
                        that can exclude interested participants, as only a portion of it can be
                        offset by a limited range of needs and merit-based funding opportunities. In
                        fact, one of our own infrastructural failures has been our inability to
                        secure meaningful bursaries and financial assistance to students who might
                        be interested in attending (and we have evidence that financial barriers
                        have prevented some students from joining the program). 
                
                We remain ever aware of how the program exists in a sphere of privilege, perhaps
                    best symbolized by the campus’s main academic building, a 15th-century fortified
                    English manor house. Though the DHFS endeavoured to afford undergraduates agency
                    in the field, it must also continue to be critically aware of, and accountable
                    for, its position and inheritance. As part of that inheritance, the DHFS’s
                    content retained a Eurocentric focus, and reaches a largely North American
                    student body that provides only limited exposure to the wealth of criticism
                    emerging from a global DH landscape. One of our own failures, again, has been to
                    find compelling ways of teaching non-Eurocentric and non-North American forms of
                    DH. 
                In addition, as we wish to subject a citizenry model to the same scrutiny as the
                        digital native and apprentice-research
                        assistant models, we are aware of how such a community-oriented
                    model of engagement might privilege social compliance over individual agency,
                    and, additionally, can act in service of a neo-liberal discourse that has
                    utilized the language surrounding creative practice for its own purposes. As
                    Claire Bishop notes in her critical assessment of participatory art, such
                    collaborations can be co-opted into the project of rewarding 
                        submissive citizens who respect authority and accept
                            the ‘risk’ and responsibility of looking after themselves in the face of
                            diminished [support infrastructures]
                        
                    . Bishop’s warning is instructive for the idealistic models of
                    participation we envision for undergraduate DHers, models that rely on what can
                    be markers of exactly this neoliberal subjectivity. 
                Further scrutiny along these lines only leads us to ask: what is the remedy to
                    the insistent place of privilege from which we conduct this pedagogical
                    exercise? We attempt to model a pedagogy that thinks of our students as social,
                    political, and ideological subjects, as scholar citizens, a model that shifts,
                    if only slightly, the metaphors of belonging we apply to undergraduate
                    participation in DH. We hope that this model will continue push us to challenge
                    the underlying assumptions of our pedagogy in recognition that these moments of
                    difficulty and discomfort, and a willingness to account for them and critically
                    examine them, can help to render discourses of belonging in the digital
                    humanities more accountable for those who are the subject of them.
            
