Title:  The Little Database: A Poetics of Media Formats
                    (2025)
Volume:  019
Issue:  3
Date:  31 October 2025
Abstract:  
                
                The Little Database is a book that merges media studies and literary studies to
                    survey a series of little databases, databases too small to be useful for
                    modern data analytics, but too large for a single person to consume. The work
                    covers Textz.com, Eclipse, PennSound, MutantSounds, MUPS, and UbuWeb in novel
                    and interesting ways previously unseen in either media or literary studies.
            
Full Body Text: 


                
                The winter of 1958 was a pivotal moment for avant-garde prose and poetry.
                    Sections of William S. Burroughs' yet-to-be-published novel Naked Lunch were blocked from distribution in the Chicago Review by the University of Chicago
                    administration. In response, much of the editorial staff resigned and launched a
                    new, more inviting magazine — both in name and content — Big Table. Daniel Scott Snelson’s The Little
                        Database connects similar, though less sensational, paratextual
                    events in web-based compilations and experimental publishing — forms far more
                    avant-garde and inventive than anything the Big
                        Table editors could have imagined — to the lineage of paper-based
                    little magazines that challenged convention as much as definition. Snelson
                    contends that tables storing small assemblages of data may lead to Big
                    Table-sized literary impact. 
                Snelson deploys the history of the little magazine in conversation with material
                    text and media studies scholars ranging from Robert Scholes and Clifford Wulfman
                    to Marjorie Perloff, Lev Manovich, and N. Katherine Hayles (and that’s just to
                    get at what a little magazine is). From that constellation, the little magazine
                    emerges as a form unconcerned with wide circulation, wide purview, absolute
                    compilation, or absolute anything. Rather, the periodicals, as former Chicago Review editor Eirik Steinhoff puts it, serve
                    as a collection of (potentially explosive) material put in
                        storage for future use
                     that seek to put together the best and most
                    exciting works at hand during the editing of a given issue. Snelson refers to
                    Scholes and Wulfman’s assessment that little magazines were central to the
                    development of modernism in the 20th century but never makes a similar case,
                    that the form encloses the politics and poetics of the present, for the little
                    database. Instead the entirety of the work is devoted to exploring the
                    contingency of meaning-making in the latter cultural forms, as Snelson states,
                        [t]he transformations effected by digital formats
                        cannot be generalized. Indeed, the only generalization we might make is that
                        every file is transformed differently, and that we must therefore attend
                        with care to those conditions of transformation
                    . The book invites the reader to imagine
                    a new, nascent, literary movement emerging from the transformative screens of
                    these small collections.
                A little database, like the little magazine, is unconcerned with absolutes and
                    ignores completion. Snelson borrows Lev Manovich’s description of a database as
                        any organized collection of data
                     and sets to work. Little, in the
                    context of these databases, refers to something large enough that an individual
                    could not consume all its material, yet small enough to resist large-scale data
                    analysis. Such heuristics underscore that the little database, as a cultural
                    artifact, is not something Snelson aims to capture within a model. Despite the
                    title, the focus is less on the little database and more
                    on tracing and exploring the slipperiness of specific little databases. Each
                    chapter centers on one — or sometimes a few — databases, and concludes with a
                    creative intervention into that database’s tactics. The interventions are a form
                    of media poetics performing art as scholarship, each taking a thread from the
                    preceding chapter and then weaving that thread into a wholly new artwork outside
                    of the database described. Chapter one generates a book of remixed
                    theory/poetry. Chapter two creates new works of AI generated poems to create
                    bootlegs of L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E Magazine. Chapter three
                    spawns an audio essay and chapter four a film. Even the index is subject to
                    generative remix. These interventions are discussed in the book, but live in the
                    open access digital edition hosted by Manifold, streaming beyond the pages for the reader to find.
                The book is radically materialist in its literary criticism-based approach,
                    focusing on cultural workers over philosophers. Where other works would,
                    perhaps, cite thinkers more heavily indebted to continental philosophy to
                    discuss digital objects, from the Frankfurt School to Yuk Hui’s On the Existence of Digital Objects
                    , The Little Database
                    leans more heavily on Hito Steyerl’s influential writing on the subject. Of
                    course, that is by design. While the book has a foothold in continental
                    philosophy, it privileges the perspectives and practices of writers, artists,
                    and literary critics. In this way, a series of chapters have more in common with
                    Marjorie Perloff’s The Poetics of Indeterminacy
                    , a survey of experimental works within a poetic
                    genre, as well as her Differentials
                    , than that of Hui, Jonathan Sterne, or Alexander
                    Galloway, though all three can be found serving as a background for the text.
                    For example, Snelson’s book opens with a reading of a digitized recording of
                    William Carlos Williams’ The Defective Record — and
                    the interpretive complications that arise in the digitization of its type of
                    media-specific works. In discussing Williams, Perloff writes, but Williams also understood that, in the case of poetry, and,
                        for that matter… pure abstraction was not the goal
                    . Similarly, Snelson focuses on cultural
                    specificity — the concrete and contingent materials of writing and constructing
                    poetry — and argues that pure abstraction, whether in software, the World Wide
                    Web, or algorithmic systems more broadly, can never be extracted from specific
                    material instantiations. Instead, the experiential meaning, that activates
                    during a specific encounter, at a specific moment in time, is of central
                    importance to the project. 
                The first chapter focuses on textwarez — text files
                    distributed like pirated software — on a site known as Textz. The second chapter explores the aesthetic concerns and
                    questions of preservation in presenting textual material as images on the
                    website Eclipse. Building on the ideas introduced
                    earlier, the third chapter examines the possibilities that arise when poetry
                    moves from text to image to sound, ultimately flattened into sonic collage, as
                    seen in the little databases PennSound, Mutant Sounds, and MUPS.
                    The book concludes with the artistic blooms emerging from UbuWeb, focusing in particular on Nam June Paik’s Zen for Film (specifically as it is nestled on UbuWeb), Vito Acconci’s Theme
                        Song, and Vicki Bennett’s We Edit Life. 
                The 1958 Big Table episode is echoed in a 2002
                    incident involving a cease-and-desist letter from Suhrkamp Press, which demanded
                    that the website Textz.com remove a file labeled
                        walser.pdf. Without opening the file, the press
                    assumed it contained a leaked version of a forthcoming Martin Walser work
                    rumored to include anti-Semitic caricatures. There was no journal to quit and no
                    magazine to start, so the little database known as Textz created a file called walser.php.txt. The file did not contain, but could generate, the
                    contents of the text Suhrkamp was trying to suppress. In this clever gesture of
                    resistance, Snelson argues, the episode mirrors the kind of playful
                    extra-literary games that have historically shaped both little magazines of the
                    past and little databases of the present. Textz,
                    responding to such restrictions, creates its own contingent and subjective
                    reading/writing and creator/consumer experience. The actual files hosted by
                        Textz, numerous and interesting as they are,
                    are secondary to understanding how textwarez might
                        transform literary sources in the computation of each user
                    . For Snelson, the concern is less with
                    the contents of Naked Lunch, than the
                    meaning-making potentials that a magazine that publishes works like Naked Lunch generates for the reader and the literary
                    world overall.
                While Naked Lunch was suppressed for its
                        filthy content, the website Eclipse was
                    taken off the internet briefly due to an unexpected restructuring of university
                    servers. The error — whether moral, as in the case of Naked
                        Lunch, or the administrative carelessness of academic institutions,
                    as in the case of Eclipse — is a place where new
                    insights about the platforms can begin to take form. Snelson deftly argues that
                    because Eclipse went offline, causing certain parts
                    of the site to malfunction and pieces of content occasionally to not be found
                    where they should be, the website’s otherwise invisible functions came into
                    view. In addition, unlike Google Books, the site prioritizes human — not
                    software — readers, hosting many of its works as image files. Snelson bridges
                    the materials of the site with the specificities of the images files it hosts in
                    order to ask the reader to use these technical details to imagine these objects beyond their analog iterations, as new editions with
                        revised material codes that are as significant, complex and layered as the
                        substrates from which they derive
                    . 
                The contrasting nature of PennSound and UbuWeb leads to the contrasting construction of the
                    studies of each in the following chapters. PennSound is explored through the poet and musician bill bissett.
                    bissett’s idiosyncratic poetry is made stranger by its idiosyncratic printing,
                    which is then made stranger by the performances bissett gave of his own work.
                    The looping of phrases and words, both in the printing and in the reading of
                    bissett’s work, can be seen as a funhouse mirror of transmission and
                    digitization narratives, The Little Database
                    argues. Poetry digitization is [a]lready a kind of offshoot
                        or supplement to the printed work, the social text of the historical reading
                        radiates out to a wide range of materials connecting the past to our present
                        moment, on- and offline, transforming our understanding of each in
                        turn
                    . That idea leads into the most inventive
                    and inviting episode of the book: Snelson’s reading of digital works deriving
                    from Nam June Paik’s Zen for Film’s hosting on
                        UbuWeb. Snelson discusses the work of Cory
                    Arcangel, Mark Amerika, Mungo Thomson, and Michael Kontopoulos before going into
                    a celebration and investigation of the compilation movie We
                        Edit Life. The reading of these video works is a survey, of sorts,
                    of the complex and strange dance generated from the interaction of digital
                    culture with audiovisual recording. Snelson ends his book by showcasing a range
                    of great new works — part of a movement yet to be named but owing a great debt
                    of gratitude to the sites Snelson both builds and explores in this book. If the
                    little database, as laid out by Snelson, is attended to, an entirely new form
                    comprising text, prose, poetry, audio, websites, video, digital video, film,
                    software, and a vast swath of other communication media can emerge — slithering,
                    resisting the same fate as our erstwhile digital commons, which Snelson
                    notes is completely gone. 
                The book leaves many questions, not only unanswered, but prompted for the reader.
                    The scope of the work is massively humble and detailed in respect to the many
                    new avenues of inquiries it simultaneously invents and virtuosically enacts. It
                    leaves some other questions to future researchers and interveners, i.e.,
                    artists: What would it mean to read another little database the book doesn’t
                    cover? What other little databases exist? What would a relational little
                    database (based on something like SQL) look like? What are the particular
                    concerns of web-based little databases in contrast to personal hard drives?
                    Could there be offline little databases? Can a single work of art, such as
                        We Edit Life, be considered a little database?
                    The book, while short in length, is certain to be long in influence, as it lays
                    groundwork for future scholars, artists, readers, website makers, and
                    archivists. The twists and turns, both in methodology and in specific analysis,
                    are far more exciting than any summary, or even multiple readings, of them,
                    could serve. Of course, The Little Database does
                    not make explicit what it makes obvious: The book itself is a little database,
                    one big table of information. Filled with many links and nodes, threads and
                    connections, shifting and contingent data — from experimental poetry books that
                    their author created to tangled networks of filmic production and analysis,
                    meant for the reader to create new work with/from — the book generates the same
                    quantity of material to explore as it historicizes. 
            
