Title:  Metaphors in Digital Hermeneutics: Zooming
                    through Literary, Didactic and Historical Representations of Imaginary and
                    Existing Cities
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  2017 November 1
Abstract:  
                
                The paper proposes to bridge two areas of inquiry, digital hermeneutics and
                    metaphor within a digital environment, by the analysis of a less studied
                    phenomenon, i.e. how interpretation is supported and shaped by metaphors
                    embedded in an interface. The study is articulated around three use cases for
                    literary, didactic and historical representations of imaginary and existing
                    cities based on a model (z-text) and interface (Z-editor) for zoomable texts. We
                    will try to demonstrate that the zooming and contextualization features of the
                    tool allow creating layers of meaning that can assist interpretation and
                    critical readings of literature and history.
            
Full Body Text: 

                1. Introduction. Digital Hermeneutics and Metaphor
                How can interpretations of text and images be supported and shaped by metaphors
                    embedded in an interface? This is the central question of our inquiry trying to
                    bridge digital hermeneutics and metaphor within a digital environment.
                    Interpretation is understood in terms of reconfiguration, reorganization,
                    restructuring of content, in a sense close to Samuels and McGann's
                        deformance as 
                        deformative critical operation
                        
                     and Ramsay’s transformation or transduction 
                        into an alternative vision
                        
                    . The aim is to foster insight on metaphor as a cognitive rather than
                    merely linguistic process and its interpretative incentives conveyed by means of
                    a digital tool. The model and interface proposed for examination
                        (z-text and Z-editor) encompass the metaphor of
                    zooming, permitting its users to work across scales and perspectives and
                    eventually encouraging them to make peculiar associations. All the presented use
                    cases, modeled via the Z-editor interface, involve cities–some imagined, some
                    planned, and some actually existing–as literary, historical, cultural, and
                    theoretical constructs. This choice is intended to illustrate how a digital tool
                    creates opportunities for undertaking layered investigations within disciplines
                    but also for engaging in cross-disciplinary exploration. Considering that
                    scholarship in Digital Humanities operates well from both sides, using
                    tool-making to advance theory and theory to imagine new tools, we combine a
                    practical perspective with theoretical reflection. An overview of works
                    originating from different fields, such as philosophy of science and
                    hermeneutics, cognitive linguistics, computer science and interface design,
                    serves as a starting point for our argument.
                The assumption that digital technologies are shaping our perception and
                    understanding of the world has already been expressed in a variety of studies.
                    According to Capurro, these technologies have impact on all the levels of our
                        being-in-the-world, and it is by the term of digital
                        hermeneutics that he defines the way digital code is being
                        interpreted and implemented (or not) in today’s society . Going beyond the traditional sense of text-centered
                    interpretation, Capurro aligns with Ihde’s concept of expanding or
                        material hermeneutics that considers technologies as
                    instruments through which 
                        things can show themselves
                        
                    , and which may therefore play an important role in the process of
                    producing knowledge. In the context of interactive art, Simanowski situates the
                    hermeneutic act at the intersection of formal analysis of a digital artifact
                    (structure, interface, grammar of interaction underpinned by the hidden
                        text, the code) and interpretation, in the sense of how these aspects 
                        are perceived by the audience
                        
                    . Likewise, by their two-fold conception of digital hermeneutics, as
                    theory of interpretation and context for the development of applications
                    supporting interpretation, Akker et al. illustrate how the different types of
                    relationships (at the level of object, event, narrative), modeled within an
                    interface for online access to historical documents, may assist the user in the
                    interpretation of cultural heritage . Moreover,
                    Rockwell and Sinclair advocate for a digital hermeneutics with the focus on
                    computer-assisted text analysis and interpretation intended to the humanities
                        . Elaborating on Gualeni’s philosophical
                    approach to virtual worlds in video games  and on
                    Ricoeur's theory of metaphor and narrative as reconfiguring human experience
                        
                    , Romele draws attention to the “reconfiguration
                    power” exerted by digital technologies on their users and to the “existential
                    and ontological consequences” of the “production and use” of these technologies,
                    articulated within the digital hermeneutics framework. 
                
                Initially considered a purely linguistic and aesthetic phenomenon, metaphor is
                    more and more studied in relation with cognitive processes, and implicitly
                    interpretation, mediated or not via computers. Advocating for an experientialist
                    approach within the broader context of a neural theory of language, Lakoff and
                    Johnson assume that metaphor is 
                        one of the most basic mechanisms we have for
                            understanding our experience
                        
                    , whose primary function is to provide a 
                        partial understanding of one kind of experience in
                            terms of another
                        
                    . From an interactionist perspective, Indurkhya proposes a cognitive model
                    allowing to see metaphor as an unconventional description of an object or event
                        (target) by means of a different set of concepts
                        (source), which may involve the reorganization and
                        restructuring of the cognitive agent’s world view . In Human Computer Interaction, metaphor
                    is often described as providing the user with 
                        a model of the system
                        
                     or as a 
                        device for explaining some system functionality or
                            structure by asserting its similarity to another concept or thing
                            already familiar to the user
                        
                    . Other aspects of metaphor as adopted in Computer Science refer, for
                    instance, to its function in providing a conceptual framework for exploiting
                        both preexisting and emerging similarity and to its pedagogical,
                        design-oriented and scientific roles , or to the culturally marked
                    nature of computer collocations and metaphors, manifested in the process of
                    specialized translation from one language to another .
                Within this context, evoking different approaches related to digital hermeneutics
                    and metaphor, our argumentation will focus on the hermeneutic potential of
                    metaphor as a built-in constituent of an interface, and especially on its
                        reconfiguring power common both to the interpretative
                    attempt and to the metaphoric expression in a digital setting. We assume that
                    such a perspective, combined with the presentation of three use cases, may
                    encourage insight by going beyond the description of a tool to the discussion
                    (and eventually theorization) of how knowledge is fashioned by means of that
                    tool. In order to support this view, the paper is structured in four sections.
                    Section 2 provides the description of the z-text model and Z-editor interface
                    that allows to create and explore zoomable texts. Section 3 discusses the three
                    cases of literary, didactic and historical interpretations fostered by the
                    metaphor of zooming, and the corresponding z-texts built via the Z-editor
                    interface. Section 4 is dedicated to conclusions and future work.
            

                2. Z-text model. Zooming as a Multifaceted Metaphor
                Steven Johnson claims that after the fixed perspective of Renaissance Art and the
                    collages of Cubism, the way of seeing of our era might be called the
                        The Long Zoom: 
                        It is, by any measure, a difficult way of thinking, in
                            part because our brains did not evolve tools to perceive or intuitively
                            understand the scales of microbes or galaxies. You can catch glimpses of
                            the long zoom in special-effects sequences, but to understand the
                            connections between those different scales, to understand our place in
                            the universe of the very large and the very small, you have to take
                            another way in.
                        
                     Johnson’s context was the world of computer games, but his observations
                    may bring to mind Srinivas’s concept of critical hermeneutics, an
                    attempt to reconcile interpretation and critical thinking which enables both
                        closeness and distantiation to the object of study . Representation at different scales
                    together with the possibility for perspective change constitute the main
                    elements of the zooming metaphor implemented in the z-text model and Z-editor
                    interface, as it will be described below. While the zooming function supports
                    bridging distant and close reading by scalable reading, the combination with
                    contextualization on the various planes to read text and image from various
                    perspectives agrees with notions of deep reading
                    , deep maps
                    , deep texts, or topic modeling of
                    hidden texts , and deep networks
                    . This combination
                    allows for the creation of multiple levels of meaning and supports a continuous
                    process of reinterpretation from multiple perspectives, contributing this way to
                    recent developments of digital hermeneutic methods.
                Inspired by Stephenson’s fictional primer, an interactive, scalable book that can
                    answer the reader’s questions by continuous expansion , the z-text model 
                    incorporates a multifaceted zooming metaphor.
                The first facet, alluding to a primer, is actually related to the idea of
                    exploration and learning. The content accessible at a certain moment via the
                    interface may stimulate the reader’s curiosity and his or her desire for further
                    discovery: 
                        This sort of thing no longer surprised or upset Nell
                            because it had happened hundreds of times during her relationship with
                            the Primer. Besides, she had known, from the very first day Harv had
                            given her the book, how the story would come out in the end. It was just
                            that the story was anfractuous; it developed more ramifications the more
                            closely she read it.
                        
                    
                A second aspect, implied by the “anfractuous” nature of the primer, is the
                    representation at variable scale, which can be associated, by analogy, to the
                    iterative growing of a fractal, like in Mandelbrot’s measurement of a coastline
                    with smaller and smaller yardsticks , or to the
                    gradual uncovering of details by zooming on an electronic map. In order to
                    function, the metaphorical combination of learning, or being involved with the
                    text, and zooming in the z-text model includes a layered structure , to each layer corresponding a certain
                    signification or symbolic meaning as compared to the whole. 
                Figure 1 presents a z-textual layout where units of content called
                        z-lexias — from Barthes’s lexias, 
                        units of reading
                        
                     — may be expanded on the deeper levels and explored by zoom-in and
                    zoom-out. The z-lexias visible at a certain moment on the surface are disposed
                    on different planes along with the Z-axis (hence the “z-“ prefix). The process
                    of expanding a z-lexia is called z-writing (for instance, zl1 from
                    level 1 is expanded to zl1.1 on level 2) and is conceived as either an addition
                    of details to the selected content, or as a broadening in meaning according to a
                    certain logic or argumentation strategy (simple to complex, concrete to
                    abstract, local to global, etc.) or to a particular interpretation (as it will
                    be shown in the following section).
                
                    Z-text layout. Levels of z-lexias (center). Changing perspective (bottom
                        right)
                    
                

                The traversal of the structure to read the z-lexias and made them visible on the
                    screen is called z-reading and supposes a back and forth movement
                    through the layers, downward for zoom-in, upward for zoom-out. Since the
                    conception of layers and their symbolic entailment depend on the author’s
                    intentions and imagination, the zooming metaphor may be more or less apparent to
                    the reader and its degree of accomplishment is determined by the inner logic
                    driving the transition from one scale to another.
                The ZoomImagine interface,
                    Z-editor, allows both z-writing and z-reading, to each mode (expansion, zoom-in,
                    zoom-out) corresponding a distinct hovering cursor. As illustrated in Figure 1,
                    the metaphor of zooming is enriched by an additional facet for perspective
                    change, represented by magnifying glasses and planes of different colors (right
                    bottom), which may turn the representation into a multidimensional conceptual
                    space. For example, a z-lexia on level i can be expanded on level i+1 following
                    multiple perspectives (e.g. attached to a red, green or yellow magnifying
                    glass), each opening a distinctive succession of layers of meaning. The
                    magnifying glass stands therefore for a multifaceted symbol, as a tool for
                    curiosity-driven exploration, discovery and learning by making visible what is
                    at first hidden, and as a device providing a kaleidoscopic view on the object of
                    inquiry.
                From a technical point of view, Z-editor is a Java-based editor for documents in
                    XML-TEI format. To each level corresponds an XML file, the ancestor-descendants
                    relationships between z-lexias being modelled by means of a system of
                    identifiers relating a parent on a certain level to its children on the
                    subsequent one. There is no automatic processing for constructing the levels,
                    the content and significance of each layer of meaning depend on the author’s
                    ingenuity. However, the XML-TEI encoding is completely transparent to the user.
                    Although it can be used for annotation and map-like exploration, compared with
                    editorial platforms for annotation or for connecting maps, narratives and
                    timelines, such as Pliny and Neatline, Z-editor is more centered on
                    the concepts of variable scale and perspective change as organizing principles
                    mainly of text (that can also include images). Therefore, it can be used as a
                    tool for reading and interpretation of existing texts (and images), reconfigured
                    along with a zoomable layout, or as an instrument supporting creative scenarios
                    implying, for instance, the incorporation of details in a gradually expanding
                    piece of writing in a view spotlighting the process rather than the final
                    product. The first point (reading, interpretation and reconfiguration of
                    content) makes the object of the present study.
            

                3. Use cases - Theoretical and Exploratory Standpoints. Imaginary Cities in
                    Literature and History and Historical Analysis of Town Planning
                After this introduction to the z-text model underlying the ZoomImagine software
                    (Z-editor) we will demonstrate that the zooming and contextualization features
                    of such a tool allow creating layers of meaning that support interpretation and
                    critical readings of literature and history. The results of three use cases will
                    be discussed in which the Z-editor was used to explore cross-overs between text
                    and image and history and literature in descriptions of imaginary cities and
                    imaginary depictions of existing cities in order to establish their potential
                    role in the history of town planning. The choice for this topic of imaginary
                    cities in relation to town planning in literature and history makes possible to
                    assess the potential of models like z-text for the development of digital
                    hermeneutic methods. It also allows to use a wide array of texts and images,
                    reading interpretations of various authors and critics from various disciplines
                    and to compare theoretical reflections and practical applications. We claim that
                    digital tools should be used to widen the scope of literary and historical
                    analyses by combining multiple perspectives and not only focus on certain
                    patterns in one dimension. For instance, the historical research of town
                    planning in the digital era is still conditioned by morphological pattern
                    recognition tradition that goes back to 19th century civic
                        art studies such as the international renown and much translated
                    work Der Städtebau nach seinen künstlerischen
                        Grundsätzen of Camillo Sitte (1889) and  Der
                        Städtebau (1890) of Josef Stübben . Urban
                    morphology, practiced by 20th century in that tradition by urban historians (for
                    instance Michael Conzen, Saverio Muratori, Lewis Mumford and Pierre Lavedan),
                    analyzes the spatial structure of towns by focusing on patterns of streets,
                    building blocks and lots. Some authors such as Gerard Eimer in his Die Stadtplanung in schwedischen Ostseereich
                        (1600-1715). Mit Beiträgen zur Geschichte der
                        Idealstadt (1961) or Bruno Fortier, La
                        métropole imaginaire: Un atlas de Paris (1989), tried as the titles
                    of their publications reveal to use the morphological approach to link the
                    structure of existing towns with mappings of ideal, imaginary cities. In this
                    morphological approach images and cartographical resources of imaginary, ideal
                    and of existing cities are often translated into grid or radio-concentric
                    diagrams for comparative analyses. These translations not seldom result in
                    reduction of complexity at the cost of understanding contextual differences
                    between these various images of cities. Such morphological readings of images
                    and cartographic sources (and their limitations) were enhanced by the
                    introduction of GIS in the history of town planning and architecture . However, GIS is only partially suitable for mapping
                    literary or historical landscapes. For instance, The
                        Mapping Lake District Literature pilot of Lancaster University makes
                    possible to follow the trails of the authors Thomas Gray and Samuel Taylor
                    Coleridge but the imaginary landscapes depicted in their epistolary journal and
                    letters cannot be plotted by geographical coordinates on the map. In his
                    exploration of the potential of spatial humanities, David Bodenhamer asks the
                    question: 
                        how we as humanists make GIS do what is not intended to
                            do, namely, represent the world as culture and not simply mapped
                            locations?
                        
                    Bodenhamer proposes to create deep maps that
                    contextualize GIS by combining them with multiple layers of multimedia artifacts
                    that can be viewed separately and collectively providing various perspectives.
                    Such multilayered multimedia objects would indeed permit to contextualize maps
                    represented by geographical coordinates with non-geographical, spatial
                    information. However, they do not allow to start from the other end, i.e. from
                    non-Euclidean, topical spaces for instance, such as the imaginary cities that
                    often inspired urban planners and architects. In this context the remarks of the
                    author, Italo Calvino (1923-1985), of our first use case Le
                        Città Invisibili (Invisible Cities) of
                    1972 are of interest. Calvino considered his Invisible
                        Cities relevant and actual for contemporary debates on town
                    planning: 
                        I feel that the idea of the city which the book conjures
                            up is not outside time; there is also (at times implicit, at other
                            explicit) a discussion on the city in general. I have heard from a
                            number of friends in town planning that the book touches on some of the
                            questions that they are faced with in their work; and this is no
                            coincidence, as the background from which the book springs is the same
                            as theirs.
                        
                    It is this common background, a continuous space with textual and visual
                    representations consisting of imaginary and existing cities, that we want to
                    explore and that forms the starting point of our three cases:
                
                    The first, literary case concerns readings of the Invisible Cities in which Calvino describes Marco Polo’s
                        accounts of visits to cities to Kubla Kahn, Emperor of the Tartars. In this
                        case, the z-text model allows zooming on imaginary spaces in this framework
                        story and navigating in an associative way between the Invisible Cities, related publications and artistic
                        impressions, as well as critical readings hereof.
                    The zooming metaphor via Z-editor in the second, didactic case around the
                        Dutch scholar of Flemish origin, Simon Stevin (1548-1620), teacher to
                        Maurice, Count of Nassau, Prince of Orange (1567-1625), will demonstrate
                        that the most common purely functional interpretations of his ideal city and
                        houses as planning instrument for the construction of real cities are not
                        convincing, but that these should be read in the context of didactic and
                        educational purposes.
                    The third, historical case discusses how a z-text can be used to explore
                        different levels of historical evidence of various imaginary depictions of
                        existing cities. To this end, drawings of the citadel and the city of
                        Groningen in the Netherlands in an atlas of the Flemish engineer Pierre
                        Lepoivre (1546-1626) will be analyzed in a comparative way.
                
                    
                        3.1. Literary Case. Invisible Cities — a
                            "Rhizomatic" Layout inside/outside Calvino's Text
                        The publication of Le Città Invisibili in
                            1972 by Italo Calvino was directly followed by translations and comments
                            by literary critics and by visualizations of artists inspired by the
                            poetical descriptions of the imaginary cities in the imageless book. The
                            division into 11 themes associated with the city that return each 5
                            times in the book — City and Memory, City and Desire, City and Signs,
                            Thin Cities, Trading Cities, Cities and Eyes, Cities and Names, Cities
                            and the Dead, Cities and the Sky, Continuous Cities and Hidden Cities —
                            has resulted into various interpretations of these imaginary urban
                            spaces. Kerstin Pilz uses Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari’s concept of
                                rhizomatic space to underpin her argument for a
                            postmodern reading of city descriptions , while
                            Sambit Panigrahi underlines the importance of 
                                cities as strata that are perennially
                                    oscillating between deterritorialisation and
                                    reterritorialisation
                                
                             based on concepts proposed by the same philosophers. Thus,
                            Panigrahi compares Calvino’s description of the continuous city of
                            Leonia that each days breaches through its boundaries of deposited waste
                            at its circumference with Deleuze and Guattari’s explanation of a
                            multilayered stratum that deterritorializes from a center to periphery
                            through multiple states (epistrata) and the creation of new peripheral
                            centres with their peripheries (parastrata).
                        Starting from these hypotheses, the zooming metaphor embedded in the
                            z-text model makes possible to interpret, through rhizomatic lens,
                            Calvino’s text itself “as strata” that can be explored by zoom-in and
                            zoom-out. According to Deleuze and Guattari, a rhizome is made of lines
                            of segmentarity and stratification as its dimensions, and lines
                            of flight or deterritorialization as the maximum dimension after
                                which the multiplicity undergoes metamorphosis, changes in
                                nature
                            . The z-text created following this
                            interpretation implied a restructuration articulated along with
                            different lines of stratification and flight (or metamorphosis), inside
                            and outside Calvino’s text.
                        Figure 2 illustrates a reorganization of Leonia description which appeared to us as oscillating (to
                            paraphrase Panigrahi’s analysis) around the new-old
                            divide. The first level of the representation (left) contains fragments
                            (z-lexias) mainly focusing on the concept of new
                            verbalized through expressions like refashion,
                                fresh, brand-new,
                                latest, up-to-date,
                                new, renew. The second
                            level (right) completes the text with elements that highlight the
                            tension between the passion and enjoyment of Leonia’s inhabitants for
                            incessant renewal and the inevitable accumulation of old produced by it,
                            expressed by phrases such as remains,
                                yesterday’s Leonia,
                                garbage, expel,
                                discard, yesterday’s
                                existence. Zooming-in or out to surface or hide these
                            elements from deeper strata, may draw attention to
                            the new-old opposition and dynamics inherent to the
                            text. The figure shows the result of a zoom-in action, manifested by the
                            expansion of the clicked z-lexia from the left and the retrieval of
                            Calvino’s original fragment on the right.

                        
                            Invisible Cities z-text. Zoom-in,
                                level 1 (left), 2 (right). Stratification along with the
                                    new-old line.
                            
                        

                        While the “new-old” stratification determined a reconfiguration on levels
                            inside Leonia text, further interpretation,
                            using different “lines of flight” and changing of perspectives, implied
                            ramifications of the z-text outside Calvino’s text. The first extension
                            refers to visual representations, not belonging to the original work,
                            but imagined by various artists, the second –moving on the same plane
                            with contextual information- enables other readings of Calvino’s work,
                            both by critics and himself. Recently, Elio Baldi focused on Calvino’s
                            various roles in interactions between authors and critics by
                            occasionally looking through the lens of the writer and in other moments
                            through the eyes of the reader or editor .
                            Indeed, lectures by Calvino and interviews with the author reveal many
                            shifts in perspectives on multiple planes. In a published lecture
                            dealing with the writing of Invisible Cities, Calvino reacts to
                                almost all critics, but also states that the author’s view
                                no longer counts and provides interpretations as one reader
                                among others
                            . Calvino sometimes directly
                            puts the Invisible Cities into context by
                            referring to works that similarly are inspired by Marco Polo’s travels,
                            such as the poem Kubla Kahn by Samuel
                            Taylor Coleridge , The Message from the Emperor by Franz Kafka of 1919 , or Il Deserto dei
                                Tartari (The Tartar Steppe) by
                            Dino Buzzati of 1940 
                            . On other occasions, references are
                            indirect, for example when Calvino notes that the atlas of Kubla Kahn
                            contains images of “lands visited in thought, but not yet discovered or
                            founded: New Atlantis, Utopia, the City of the Sun” . On a more detailed level the
                            possibility of sideways movements becomes important when Calvino reacts
                            to all those critics who underlined the importance of the closing
                            sentence by claiming that the Invisible
                                Cities is “a many facetted book” with “various possible
                            ‘conclusions’” . By combining the
                            zooming functionality with the representation of visual and contextual
                            information a z-text becomes a multidimensional space as explained
                            below.
                        
                            Invisible Cities z-text. Zoom-in,
                                level 2 (top left), 3 (bottom left), 3,4 (top right), 5,6 (bottom
                                right). Extension along with the lines of
                                    flight visual and
                                    context. 
                                
                                . Brannigan, Colleen Corradi,
                                    (2006) Oil and acrylic paintings, Le Città
                                        Invisibili, Leonia, http://www.cittainvisibili.com/en/portfolio/leonia-en.html.
                                    (with the artist's agreement) (Accessed May 22, 2017).
                                    Coleridge, Samuel Taylor (1798) Kubla
                                        Kahn. In The Rime of the
                                        Ancient Mariner and Other Poems, New York: Dover
                                    Publications Inc. Illustration Patten Wilson, http://www.fulltable.com/vts/aoi/w/wilson/07.jpg.
                                    (Accessed May 22, 2017).
                            
                        
                        Figure 3 presents an extension of a level 2 z-lexia (top left) describing
                            Leonia’s stratified “load of refuse”, by a change of perspective
                            (orange, VISUAL magnifying glass, bottom left) that includes an artistic
                            illustration of the city and its mountains of leftovers (Brannigan,
                            2006). The same fragment can be expanded by considering a different,
                            contextualization angle (blue, CONTEXT magnifying glass, top right),
                            adding, for instance, on levels 3, 4 Kafka’s depiction of the imperial
                            city “piled high with its own refuse”  and the walls and towers of Coleridge’s Xanadu . Further contextualization on levels 5, 6
                            (bottom right) enriches the representation of Marco Polo’s tales of
                                impossible cities, narrated to the Kahn, by Calvino’s own
                            reflections on the crisis of the overgrown city and the
                                destruction of the natural environment, as one of the main
                            topics of his book . Since these
                            extensions are not part of the original content (unlike the first
                            z-text), they can be interpreted as engendered by different
                                lines of flight, determining the metamorphosis
                            of the text that becomes image or paratext.
                        The interface may support therefore both the reading (and restructuring)
                            of the Invisible Cities text, according to
                            a stratified interpretation (Figure 2), and its expansion by adding
                            layers of related forms of expression and reflection (Figure 3). While
                            the latter example hints to potential artistic, literary and reflective
                            contextualizations inspired by Calvino’s comments, we may further
                            imagine this type of gradual extension outside Invisible Cities as developed (similarly to Barthes’s
                            analysis in S/Z) in line with different interpretative
                                codes highlighting the
                                writability and plurality of the text. As
                            Calvino observes: 
                                And yet, all these pages put together did not
                                    make a book: for a book (I think) is something which has a
                                    beginning and an end (even if it’s not a novel, in the strict
                                    sense of the word). It is a space which the reader must enter,
                                    wander round, maybe lose his way in, and eventually find an
                                    exit, or perhaps even several exits, or maybe a way of breaking
                                    out on his own.
                                
                             If we enter our concentric city of Leonia again immediately new
                            associative perspectives pop up. As shown in the figure above, we
                            recognize for instance Calvino’s reference to Kafka’s story of the
                            Emperor’s messenger wanting to report about the death of Kubla Kahn by
                            trying in vain to break through the walls surrounding the palace . Nowadays, the concentric rings of garbage
                            surrounding Leonia has also become symbolic for polluted, unlivable
                            cities. However, another of Calvino’s references, the one to
                            Campanella’s concentric walled City of the Sun
                            allows to link the form of Leonia with images of built and not built
                            fortified cities that are relevant to our two next cases focusing on the
                            impact of visualizations of imaginary and existing cities for town
                            planning, fortification and architectural design. 
                    
                    
                        3.2. Didactic Case. Simon Stevin's Multilayered System Based on the
                            Concept of "Mirror-Symmetry”
                        In the years 1605 and 1608, the Flemish mathematician Simon Stevin
                            (1548-1620) published five books in two volumes with the title Wisconstighe Ghedachtenissen (Mathematical Memoirs) that can be seen as a
                            compilation of his private lessons to Prince Maurice of Orange
                            (1567-1625) on mathematics, natural sciences and military arts at the
                            court in The Hague. In the fifth book, Van de
                                Ghemengde Stoffen (Miscellanea), Stevin explained in a note that he had not been
                            able to finish several treatises announced in the table of content (on
                                Arithmetic, Book keeping, Architecture, Music
                                Theory, Military Arts and other topics) in time for the
                            printer and planned, therefore, to publish these at a later moment . By the time Stevin died in
                            1620, only a few fragments of these announced treatises had appeared in
                            other publications. 
                        This case discusses interpretations on Stevin’s uncompleted treatise on
                            town planning and architecture of which fragments were adapted and
                            published posthumously by his son Hendrik Stevin in his Materiae Politicae Burgherlicke Stoffen
                                (Political Matters Civic Affairs)
                            (1649) and Wisconstich Filosofisch Bedryf
                                (Mathematical-Philosophical Act)
                            (1667). Charles van den Heuvel made a reconstruction of Stevin’s
                            treatise on town planning and architecture, De
                                Huysbou, on the basis of excerpts in manuscripts of scholars
                            such as Isaac Beeckman, Constantijn and Christiaan Huygens and Hendrik
                            Stevin that circulated in the Dutch Republic . Stevin’s diagrams of ideal buildings and town known via the
                            publication in Hendrik Stevin’s Materiae
                                Politicae have been often described in purely morphological
                            and rational terms 
                            
                            . However, we will try to reveal, via the
                            zooming features of the Z-editor interface, that Stevin’s city
                            architecture was not conceived as one rational whole, but rather should
                            be read from a didactic perspective to explain a multi-layered model of
                            an ideal city and houses all based on the same underlying concept of
                            mirror-symmetry. Nowadays we are familiar with the concept of
                            mirror-symmetry, but at the time that Stevin wrote his treatise authors
                            on architecture used the term ‘symmetria’ in the Vitruvian tradition
                            i.e. as the harmonious ratio of the parts to the whole. For that reason
                            Stevin introduced the neologism: lycksijdcheyt,
                            literally like-sidedness. For Stevin, this distinction was not trivial.
                            But in his view, mirror-symmetry had its origins in nature, unlike the
                            proportional symmetry of Vitruvius and his followers, and should
                            therefore serve as the basis for logical architecture: 
                                [...] a building should be like an animal, and
                                    if one wishes to make it correctly, one should follow nature. By
                                    which it should be understood that just as nature or the Creator
                                    of animals produces like-sidedness, so the architect should
                                    emulate this and design buildings with like-sidedness.
                                 (transl. ).
                            
                        The zooming and contextualization features of the Z-editor (Figure 4)
                            allow us to demonstrate why the relationships between Stevin’s town and
                            houses should be understood in the context of his didactic explanation
                            of the underlying principle of mirror-symmetry rather by the rational
                            arguments based on morphological correspondences between some (but not
                            all) of the buildings blocks of houses and the town. A closer look at
                            Stevin’s town plan reveals that most, but not all features can be
                            explained rationally. The rectangular ground plan with its square
                            buildings blocks enables an efficient distribution of houses and can be
                            therefore read from a civic planning perspective as rational. However,
                            the bastions with acute pointed faces and the odd double flanks from the
                            bastions adjacent to the corner bastions are compromises from a military
                            point of view. Stevin was well aware of that. In his treatise on
                            fortification, De Sterctenbouwing
                            , Stevin explained that the optimal form for
                            a large city to defend itself would be a hexagon. A comparison on level
                            1 (city) shows indeed that the hexagonal perimeter of the fortress city
                            results in bastions with more obtuse points that are less vulnerable for
                            collision after a heavy impact of gunfire. Also zooming reveals that
                            Stevin’s city cannot be read as one coherent whole. Hoeven/Louwen
                            represented Stevin’s city as a system of building components that could
                            be pieced together . However, if we zoom-in
                            to 2nd level, that represents buildings
                            blocks containing different numbers of houses, it becomes clear that as
                            a result of the variations in their rectangular form they would not all
                            fit into the square buildings blocks represented in the town plan.
                            Despite their differences, the blocks have in common that they are
                            organized in such a way that all houses receive as much light as
                            possible from the inner courts and that the rules of mirror-symmetry are
                            always respected. In short, Stevin was not interested in forms of towns
                            and dwellings in which contrasting demands of military, economic or
                            social orders were planned as one whole. Instead, Stevin’s writings on
                            the layout of houses and towns are characterized by the separation of
                            different levels and the segregation of adjacent functions. Stevin’s
                            synthesis of houses into blocks, blocks into towns and the ordering of
                            urban extensions focused more on the organizational method than on the
                            precise form. And this method was governed by a single principle: that
                            of mirror-symmetry, to which all other organizational forms were
                            subordinated. The reason why Stevin’s city has been read by many authors
                            as one systematic whole might have been enhanced by their use of its
                            representation in print in the work of Hendrik Stevin. Hendrik Stevin
                            represented his father’s city with all the names of the civic functions:
                            palace, churches, markets, university etc. engraved in the image itself.
                            This way, the image of the city could be read independently as one
                            whole. However, Hendrik Stevin’s excerpt in the manuscript version of
                            the Huysbou, drawn after the original
                            drawings, reveals that his father’s representation of the town,
                            buildings blocks and separated houses consists of a series of diagrams
                            (including letters/numbers referred to in the descriptions) that can
                            only be understood in combination with the text and other illustrations. 
                        Figure 4 and 5 present two z-texts. Figure 4 denotes a transposition of
                            Stevin’s drawings and texts allowing the reader to traverse the
                            conceptual space by zooming-in and out through the city, buildings block
                            and house, down to the very definition of
                                like-sidedness. This traversal corresponds to a
                            change of scale in the representation of the city and its parts
                            correlated with a didactic argumentation lead by the principle of
                            mirror-symmetry inspired by Stevin’s text itself.

                        
                            Stevin z-texts: mirror-symmetry (top
                                right) (Stevin 1649) Hendrik Stevin, Ideal town plan according
                                    to design Simon Stevin, drawing in ink, Hendrik Stevin, Eenighe
                                    Stucken der Crychconst. Beschreve deur Simon Stevin, The Hague,
                                    KB National Library of the Netherlands, Manuscript 128 A9 - II,
                                    fol. 6. Image (c) The Hague, KB National Library of the
                                    Netherlands. Hendrik Stevin, after Simon Stevin's buildings
                                    block, illustration, Hendrik Stevin, Materiae Politicae, Byvough
                                        der Stedenoirdening. (Leiden: Adryaen Rosenboom
                                    1649). Hendrik Stevin, after Simon Stevin's house, illustration,
                                    Hendrik Stevin, Materiae Politicae,
                                        Byvough der Stedenoirdening.
                                    (Leiden: Adryaen Rosenboom 1649). Hendrik Stevin, Ideal town
                                    plan according to design Simon Stevin, illustration, Hendrik
                                    Stevin, Materiae Politicae, Byvough der
                                        Stedenoirdening. (Leiden: Adryaen Rosenboom 1649).
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            Stevin z-texts: contextualisation
                                    Print/Manuscript (bottom left)  Hendrik Stevin, Ideal town plan according
                                            to design Simon Stevin, drawing in ink, Hendrik Stevin, Eenighe
                                            Stucken der Crychconst. Beschreve deur Simon Stevin, The Hague,
                                            KB National Library of the Netherlands, Manuscript 128 A9 - II,
                                            fol. 6. Image (c) The Hague, KB National Library of the
                                            Netherlands. Hendrik Stevin, after Simon Stevin's buildings
                                            block, illustration, Hendrik Stevin, Materiae Politicae, Byvough
                                                    der Stedenoirdening. (Leiden: Adryaen Rosenboom
                                            1649). Hendrik Stevin, after Simon Stevin's house, illustration,
                                            Hendrik Stevin, Materiae Politicae,
                                            Byvough der Stedenoirdening.
                                            (Leiden: Adryaen Rosenboom 1649). Hendrik Stevin, Ideal town
                                            plan according to design Simon Stevin, illustration, Hendrik
                                            Stevin, Materiae Politicae, Byvough der
                                                Stedenoirdening. (Leiden: Adryaen Rosenboom 1649).
                                        
                            
                        
                        The second z-text in Figure 5 illustrates zooming with perspective change
                            (PRINT/MANUSCRIPT) in a contextualisation text  that explains the differences between the manuscript and the printed
                            version, determined by Hendrik’s changes in his father’s representation
                            of the town.
                        Zooming provides therefore a figurative way of unfolding our
                            contextualization and interpretation of Stevin’s multi-layered model
                            that allowed him, in his role of private tutor, to explain the
                            principles and natural logic of his architecture and town planning on
                            each level, most clearly for educational and pedagogic purposes. Logical
                            and lucid models - albeit incomplete - were for Stevin a more
                            appropriate means of achieving that goal than a complete reproduction of
                            reality that, with all its contradictions, might obscure the problem, or
                            to say it in Simon Stevin’s own words in his work on fortification 
                                because the teaching should not be complicated
                                    by arguments
                                
                            .
                    
                    
                        3.3. Historical Case. Multiple Levels of Historical Evidence in Lepoivre Atlas
                        Stevin was not only the tutor, but also a military advisor to Prince
                            Maurice and accompanied him on all his campaigns in the first decades of
                            the Eighty Years War in the Low Countries against Spain. Although Prince
                            Maurice became Captain General of the Army and Admiral of the Fleet
                            after the assassination of his father William the Silent in 1584 when he
                            was 18 years old, his inexperience was not the only reason that his
                            uncles insisted on training him in the military arts. Training in the
                            military arts made part of the education of noblemen where elementary of
                            warfare and fortification were taught along dancing, singing, playing
                            music, drawing, fencing and of course disciplines such as mathematics,
                            physics, logic, rhetoric, and languages. On the ceiling of the Palazzo
                            dei Cinquecento in Florence, Archduke Cosimo I dei Medici is depicted
                            drawing a fortress with a compass in his hand and Stevin explained how
                            Prince Maurice developed an instrument in order to learn to draw
                            fortifications in the correct way. Knowledge of fortification drawings
                            belonged to the cultural education of noblemen and designs that once
                            played a role in the practice of building defenses for cities ended up
                            in their collections. Often they were re-used or adapted for decorations
                            of fortified cities on the walls of their palaces or to create beautiful
                            atlases. It is in this context that the atlas presented in 1624 by the
                            Flemish engineer Pierre Lepoivre (ca. 1546 – 1627) to the archdukes
                            Albert VI and Isabel of Austria, sovereigns of the Habsburg Netherlands
                            must be understood . At first sight,
                                    Les Plans des Villes des Païs de
                                    Hennault, d’Artois, de Breband très noblement descripts à la
                                    plume, drawn by Lepoivre between 1615-1622, seem
                            to provide trustworthy depictions of historical battles and sieges that
                            took place in the Eighty Years War in the Low Countries. A closer
                            reading of the drawings however, reveals that Lepoivre mixed his own
                            mappings of historical events with interpretations of other
                            cartographical depictions of besieged towns and unexecuted designs of
                            cities, resulting in different levels of reliability and
                            trustworthiness. This becomes clear for instance in four drawings in his
                            atlas based on designs that the Italian engineer Bartolomeo Campi
                            (?-1573) made for the city and citadel of Groningen in the Netherlands.
                            The detail of the bastion was probably directly copied after Campi’s
                            design of 1570 . Lepoivre included a drawing
                            after Campi’s design for a hexagonal citadel, – similar to Stevin’s
                            fortress city in the form of hexagon- but a pentagonal one was executed.
                            The third drawing shows Groningen with the hexagonal citadel that never
                            existed in that form and the fourth as a part of the Siege of Groningen
                            in 1594, when the citadel that existed was already dismantled . 
                        The Z-editor not only allows moving along the four different levels of
                            historical evidence, but also to position these drawings between more
                            and less imaginary depictions of existing cities.

                        
                            Lepoivre Atlas z-text. Zoom-out
                                (level 4 to 1), zoom-in (level 1 to 4) and perspective change
                                (Agustino-Campi, level 2; Aleotti-Campi, level 3). Interpretation
                                according to the degree of reliability of the drawings as historical
                                evidence (bottom left).
                                    Birds eye view of the Siege of Groningen
                                        with the hexagonal citadel of Groningen, Brussels,
                                    Royal Library manuscript 19611 folio 8: Groninghen Assiegee. Plan of
                                        the city of Groningen and the hexagonal citadel of
                                        Bartolomeo Campi, Brussels, Royal Library manuscript
                                    19611 folio 11, Subscription: Des trouble
                                        du Pais Bas qui sont amines l’an 1566 DU PLAN DE GRONINGE ET
                                        DU, Chasteauquy fut batie par ordre de Sr. don Fernande
                                        D’Alvarez l’an 1569, 6 March 1618.Design of hexagonal citadel for the City of
                                        Groningen by Bartolomeo Campi copy by Pierre Le
                                        Poivre, Brussels, Royal Library manuscript 19611
                                    folio 10: LA PLAN DU CHASTEAU DE GRONINGEN,
                                        qui fut batit l’an 1570 par advis du Duc Alvaqui fut ordonéz
                                        de l’ingenieur Pacciotto […] fut achevé de Bartholomeo
                                        Campy, P. Lepoivre 12 April 1618.
                                    Design of Bastion for the City of
                                        Groningen, plan top level and fundaments level by Bartolomeo
                                        Campi, copy by Pierre LePoivre for his atlas,
                                    Brussels, Royal Library manuscript 19611 folio 13, Subscription:
                                    [top] Particuliarités des fondements
                                        [sic:fundaments] de l’architecture du chasteau de gruningen
                                        [Groningen] qui fut comenses [sic: commencés] de l’ingenieur
                                        pachote [sic: Francesco Paciotto], et depuis fur achevé du
                                        Sr. Capitano Bertholmeo Campy [Bartolomeo Campi] Ingenieur
                                        de Sa Majestà et l’autheur de ces oeuvres à diondante des
                                        dict Ingenieur. Ceste scale contient 300 piedz depuis la
                                        letter A et B faicte à Bruxelle le 19 April 1618 P. Lepoivre
                                        architecte de Sa Majesté Catholique. Subscription:
                                    [bottom] Particularités du boulverts y cy
                                        dessus remarqués par la Plan figure de la letter
                                    etc. Pentagonal citadel of Groningen
                                        executed after design of Bartolomeo Campi, copy by
                                        Giambattista Aleotti, Ferrara, Biblioteca Comunale
                                    Aristostea. Man. Classe I 763 n. 138. Outlines for the pentagonal citadel of Groningen by
                                        Capitano Agustino with the accepted changes proposed by
                                        Bartolomeo Campi, Archivo General de Simancas,
                                    Mapas, Planos y Dibujos VII-48. Dotted lines in red show
                                    accepted proposal of Bartolomeo Campi for the measurements of
                                    the pentagonal citadel Groningen.
                            
                        

                        In Figure 6, the explanatory texts and drawings from Lepoivre Atlas are structured on four levels corresponding
                            to different illustrations of the city of Groningen (bird eye view, plan
                            with the hexagonal citadel, the hexagonal citadel itself, detail of the
                            bastion) that can be traversed by zooming-in (right to left) and
                            zooming-out (left to right). Two alternative views (outline with
                            pentagonal citadel and pentagonal citadel alone) are also provided on
                            level 2 and 3 via perspective change (AGUSTINO-CAMPI, ALEOTTI-CAMPI). As
                            the symbolic representation (bottom left) suggests, the z-text allows
                            the reader not only to explore the projection of the city at different
                            scales but also to understand Lepoivre drawings in a larger context
                            based on the degree of reliability of historical evidence, as further
                            explained below.
                        Pierre Lepoivre had assisted in the execution of the citadel of Groningen
                            and must therefore have known which designs of Campi had been approved
                            for execution . Nowadays, we would call
                            Lepoivre’s variations on Campi’s non executed designs historical
                            falsifications, however at the time of Lepoivre the mixing of sources to
                            illuminate historic events that took place apparently was not considered
                            to be problematic. Not only Lepoivre knew also the archdukes in their
                            official role of sovereigns of the Habsburg Netherlands must have known.
                            They had given Lepoivre official commission to make designs for reliable
                            fortification works and given him 500 Flemish pounds for the atlas, but
                            seem to have had no objection that the engineer selected or at least
                            included drawings based on non-executed designs or adaptations of
                            representations of historical events. The re-use in Lepoivre’s atlas of
                            the designs of Campi originally intended to explain technical details
                            and to support administrators in their decision to approve or disapprove
                            the execution hereof gave them an additional cultural meaning as objects
                            of prestige or study in the private collection of the archdukes.
                        Such multiple layers of meaning cannot be grasped in full by GIS or
                            existing spatial digital humanities software, but that requires tools
                            such as Z-editor for scalable readings and moving through geographical
                            and topical spaces. 
                        Finally, we may picture ourselves navigating in an associative way
                            through imaginary cities whose features might have inspired both
                            Calvino's literary writings as Lepoivre's designs. Contemporary artists
                            still inspired by Calvino seem to delve into a collective visual memory
                            of cities, in a way Renaissance engineers linked
                            their designs to representations of ideal cities and new fortress towns,
                            from Campanella's City of the Sun to Zamosz in Poland. Renaissance ideal
                            fortress cities were radial concentric cities with a polygonal perimeter
                            with angular bastions. Therefore circumscribing and inscribing circles
                            played an essential role in designing fortified cities and citadels. The
                            design of fortifications was not just functional. Training in the
                            Military Arts belonged to the education of noblemen, who often collected
                            drawings of fortifications. Fortification atlases were cultural
                            artifacts amongst other books on architecture such as the many Vitruvius
                            editions of the Renaissance that often contained antique and modern
                            visual interpretations of the city described in the lost original
                            manuscript.
                        One of Calvino's references to Campanella's concentric walled City of the
                            Sun allows to link the form of Leonia with images of built and not built
                            fortified cities as the designs of citadels in the atlas of Lepoivre.
                            This comparison is of interest since Calvino once considered a theme
                                Cities and Form as well, but decided to
                            merge it with those of other cities . By extension, we can imagine a traversal through the space of city
                            forms, following multiple exploration paths and connecting imaginary
                            cities in literature (Calvino, Campanella) and in architectural
                            treatises and theory (Vitruvius) with imaginary representations of
                            existing cities in design (Lepoivre).

                        
                            
                                Imaginary Cities z-text. Level 1
                                (left), 2 (top right), 3 (bottom right). Traversal through the space
                                of forms, Calvino, Campanella, Vitruvius, Lepoivre. Calvino,
                                    Italo, Les villes invisibles,
                                    Illustré par Gérard Trignac, Edité par Les Amis du Livre
                                    Contemporain, 1993, http://www.trignac-gerard.com/Les-villes-invisibles.
                                    (Accessed May 22, 2017). SADI Space
                                        Gallery, Continuous city - Leonia, 2009, http://www.sadi.net/ge/cd/13th/lb02.html. (Accessed
                                    May 22, 2017). Campanella, Tommaso, City of
                                        the Sun, 1602, Latin printed edition, Frankfurt,
                                    1623. Campanella, Tommaso, City of the
                                        Sun, http://prometey-spb.su/svetochi/0/kampanella.html.
                                    (Accessed May 22, 2017). Fra Giocondo, Vitruvian City, 1511.
                                    Caporali, Vitruvian City, 1536. Birds eye
                                        view of the Siege of Groningen with the hexagonal citadel of
                                        Groningen, Brussels, Royal Library manuscript 19611
                                    folio 8: Groninghen Assiegee.
                                        Design of hexagonal citadel for the
                                        City of Groningen by Bartolomeo Campi copy by Pierre Le
                                        Poivre, Brussels, Royal Library manuscript 19611
                                    folio 10: LA PLAN DU CHASTEAU DE GRONINGEN,
                                        qui fut batit l’an 1570 par advis du Duc Alvaqui fut ordonéz
                                        de l’ingenieur Pacciotto […] fut achevé de bartholomeo
                                        Campy, P. Lepoivre 12 April 1618. 
                            
                        

                        The examples presented in this section were intended to illustrate how
                            the reconfiguration, restructuring, reorganization of existing content
                            (excerpts from books, articles, essays, etc., images) may be shaped via
                            metaphoric and digital lens, both in the interpretation and the
                            production of knowledge. Our assumption was that the interface mediates
                            a two-stage process, by influencing our perception of a topic, as well
                            as the way we represent this perception via the interface. In our cases,
                            the metaphor of zooming determined a certain predisposition to discern
                            different scales, angles, associations and layers of meaning in the
                            material of study and, at the same time, allowed remodeling (and
                            ultimately rereading) the matter in a digital form consistent with that
                            metaphor. A phenomenon worthy of further inquiry.
                    
            

                4. Conclusions and Future Work
                In the introduction we stated that metaphors embedded in the interface may
                    support and shape interpretation. It is what we tried to demonstrate navigating
                    through the three use cases for literary, didactic and historical
                    representations of imaginary and existing cities and the corresponding z-texts
                    built via the Z-editor, an interface for writing and reading zoomable texts. 
                The first case proposed a stratification of textual and visual details, made
                    visible or invisible through the change of scale and perspective, which allowed
                    a critical projection of Calvino’s Invisible Cities
                    onto a rhizomatic interpretative space. In the
                    second example, we transposed Stevin’s conceptual system of town design into a
                    scalable structure, from the level of the whole city to that of a house, to the
                    abstract layer explaining the concept of mirror-symmetry and its role as an
                    organizing principle within the whole system interpreted in this way from a
                    didactic viewpoint. An additional z-text illustrated the contextualization of
                    Stevin’s work by highlighting, via the switch of perspective from manuscript to
                    print, the differences in the visual-textual dynamics in Simon’s versus
                    Hendrik’s representations of the town plans. The third experiment dealt with a
                    symbolic traversal at variable scale of the city of Groningen drawings from
                        Lepoivre Atlas which together with views of
                    alternative designs assisted interpretation within the larger context of more or
                    less reliable historical evidence.
                As Eberhardt affirms referring to Gadamer’s hermeneutics, the use of zooming not
                    only provides more detail but also allows horizontal expansion, resulting in
                    widening horizons . The study of the
                    role of zooming in particular, and of metaphors in general, in digital
                    hermeneutics has, in our opinion, the potential for widening horizons, both in
                    terms of interpretation and of production of knowledge. Further experiments and
                    features development should be envisaged (e.g., allowing the users to have an
                    overview, reconstruct and annotate the steps they took while navigating in the
                    interpretative space provided by the digital tool and the implied metaphor).
                    Moreover, further requirements can be explored by interdisciplinary research and
                    training programs, like the Digital History and Hermeneutics Doctoral Training
                    Unit, starting in 2017 at the University of Luxembourg, intended to create a
                        space of experiment and to encourage critical and self-reflexive
                        use of digital tools and technologies
                    , in order to stimulate creative thinking and to
                    improve the exploitation of these tools and technologies for research and
                    teaching. In this context, the combined analysis of metaphor and digital
                    hermeneutics may open new paths for experiment and reflection in Digital
                    Humanities.
            
