Title:  
               
Volume:  006
Issue:  2
Date:  31 July 2012
Abstract:  
            
            Almost since the inception of the industry, the player community has been
               instrumental in preserving video games and other variable media art. Drawing on a
               combination of primary and secondary sources of information, including the Preserving
               Virtual Worlds project (an academic investigation into viable models of preservation
               for videogames and 3D virtual worlds based on a series of archiving case studies) and
               the results of a game documentation survey conducted by Donahue, we examine how
               players are taking responsibility for collecting, managing, curating, and creating
               long-term access to computer games. Because our interest lies with the contact zone
               between players and information professionals, we also describe and analyze how we
               and other scholar-archivists are collaborating with or relying on the user community
               to preserve virtual worlds, with an eye to how these relationships might eventually
               be codified within a larger preservation framework.Early versions of portions of this paper were delivered by Kari Kraus, Rachel
                  Donahue, and Megan Winget, Game Change: The Role of Amateur and
                     Professional Cultures in Preserving Virtual Worlds Conference paper. Digital
                  Humanities Conference, College Park, MD (June 22-29 2009); and Rachel Donahue, 
                     Do You Want to Save Your Progress? Preservation Strategies of the Game
                     Industry, and What Their Users Could Teach Them, Society of American
                  Archivists Annual Meeting, August 2009. 
         
Full Body Text: 

            Production, distribution and consumption of all forms of
               digital information: text, music, image, video: have all been democratised. So why
               should the curation of these be any different?
            JP Rangaswami
         
 
            What is an amazing cultural shift — I’m probably
               exaggerating a little bit — but what we’re looking at is that artworks are going to
               be preserved because seventeen-year-olds are doing the work of preserving
               them.
            Christiane Paul, Curator of New Media, Whitney Museum (Echoes of Art Symposium,
               2004)
         

            Archives . . . are about dynamic recordmaking,
               and remaking, re-remaking, over and over again, without end, rather than the
               traditional record-keeping, looking after and keeping safe some fixed records product
               as a sacred artifact. 
            Terry Cook, Introduction to Verne Harris, Archives and Justice: A South
                  African Perspective, 
            
         

            Introduction
            In 2006, Margaret Hedstrom and a team of researchers at the University of Michigan
               published the results of an experiment exploring how users evaluate the authenticity
               and usability of computer games and other digital materials that have been preserved
               through multiple methods. The study found that users tended to prefer playing
               emulated and migrated versions of a popular 1980s-era computer game known as Chuckie
               Egg over the original version. Arguing the importance of the user's perspective in
               archival decision-making, the authors begin and end the paper with a call for further
               research into the needs and preferences of the user community . The purpose of this article is to develop this line of
               inquiry by drawing on a combination of primary and secondary sources of information,
               including our experiences with the Preserving Virtual Worlds project (an academic
               investigation into viable models of preservation for videogames and 3D virtual worlds
               based on a series of archiving case studies);
                  Preserving Virtual Worlds, Preserving Creative
                  America initiative under the National Digital Information Infrastructure
                  Preservation Program (NDIIPP) administered by the Library of Congress. Project
                  partners include the University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign (lead, under
                  direction of Jerome McDonough), the University of Maryland, Stanford University,
                  Rochester Institute of Technology, and Linden Lab. January 2008 - December
                  2009. the results of a game documentation survey conducted by Donahue on
               the preservation practices of the videogame industry and the player community;
               user-generated game resources, hacks, mods, and ports;For a copy of Donahue’s
                  survey questions, see the Appendix to the Game Preservation Special Interest Group
                  White Paper, Before It’s Too Late (2009), authored by
                  Henry Lowood, Andrew Armstrong, Devin Monnens, Zach Vowell, Judd Ruggill, Ken
                  McAllister, and Rachel Donahue. Available for download at http://wiki.igda.org/Game_Preservation_SIG/White_Paper/Before_It%27s_Too_Late:_A_Digital_Game_Preservation_White_Paper.
               and the scholarly literature on game studies, archives, and digital preservation.
               Where we depart from Hedstrom and her colleagues is in how we position the user
               within the preservation system. While their assumption is that users are primarily
               consumers of digital information, ours is that they are also avid custodians of it.
               To frame the issue in archival terms, we see players taking responsibility for
               collecting, managing, curating, and creating long-term access to computer games.
               Because our interest lies with the contact zone between players and information
               professionals, we will describe and analyze how we and other scholar-archivists are
               collaborating with or relying on the user community to preserve virtual worlds, with
               an eye to how these relationships might eventually be codified within a larger
               preservation framework.
            Participatory culture provides one obvious context in which to consider the rise of
               the player archivist and preservationist. In recent years much has been made of the
               allegedly stark contrast between amateur and professional culture, and those writing
               about it tend to structure the conversation in markedly polemical terms.  While
               proponents of amateur culture extol the democratization of the means of production,
               opponents denounce the decline of subject expertise, certified credentials,
               and institutional standards. Compare, for example, the diametric perspectives
                  of Clay Shirky, Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing
                     Without Organizations (Reprint. New York: Penguin, 2009) and Andrew
                  Keen, The Cult of the Amateur: How Today's Internet is
                     Killing Our Culture (New York: Doubleday, 2007).  This paper
               attempts to shift the focus and substance of the debate in two ways:
            
               First, by framing amateur and professional culture in terms of content
                     preservation as well as the more customary content
                     creation (user-preserved and curated
                  media in addition to user-generated media). Drawing on examples from
                  the creative/expressive domains of computer games, interactive fiction, and
                  variable media art, we argue that the production and dissemination of fan-made
                  mods, game cracks, and homebrew ports are frequently not only creative (or
                  piratical) activities, but also preservational ones. While this position differs
                  from that held by most in the recordkeeping professions for whom the integrity,
                  fixity, and accuracy of digital information are the cornerstone of any responsible
                  preservation program, one of our objectives is to situate the transformational
                  model within the context of cultural heritage studies more broadly, where it has
                  been legitimated in a variety of disciplines. It finds expression, for example, in
                  phrases such as permanence through change (museum studies);
                     transformission: transmission + transformation (textual scholarship);
                  and preservation through adaptive reuse (architecture). See ; Random Clod [i.e., Randall McLeod], Information on Information,
                     Text 5 (1991): 270; Paul Eggert, Securing the Past (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2009)
                     22–23. Marc Ruppel has discussed the concept of permanence through
                        change in the context of transmedia narratives. See Ruppel, Narrative Convergence, Cross-Sited Productions, and the
                        Archival Dilemma. Convergence 15
                     (2009): 281–298. 
               
               Second, by demonstrating that the relationship between professional and amateur
                  archivists of virtual worlds is one of reciprocity and mutual influence. Even
                  those, like Richard J. Cox, who acknowledge the increasingly important role of
                  citizen archivists in the information age tend to assume an asymmetrical
                  relationship between them and their professional counterparts . Cox presupposes a uni-directional transfer of knowledge
                  from professional to amateur, with the former advising,
                  assisting, or educating the latter.See, for example,  . When it comes to the
                  preservation of computer games and related artifacts, however, both sides are in
                  possession of significant expertise. Moreover, the borders separating them are
                  remarkably porous: the contributors to the Mystery House Taken Over Project, for
                  example (discussed below), might be variously categorized as artists, gamers,
                  developers, scholars, and preservationists. A single individual — or a single
                  community — contains multitudes.
            
            The article is divided into five sections: Part I overviews the primary risks to
               videogame longevity, including hardware and software obsolescence a mere 5–10 years
               after a game’s initial release. Part II summarizes what actions are currently being
               undertaken to preserve videogames by three communities of practice: the videogame
               industry, the player community, and the information professions. In order to assess
               the contributions of the first two communities, Donahue administered two surveys
               designed to reveal where professional and amateur preservation activities intersect
               with and deviate from one another. Part III introduces the user paradigm of
               preservation through adaptation, drawing on the example of Mystery House
               , the first text adventure game to include graphics.
               This paradigm, we argue, shapes (and is shaped by) a view of authenticity that values
               continuity through change and that conceptualizes an art object as an entity whose
               ontology is fulfilled through the process of adaptation. By this logic, a game is
               paradoxically more faithful to itself as it is modified and transformed by developers
               and successive generations of players.This view of authenticity is described
                  and historicized in  (see also ) in Cultural Artifacts and the
                     Production of Meaning, ed. Margaret J. M. Ezell and Katherine O'Brien
                  O'Keeffe (Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 1994) 85–99. Part IV examines
               patterns of interaction between communities of practice. We are particularly
               interested in those instances where the transfer of a game’s stewardship from one
               community to another corresponds with a shift in preservation strategies, for example
               from a data-centric approach of porting or modding to a process-centric
               approach of rendering the original object through emulation or
                  virtualization.The terminology of data-centric and
                     process-centric approaches to digital preservation is taken from . Through an examination of Will
               Crowther’s Colossal Cave Adventure (the first text
               adventure game)W. Crowther and D. Woods, Adventure. [aka ADVENT> and Colossal Cave] FORTRAN source code (1977) http://mirror.ifarchive.org/if-archive/games/source/adv350-pdp10.tar.gz.,
               William Gibson’s Agrippa (a work of variable media art)
                  , as well as a number of secondary sources, we also
               attempt to identify some of the principles that underlie the selection of significant
               properties in player mods and ports. Part V derives a set of recommendations for game
               preservation from the foregoing analysis. A coda to the paper pays tribute to the
               player community. 
         

            Risks to Videogame Longevity
            While paper records remain potentially accessible for decades and even centuries with
               no intervention, videogames are subject to hardware and software obsolescence a mere
               5–10 years after their release. Prior research into the preservation of electronic
               records has largely focused on static files created on personal computers, which
               present far fewer challenges than an interactive piece of software, often designed
               for use on a proprietary system.
            
               
                  Hardware obsolescence: The original console or computing platform
                  used to run the game may cease to be supported or even available in the
                  aftermarket.
               
                  Software obsolescence: The original software needed to run the game
                  — operating system, drivers, frameworks — may lose support, cease development, and
                  become incapable of running on future hardware/software configurations.
               
                  Scarcity: Some video games are produced in limited quantities, and
                  are subject to the dangers of media decay.A quantitative study of the
                     scarcity of videogames was conducted in the UK in 2008. The study took a sample
                     of videogame consoles, as well as 50 video game cartridges for the Atari 2600,
                     and examined their availability in archives, on internet sale sites, and as
                     illegal ROMs for download and play on emulators. The study determined that
                     pirated ROMs present the most available resource for games, and that all of the
                     archives found to contain the selected games were located in the United States.
                     The recent opening of the UK National Videogame Archive may change this
                     dispersal problem, but the rarity of authentic, original game copies represents
                     a challenge to those who seek to preserve them. Paul Gooding and Melissa
                     Terras, Grand Theft Archive: A Quantitative Analysis of
                        the State of Computer Game Preservation,
                     International Journal of Digital Curation 3
                     (2008): http://www.ijdc.net/index.php/ijdc/article/view/85.
               
               
                  3rd party software dependence: Once a game platform becomes
                  obsolete, emulation may be the best method of providing access. Currently,
                  however, most emulators are developed by the game community and are of
                  questionable legality. They are also typically created without the benefit of the
                  original specifications, and are themselves at risk of becoming obsolete.
               
                  Complex, proprietary code and an associated lack of documentation:
                  Videogames are generally released as compiled binaries with no documentation of
                  the compiling process, or even the programming languages used. Not having access
                  to the source code or language specifications makes migrating or emulating
                  software far more difficult. It’s a magnification of the format identification
                  issue for stand-alone, static files.
               
                  Authenticity: The elephant in the digital preservation room —
                  proving that a digital object is what it claims to be, free from tampering or
                  corruption. Video games enjoy many versions between the first prototype, the
                  official release (on multiple platforms), and cracked or otherwise altered
                  unauthorized editions. Especially for older games, the only extant copy may exist
                  in a fan-run web repository, making the authenticity impossible to
                     establish.In this paper we propose alternate conceptions of
                        authenticity for video games that may align better with their complex
                     version histories. See the Preservation Through
                        Adaptation and Patterns of Interaction Across
                        Communities sections, as well as Recommendations.
                  
               
               
                  Intellectual property rights: The game development industry is
                  highly creative and competitive, leading developers to be very jealous of their
                  intellectual property. Most have instituted extremely draconian shrink-wrap
                  licenses reflecting this. And yet, once a game is no longer actively marketable,
                  they are unlikely to respond to inquiries about licensing for it.For a
                     discussion of intellectual property rights as they relate to the economic value
                     chain of the video game industry, see James Conley, et al., Use of a Game Over: Emulation and the Video Game
                        Industry,
                     Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual
                        Property 2 (2004): http://www.law.northwestern.edu/journals/njtip/v2/n2/3/. For an
                     opposing viewpoint — that hacking and piracy benefit society — see Will Jordan,
                        From Rule-Breaking to ROM-Hacking: Theorizing the
                        Computer Game-as-Commodity,
                     Situated Play: Proceedings of DiGRA 2007
                     Conference (2007): 708–713. For a discussion of what archivists and librarians
                     can learn from video game players about IP reform, see Kari Kraus, 
                        A Counter-Friction to the Machine: What Game Scholars, Librarians,
                        and Archivists Can Learn from Machinimists about User Activism.
                     Journal of Visual Culture (special
                     Machinima-themed issue guest-edited by the Stanford Humanities Lab) 10 (2011):
                     100–112.
               
               
                  Significant properties: What are the significant properties of a
                  game that must be maintained with each transformation/preservation action? How
                  important are font size and color palette? What about the speed of text scrolling
                  or sprite movement? How faithful must we stay to the original code? Is it enough
                  to save a video of gameplay, or must we save the interactivity? Do we need BOTH?
                  These are essential to define, as they play a major role in determining
                     authenticity.For a detailed example of the essential characteristics of
                     videogames, and a preservation model using PLANETS, see M. Guttenbrunner, C.
                     Becker, and A. Rauber, Evaluating Strategies for the
                        Preservation of Console Video Games,
                     Proceedings of the Fifth international Conference on
                        Preservation of Digital Objects (iPRES 2008), London, UK, September
                     29–30, 2008 http://www.ifs.tuwien.ac.at/~guttenbr/pubs/guttenbrunner_ipres2008.pdf.
                     The IMLS-funded project directed by Jerry McDonough, Preserving Virtual Worlds II: Methods for Evaluating and Preserving
                        Significant Properties of Educational Games and Complex Interactive
                        Environments, with which Kraus and Donahue are both involved, aims
                     to address related issues.
               
               
                  Context: Although this isn’t an immediate threat to the
                  preservation of games, building contextuality is important to creating
                  understanding for future users. This is truer for video games than many other
                  record types because, as technology advances, game players who have only been
                  exposed to the latest and greatest may be apt to play an older game and say, so
                     what? even though the game might have been revolutionary for its
                     time. As an example, Sierra’s Mystery House
                     was not just a first for the company — it was the first text adventure to
                     incorporate graphics. An amazing breakthrough at the time, it seems crude in
                     comparison to today’s realistic 3D environments.
               
            
         

            What’s Being Done?
            To determine what should be done (see the Recommendations section), we first need to understand what activities are
               currently being undertaken to preserve videogames. To do this, two surveys were
               constructed: one for game developers, and one for game enthusiasts. The surveys were
               distributed through the International Game Developers Association’s white paper,
               presented at the Game Developers Conference, announced on the Grand Text Auto blog,
               and publicized among known developers and gamers including members of New England
               Classic Gaming .
                  http://www.atariage.com/forums/index.php?showforum=75
                Responses were collected and analyzed using the SurveyMonkey service, and
               questions were structured as multiple choice, free text, or a combination of the two.
               Very little demographic data was collected, in order to encourage participation by
               ensuring anonymity. 
            
               Industry response
               Total respondents: 48
               Completion rate: 33.33% (16 respondents)
               Respondents with > 50 employees: 26
            
            Forty-eight individuals from the videogame industry responded to the survey, but only
               16 answered every question. Of the respondents, 26 were from companies that had 50 or
               more employees, and only 6 of these made it beyond the question, Have you
                  considered establishing an archives/records management program? Nine of the 26
               responded that they did have a formal program, 15 did not have one, and 2 skipped the
               question entirely. Those with formal programs, in both smaller and larger companies,
               grouped their records according to project and/or type of asset (e.g. code or
               graphic). Figure 1 shows the main divisions of records included
               in archives/records management programs. 
            
               Records included in archives/records management programs
               
            
            Comments to this question showed a range of disorganized preservation activity. Some
               companies indicated using a wiki to manage and preserve their records, many referred
               to a version control system or code repository, and a few mentioned nightly backup
               tapes without elaborating on the content of those backups. The most promising
               comments were from respondents who claimed they used configuration management (CM)
               processes and policies for all of their major game builds, though not for individual
               developer materials.
            According to Jessica Keyes, CM identifies
                  which processes need to be documented and tracks any changes . Wikipedia expands on this, noting that it identifies the functional and physical
                  attributes of software at various points in time and performs systematic control
                  of changes to the identified attributes for the purpose of maintaining software
                  integrity and traceability throughout the software development life cycle.
               
                  Configuration Management,
                  Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Configuration_management.
               Unfortunately, in the very same question, the same respondents admitted that many, if
               not most, developers have no CM training.
            Using a code repository or asset management system is certainly an important part of
               a good CM plan. And yet, although they were mentioned in an earlier question, only
               50% of respondents said they utilized them when asked specifically.
            Although 2 respondents said that they did use records schedules, most free-text
               responses regarding how permanence is determined displayed a fairly casual attitude
               towards preservation. There were many references to item types that were necessary or
               reusable being kept, while everything else was tossed, and to materials only being
               kept for successful games. Some companies retained related documentation, while
               others did not. Storage environments (Figure 3) ranged from
               enshrining physical records in an off-limits closet to a hard drive stored under a
               developer’s desk. The word whim in reference to an individual deciding the
               fate of records was used more than once.
            In summary, there seems to be a tendency within the game industry to make
               preservation decisions at the level of the individual developer, with no official
               guidance. When Donahue asked the question of a Garage Games developer at Foundations
               of Digital Games, he responded, [laugh] We don't.
                  Other than the source code of a game that ships, we don't care. I just had someone
                  looking for annotated versions of our tools and we don't have them. To be
               fair, this is explicable. Game developers tend to work with a fixed deadline: the
               majority of their income is made in the holiday season, so they need to get releases
               out early in the 4th quarter. They also operate on a finite budget, which tends to
               mean fewer programmers working more hours–leading to everyone working at too
               breakneck a pace to give a thought to what happens to any of the interim
               products.
            The survey also asked respondents to indicate what kinds of digital and analogue
               objects they were preserving (Figure 2). Of the materials listed
               in the questionnaire, all categories were saved by at least one company, except for
                  Game magazines/clippings files. The most popular categories were source
               code and compiled binaries, as well as game assets and artwork, with 85% of
               respondents reporting they preserved each of these item types. Following closely
               behind at 77% each were design documents and tools developed to support game
               creation.
            
               Detailed Record Types: Industry
               
            
            Only 8% saved recordings of game play or machinima (video productions using a game
               engine as the recording/acting mechanism). This finding contrasts significantly with
               the practice of game players. At the time of this writing, a YouTube search for
                  speed play game yields 14,800 videos and game play demo yields
               73,100 results. One example of a user community project, C64
                  Longplays,
               
                  http://c64-longplays.de/
                offers 270 videos of end-to-end game play and an additional 199 more
               generalized videos of the most popular or obscure games.
            Of the 12 respondents who answered the preservation tactics question, 7 reported
               simply saving the files in their original format, 1 migrated to an unspecified
               preservation format, and 3 transformed files on demand if the game was needed for
               another reason (such as a re-release) in the future. One respondent went so far as to
               say that once a game’s platform is gone, the software is, too. Emulation was
               referenced only as a test platform during development. Responses to the description
               questions revealed that metadata tends to be captured as unstructured text rather
               than using a schema or authority list, if it is done at all. 
            
               Game Documentation Study (Industry): File Storage
               
            
            Additional comments support the interpretation that the survey responses reveal a
               lack of industry interest in preservation. Many game companies simply are not
               concerned with their games beyond the development lifecycle. If the results of this
               survey reflect the practices of the industry at large, we are in serious danger of
               losing large chunks of our cultural heritage. The concept of benign neglect
               can be applied safely to paper records and even some analog audiovisual media — but
               apply it to digital objects and they will almost certainly end up in the dustbin as
               soon as they go out of active use. 
            
               Community Response
               
                  Total respondents: 62
               
                  Completion Rate: 87%
               
                  Respondents with preservation experience: 19
            
            Luckily for future historians, gamers, and students, the player community is very
               active in preserving the software and artifacts of the games they love. If enthusiasm
               can be inferred from response rate, the contrast between the community and industry
               surveys demonstrates very different levels of interest. Recall that 16 people (or
               33%) of those answering completed the industry survey, a decent rate of response,
               according to some. The community, on the other hand, completed the survey 87% of the
               time, generating 54 full responses, with numerous people emailing that they wished
               they’d had a chance to take the survey before it closed.
            Illustrating the diversity of the community, respondents were split between exclusive
               collectors of officially released material, and those who collected unreleased as
               well. Systems that interested them ranged from the Vectrex (1982–84, a home system
               with built-in display, that used vector graphics rather than the more common raster
               graphics) and Pong (1972 and after, a single-game console originally popularized in
               bars) to the PS3 and Wii. Thirty percent collected ephemera, and about half used
               emulators to play games for systems that interested them. The free text comments on
               the emulation experience were rich, and, with emulation being a primary access method
               for obsolete systems, deserve further exploration and analysis in a later study.
            The enthusiasts were also asked which websites they regularly visited and/or
               contributed to, with 77% partaking in both activities. These websites represent a
               very valuable preservation contribution by the game community. Sites like
               GameFAQs.com, MobyGames, and Home of the Underdogs (before its unfortunate demise)
               provide metadata and context information at a level many cataloguers would envy. This
               data is essentially peer reviewed, as there are scores of well-informed visitors
               constantly viewing and updating it. Some sites have a formal moderation system for
               quality control.
            Nineteen of the respondents had engaged in preservation activities beyond website
               participation. The most common activities were contributing to an emulator, imaging
               disks, and restoring/refurbishing hardware (Figure 4). More unusual activities were
               designing a preservation architecture,
                  http://www.amigaforever.com/
                writing preservation guidelines for developers, and curating game related
               exhibits. Additionally, three of the respondents put their collections to good use,
               by releasing previously unreleased games to the public. Whether this was as a ROM or
               on physical media is unclear,A ROM is a digital file that clones all the
                  contents of a given read-only storage medium, such as a game cartridge, right down
                  to the slack space at the end of a file. but both have been known to
               happen. Mike Tyson’s Intergalactic Punch Out for the NES was released as a ROM,
                  http://www.gamesetwatch.com/2009/04/mike_tysons_intergalactic_powe.php
               
               Star Wars Ewok Adventure for the Atari 2600 was released
               in a limited run of 30 cartridges.
                  http://www.geocities.com/TimesSquare/Lair/9260/ewok.html
               
            
            
               Player Community: Preservation Activities
               
            
            
               Information Professionals
               The archival literature has, relatively speaking, a dearth of
                  preservation-centered articles for interactive objects. InterPARES (International
                  Research on Permanent Authentic Records in Electronic Systems) is a series of
                  projects investigating problems related to the authenticity, reliability, and accuracy of electronic records throughout their
                     life cycle.
                   Richard Pearce-Moses, InterPARES, SAA: Glossary of Archival Terminology
                        http://archivists.org/glossary/term_details.asp?DefinitionKey=1794.
                  While InterPARES2 dealt with Experiential,
                     Interactive and Dynamic Records, its focus was on files generated by
                  artists, musicians, and scientists, rather than software. Regardless, a repository
                  looking to preserve videogames would do well to follow the Preserver
                     Guidelines laid out in the Project Book InterPARES 2 Project,
                     directed by Luciana Duranti: http://www.interpares.org/ip2/ip2_index.cfm.. 
               In particular, the oft repeated mantra (in the realm of e-records) of getting
                  involved early in the lifecycle process is important to game preservation. The
                  dangers of obsolescence make it extremely useful to have the source code for games
                  of enduring value. Due to the nature of development and the rapidly changing
                  market, raw source code is more likely to be available before a game is officially
                  released – before it has been compiled into the executable programs we run on our
                  systems at home. Taking a disk image from an official release – making a
                  hardware-independent copy – only provides the binary files, and these are
                  difficult to migrate to other formats should it become necessary. The trouble with
                  binary files is that they obscure the underlying code and are difficult to
                  impossible to decompile. If, however, we have access to the source code, it would
                  allow an enterprising programmer to change small amounts of the code to create a
                  source port to a different operating system. This is somewhat comparable to the
                  value of having negatives vs. photographs; you can do a lot more with the
                  negatives, and the same is true for source code. 
               An example of the utility of source code is seen in the source ports available at
                     DoomWorldDoomWorld is a community-run portal for all things related to
                     all versions of the DOOM video game, developed and released by id software.
                     This includes history, downloads, help files, forums, news, feature articles,
                     and a myriad of topical sites hosted by the portal for other DOOM enthusiasts.
                        http://www.doomworld.com/
                  , which were made possible by the release of the Doom Engine to the public
                  domain by id Software, as well as by the efforts of Doom enthusiasts who helped
                  port the game to other operating systems. Because just the engine was released,
                  players had to have a copy of the accompanying files in order to play the game,
                  helping to preserve id’s intellectual property rights. The game engine essentially
                  acts as a driver or interpreter for the graphics, sound, and other individual
                  objects that make up a complete game.
               This discussion of objects other than binary files brings us to another important
                  guideline laid out by InterPARES 2: identify all digital components. One of the
                  challenges of preserving a videogame is that referring to it in the singular is
                  deceptive. A videogame is actually made up of as many as hundreds of different
                  objects, some of which may be hidden depending on the settings of the operating
                  system one is using to access it. Making sure that every file is identified and
                  every file-type known is an essential part of keeping an accurate record of the
                  program. This is another area where having the source code is helpful. Identifying
                  a file as a binary or executable is essentially useless; all information related
                  to the structure and programming of the file is obscured. 
               Similar to InterPARES is the Variable Media Network’s questionnaire for new media
                     artists. Alain Depocas, et al, Permanence Through
                        Change, 
                     http://variablemedia.net/e/preserving/html/var_pub_index.html;
                     Variable Media Questionnaire, a Forging the Future Project, co-designed by John
                     Bell and Jon Ippolito http://variablemediaquestionnaire.net/ The
                  questionnaire allows a curator to learn from the creator exactly what aspects of
                  his or her work must be presented to allow for an accurate representation to be
                  made in the future. It also helps to clarify any rights issues, and provides the
                  rationale for recording the specific technologies used. Creating a similar
                  questionnaire for videogame creators would give archivists and historians the
                  ability to track the evolution of design platforms in addition to clarifying
                  technical metadata and intellectual property concerns.
               Beyond these two projects, some of the most useful things to come out of the
                  archival world are standards for metadata and the Open Archival Information System
                  (OAIS) reference model, which have obvious applications and import for any digital archive.
                     http://public.ccsds.org/publications/archive/650x0b1.pdf
                  
               
            
         

            Preservation through Adaptation
            Having taken a preliminary look at how three different communities of practice
               approach the problem of video game preservation, we will now consider preservation
               strategies that involve reprogramming, reimplementation, re-creation, and adaptation.
               Our contention is that one of the preservation models that governs certain categories
               of virtual worlds, such as non-commercial IF, operates under the sign of modification
               rather than reproduction. More precisely, adaptation exists alongside
                  reproduction as a preservation strategy; the two often work in tandem.
            
            Consider, for example, the case of Mystery House, the
               first graphical work of interactive fiction ever created. Released into the public
               domain in 1987, Mystery House was later reimplemented in
               the Inform programming language by the Mystery House Taken Over Occupation Force,
               comprised of Nick Montfort, Dan Shiovitz, and Emily Short . While the reimplemented game hews closely to the original Apple II version, even
               going so far as to deliberately reproduce a programming error, it nonetheless also
               departs from its antecedent in interesting ways–sometimes intentionally (the original
               requirement to issue commands in upper-case text is pronounced too dreary to bother reproducing, for example), To view the source
                  code, download the Mystery House Taken Over Occupation Kit at http://www.turbulence.org/mhto_kit.tgz
                sometimes inadvertently and unavoidably (consistent with migration as a
               preservation strategy more broadly). Moreover, the game’s commented code demonstrates
               how MHTO oscillates between a preservation project and a remix project: while the
               comments record a wealth of information about the original game, they also reflect a
               commitment to getting a younger generation of game enthusiasts interested in early IF
               by modding and remixing it. As a result, documentary and explanatory comments coexist
               with generative ones. Players learn about how the early graphics were coded, for
               instance, even as they are encouraged to substitute their own images for the crude
               line drawings that Ken and Roberta Williams originally included. Suggestions to
               remove a line or rip out a game behavior are interspersed throughout the
               source code, and a number of programming decisions have been made with player
               customization in mind.
            It is clear that the MHTO Occupation Force, which commissioned ten contemporary
               digital artists to mod the game using a specially designed kit for the purpose, sees
               its reimplementation as an intermediary node in the genealogy of Mystery House, one that honors its predecessor and anticipates its
               successors; that is poised between what was and what will
                  be. Nick Montfort’s contribution, 
                  Mystery House Kracked by the Flippy Disk,
                Available for download on the MHTO Games page at http://www.turbulence.org/Works/mystery/games.php
                pays homage to 1980s-era hackers who would make commercial games available
               for download on Bulletin Board Systems after breaking their copy protection
               mechanisms. Montfort overlays the original MH graphics with fragments of
               Apple II crack screens, or the piratical equivalent of graffiti tags, that include
               the aliases of the crackers and shout-outs to fellow pirates. By ingesting such
               materials into the game itself, he inverts the customary relationship between text
               and context, transforming the game into an exhibition space for a particular class of
               vintage artifacts that help make first- and second-generation computer adventure
               games intelligible. 
            In its conceptualization and design, the MHTO project reflects a view of authenticity
               that Heather MacNeil, archives scholar, ascribes to Heidegger when she argues that
               cultural objects are in a continuous
                  state of becoming
               . According to this perspective, it is not stasis
               or fixity that serves as a guarantor of authenticity, particularly in the digital
               realm, but rather change and transformation; authenticity is an anticipation, a process, and a continuous
                  struggle to become . Paul Eggert
               neatly encapsulates the ineluctable truth that lies behind this model: works do not stand still
               . As MacNeil notes, while this particular
               formulation of authenticity is controversial in the field of archives and
               preservation where practitioners are dedicated to stabilizing cultural records, it
               has been fully naturalized over the last 15–20 years in the field of textual
               scholarship, a branch of literary studies concerned with the transmission of texts
               over time and which can be productively viewed as a sister discipline to archival
               science 
               . If we plot these two differing views of
               authenticity along what Paul Eggert calls the production-consumption spectrum of the life of the
                  work, then it becomes evident that the principle of fixity, which
               privileges authorial agency, falls on the production end of the spectrum ; and the principle of transformation, which
               privileges user agency, falls on the consumption end. While we are accustomed
                  to classifying the output of cultural consumption as secondary source material
                  (for example, marginalia or critical commentary in the case of novel reading;
                  machinima or recams in the case of game play), it can also take a form that more
                  closely resembles primary source material: should the various expansions and ports
                  of Will Crowther’s Colossal Cave Adventure be
                  interpreted as context for the original game or as legitimate repetitions of it,
                  albeit with modifications? The question is intended to challenge the dichotomy
                  that seems to inhere in Eggert’s model: namely, that production and
                  consumption are two entirely distinct activities. The theory of co-creation
                  integral to a Heideggerean view of authenticity suggests that eventually the two
                  ends of the spectrum become mirror images of each other. In one case, the
               authenticating function is invested in the author. In the other, it is the user.
            It would be a mistake, however, to seize on the apparent oppositions. Where the two
               approaches converge is in their shared commitment to the continuity of the
               intellectual object; where they diverge is primarily a function of how much variance
               each is willing to tolerate in the different manifestations and expressions of the
               work. Moreover, the two value systems and the preservation strategies through which
               they are realized often work together rather than at cross-purposes. The player
               community not only reprograms and modifies classic games, it also develops emulators
               for them, allowing users to experience the games in an environment that mimics an
               obsolete platform or operating system and in a form that clones the structure and
               contents of the original software data files. For this reason the community may be
               said to be Janus-faced, looking forward to new incarnations of influential or obscure
               titles while at the same time looking backward to canonical versions and official
               releases. The availability of Mystery House as
               reverse-engineered source code written in a modern programming language and as a disk image of the original executable program (a
               byte-exact copy that can be run in an Apple II emulator) testifies to this basic
               duality — a duality that need not imply incompatibility.
         

            Patterns of Interaction Across Communities
            These inter-preservational approaches happen not only synchronically within a single
               community, but also diachronically across communities. The patterns of interaction
               often resemble those found in architectural preservation, where there is a clear
               reciprocity between residents of buildings, on the one hand, and preservationists, on
               the other. Writing about the functions and roles that each of these stakeholder
               groups assumes, Paul Eggert summarizes the resulting dynamic that unfolds in time:
                  only adaptive reuse [by generations of
                  inhabitants] will have put very old buildings in a position to be proposed for
                  professional conservation and curation in the present
               . In the case of digital game preservation, an
               analogous relationship exists between user modification and institutional appraisal:
               players augment and extend the cultural relevance of computer games by modifying them
               for successive generations of users. These adaptations in turn increase the
               likelihood that professional archivists will eventually judge the games worthy of
               digital preservation.
            A good example is Colossal Cave Adventure, created by
               Will Crowther c. 1975, which has the distinction of being the first documented
               computer text-adventure game. Inspired by Kentucky’s Mammoth Cave system, the game
               inaugurated many of the conventions and player behaviors now associated with the
               genre, such as solving puzzles, collecting treasure, and interacting with the
               simulated fantasy world via short text commands .We have relied on Jerz’s brilliantly researched
                  essay for an understanding of the history and vicissitudes of Adventure. Originally written in FORTRAN, the code has been
               repeatedly ported and expanded by hackers, fans, and programmers over the years, most
               influentially by Don Woods (c. 1977), who, among other things, introduced a scoring
               system and player inventory . The
               number of versions of Adventure is legion and continues
               to grow, with players mapping the evolution of the game using tree-like structures
               showing patterns of inheritance and variation.Russel Dalenberg, Adventure Family Tree," Russel Dalenberg’s Home Page
                  [personal web site], 2004 http://www.io.com/~ged/www/family.html; Dalenberg, Versions and Ports of Adventure known to
                     exist v.2.6.7 Russel Dalenberg’s Home Page [personal web site], 2006
                     http://www.io.com/~ged/www/advelist.html.  In 2008, the
               Preserving Virtual Worlds project team selected Adventure as part of its archiving case set. After 34 years of continuous
               transformation under the stewardship of the user community, Adventure (in one or more of its protean forms) has now been ingested
               into an institutional repository, where it will undergo periodic integrity checks to
               ensure the inviolability of its bitstream over time. Professional preservation of
                  Adventure will not supplant player preservation;
               rather, the two will co-exist. But it is fair to say that the intervention of the PVW
               team would not have happened in the absence of the transformational history that has
               kept Adventure alive for more than three decades.
            Most of the game modifications referenced thus far are the product of what Alan Liu
               would call smart constraints
               : they are aesthetic, stylistic, and ludic in nature,
               encompassing changes to levels, characters, textures, descriptions, objects, and
               storylines. Generally speaking, they are creative hacks designed within the
               parameters of a given genre that are intended to enhance game play. By contrast, dumb
               constraints involve various concessions to technology; they are the unavoidable
               consequence of living in a material world where limited computer memory, storage, and
               bandwidth compromise — or at least modulate — artistic vision. While the distinction
               between smart and dumb constraints is by no means absolute, its utility lies in being
               able to generalize at a sufficiently high level about two variables affecting game
               mods.
            Although primarily focused on the role of smart constraints in the development of
                  Adventure, Dennis Jerz also pays attention to dumb
               constraints in his groundbreaking article on the game. He quotes M. Kraley, a former
               colleague of Crowther’s, who recounts the first time his friend introduced him to
                  Adventure: [O]ne day, a few of us wandered into [Crowther's] office so he could show off his
                  program. It was very crude in many respects – Will was always
                     parsimonious of memory – but surprisingly sophisticated. We all had a
                  blast playing it, offering suggestions, finding bugs, and so forth (my
               emphasis) . Here, Kraley captures with a few
               swift strokes the long-standing tension between code size and program performance – a
               tension that would have been particularly pronounced in an era when computer memory
               was measured in kilobytes rather than gigabytes. By the time Crowther was modeling
               the twisty little passages of the
               Kentucky cave system in his text-based world, the principle of parsimony was already
               axiomatic. Steven Levy locates its origins in the mainframe computer culture of the
               1950s and 60s, when program
                  bumming, or the practice of
                  taking a computer program and trying to cut off instructions without affecting the
                  outcome, emerged as its own distinct aesthetic, cast in the crucible of
               limited physical memory and punchcard media, whose minimal storage capacity created a
               strong incentive for programmers to make their code as efficient as possible, thereby
               reducing the size of the program deck . What began
               as a consequence of mundane technological circumstance quickly evolved into a
               competitive art form, and a hacker eager to prove his programming chops could do
               worse than find a bloated program to compress into fewer lines of code. Some programs were bummed to the fewest lines
                  so artfully, Levy notes, that
                  the author's peers would look at it and almost melt with awe
               .
            Parsimony is as much a gamer creed as it is a hacker creed. It is evident in the
               subculture of speedruns: recorded demos of players (or runners)
               who complete a video game as quickly as possible by optimizing the play-through with
               no reversals, mistakes, or wasted effort.Wikipedia, Speedrun
                  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speedrun; Henry Lowood, High-Performance Play: The Making of Machinima, in Videogames and Art: Intersections and Interactions, ed.
                  Andy Clarke and Grethe Mitchell (London: Intellect Books; Chicago: Univ. of
                  Chicago Press, 2007): 59–79. Earlier draft available online at www.stanford.edu/~lowood/.../highperformanceplay_finaldraft.pdf.
               Like code bums, speedruns represent a trend toward increasing efficiency,
               rationalization, and speed. They may not, however, involve the same degree of
               capitulation to dumb constraints, notwithstanding the clever exploitation of glitches
               in the game system to improve a run.For a classic account of exploiting bugs
                  and glitches in id Software’s first-person shooter Quake to improve a speedrun, see Anthony Bailey’s ZigZagging through a Strange Universe, originally published on Planet Quake (12 October 1997), now available at http://speeddemosarchive.com/quake/qdq/articles/ZigZag/
               
            
            The migration of parsimony from the code level to the game level is discernible in
               other ways as well. The concept implies not only efficiency, but also economy of
               expression, with a less is more ethos. It is this dimension of parsimony that
               game mods based on dumb constraints often reflect. One sees it, for example, in the
               readiness of an earlier generation of software pirates to sacrifice seemingly
               significant game properties in the interest of low-bandwidth warez
               distribution. The resulting game rips, which drained the digital objects of high-end
               features such as audio or video, Indhu Rajagopal and Nis Bojin, Cons in the Panopticon: Anti–Globalization and
                     Cyber–Piracy,
                  First Monday 9 (2004): http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1174/1094.
                  For further context, we quote Rajagopal and Bojin’s discussion of so-called
                     game rips in full: Pirated programs known as rips, i.e., programs that have had
                     superfluous items extracted from it, designed largely for the
                     bandwidth–impaired . . . are available for file sharers and warez Web sites.
                     For instance, where a full digital ISO image of a game may be as much as 700 MB
                     in size, a rip of that game can be far less, once the music and videos from the
                     game have either been removed or large textures in the game have been
                     downsampled, i.e., reduced in quality from the original. This can result in a
                     700 MB file becoming a 70 MB game, which is much more accessible to those who
                     wish to offer it with their own server space and for downloads on a
                     low–bandwidth connection. A similar technique is applied to applications,
                     movies whose underlying premise is of the lossy MP3 format, which has
                     acted as a cornerstone file type, elevating audio piracy to its current state
                     of popularity . . . Game rip releasers often even go the distance, allowing
                     users to customize their game if they have the bandwidth. A stripped down
                     version of the game will often be released with its removed components also
                     made available for download, if desired. Thus, one could download a copy of a
                     sports game, the music for the game, the movies for the game and in–game
                     commentary, all separately. This practice is predominant among
                     newsgroups. See also Solveig Singleton, Copy
                     Protection and Games: Lessons for DRM Debates and Development, Progress
                  and Freedom Foundation [a conservative think-tank based in Washington D. C.]
                  (2007): 3 http://www.pff.org/issues-pubs/pops/pop14.2gamecopyprotectDRM.pdf.
                recall Kraley’s association of parsimony with crudity. But crudity, as
               Matthew Kirschenbaum has observed, is a core tenet of hackerdom, not to be confused
               with lack of skill . It is consistent
               with a set of maxims in software design that fly under the banner of pragmatism and
               simplicity, boasting names such as Worse is Better; Keep It Simple,
                  Stupid: and The Principle of Good Enough.
               Wikipedia Unix Philosophy,
                  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy#Worse_is_better; Wikipedia
                     Worse is Better,
                  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Worse_is_better
                Taken together, they imply a coherent approach to the problem of significant
               properties.
            As part of the CAMiLEON emulation Project, Margaret Hedstrom and Christopher A. Lee
               have defined significant properties within the context of digital
               preservation as those properties of
                  digital objects that affect their quality, usability, rendering, and
                  behaviour
               . Similarly, the authors of the InSPECT report
               denote them as essential characteristics that must be preserved over time in order to ensure the continued accessibility,
                  usability, and meaning of the objects
               . Despite the availability of these definitions,
               the InSPECT authors lament that most of
                  those who use the term would be hard-pressed to define it or say why it is
                  important,
               , adding to date, little research has been undertaken on the
                  practical application of the concept and approach. It is therefore widely
                  recognized that there is a pressing need for practical research in this area, to
                  develop a methodology, and begin identifying quantifiable sets of significant
                  properties for specific classes of digital object[s]
               . 
            The convictions of the hacker community offer an interesting counterpoint to such
               ambivalence. The manifesto-like intensity with which hackers revere the principle of
                  all information should be free
               , as well as its corollaries, the freedom to tinker
               and share, means that reproducibility functions as a kind of acid-test for
               significant properties. Outwardly, there is nothing particularly remarkable about
               this: the relationship between the sustainability of a creative object and the
               iterability of its constituent parts is widely recognized. The subject receives what
               is perhaps its fullest treatment in Nelson Goodman’s Languages
                  of Art, which remains one of the most formidable works on semiotics ever
               published. The study of such engineering
                  matters that includes the duplicability,
               clarity,
               legibility,
               maneuverability, and performability of the individual units that
               comprise a notational system, is, Goodman states, fascinating and [intellectually] profitable
               . But while reproducibility is likely to inform
               any conversation about significant properties, it assumes pride of place in the
               context of software hacking. This is not to dispense with other criteria – one need
               only invoke the notorious failure of the Atari VCS port of Pac-Man in 1982 to realize that once a cultural artifact achieves iconic
               status, it becomes much harder to assess trade-offs between paying homage to the
               original and yielding to the technical exigencies of reimplementation on a different
               platform. But the siren call of adaptive reproduction frequently outweighs all other
               considerations. Indeed, a recurring theme that runs throughout the history of the Atari VCS
                  platform, according to Nick Montfort and Ian Bogost in Racing the Beam, is the transformative port, especially of arcade
               games . In this context, what counts as
                  significant is whatever the target platform can accommodate. Those
               properties that resist being shoehorned into the new system end up as collateral
               damage. In the case of the Pac-Man port, this included
               such venerable features as the paku-paku sound effects and the distinctive visual
               attributes of the ghosts, bonus fruits, and food pellets . The logic of adaptive reproduction,
               however, means that many properties that are casualties of an initial port can be
               re-integrated into subsequent ports. As Montfort and Bogost note, later VCS Pac-Man hacks and rebuilds re-introduced credible arcade sounds, revised colors, better sprite
                  graphics, and colored fruit.
               . Thus a relatively crude rendition of the
               game paved the way for more faithful renditions down the road. This ongoing process
               demonstrates how systems of semiotic relevance can be recalibrated over time in
               response to changing techno-cultural circumstances.Of course the logic of
                  adaptive reproduction can also result in tricked-out, augmented, or enhanced
                  audio-visual capabilities in a given game franchise that take full advantage of
                  upgrades in sound and video card technology and increased processing power over
                  time. For a discussion of the role of techno-historic constraints on game
                  aesthetics, see Andrew Hutchison, Making the Water Move:
                     Techno-Historic Limits in the Game Aesthetics of Myst and Doom,
                  Game Studies 8 (2008): http://gamestudies.org/0801/articles/hutch. 
            
            Although a work of variable media art rather than a video game, the history of
               William Gibson’s Agrippa illustrates another model of
               digital preservation that relies on asynchronous collaboration between different
               communities of practice, in this case hackers and scholars.The vagaries of the
                  poem and its associated media artifacts are documented in several sources: The
                     Agrippa Files, Transcriptions Project, University
                  of California Santa Barbara, http://agrippa.english.ucsb.edu/; Matthew Kirschenbaum, Doug Reside, and
                  Alan Liu, No Round Trip: Two New Primary Sources for Agrippa,
                  http://agrippa.english.ucsb.edu/kirschenbaum-matthew-g-with-doug-reside-and-alan-liu-no-round-trip-two-new-primary-sources-for-agrippa;
                  and Kirschenbaum, Mechanisms Introduction, Chpt. 5
                     (Text Messaging: the Transformissions of Agrippa’
                  ) and the Appendix. Like Adventure,
               the transmission and reception of Agrippa dramatizes the
               interaction between preservation-as-adaptation and preservation-as-reproduction, with
               the difference that dumb constraints play an even more decisive role in the fate of
                  Agrippa. The crux of the challenge for hackers in
               1992 was how to take a complex, auto-destructive, and cross-media work of art stored
               on a 3.5” floppy; copy it; and reformat it for online distribution prior to the era
               of the graphical web browser and at a time when ASCII was still the predominant
               currency of the internet. The crude hack they devised allowed Agrippa to survive as a text-only fragment on the network for sixteen
               years, creating the pre-conditions for its eventual emulation by Matthew
               Kirschenbaum, Doug Reside, and Alan Liu in late 2008.See . 
            
            
               Agrippa was co-authored by the writer William Gibson and
               the artist Dennis Ashbaugh, and published by Kevin Begos, Jr. in 1992. Described in
               contemporary press releases as a multi-unit artwork, it is difficult to classify, both physically and
               generically . It was originally sold in
               two versions: the deluxe version came wrapped in a shroud, its cover artificially
               aged and its pages scorched – time-burned, like the photo album described in
               Gibson’s poem, which functions as the central node of the work. Inside are etchings
               by Ashbaugh and double columns of DNA that ostensibly encode the genome of a fruitfly
                  . Nestled in the center of the book is a
               3 ½ inch floppy disk that contains a poem by Gibson, a meditation on time, memory,
               and decay. Its governing metaphor is that of the mechanism
               a trope, notes Matthew
               Kirschenbaum, that manifests itself
                  as a photograph album, a Kodak camera, a pistol, and a traffic light, as well as
                  in less literal configurations
               . Agrippa,
               among other things, is about our misplaced faith in the permanence and objectivity of
               media. Like human memories, media distort, invent, and erase the very objects they’re
               designed to preserve: handwriting fades and becomes illegible, photographs break the
               fourth wall by constantly reminding us of the world that lies just outside the
               picture frame, and inert technological artifacts put up no resistance when new ones
               come along to replace or destroy them. Paradoxically, the speaker of the poem takes
               recourse in his own recollections to supplement the incomplete records of the past,
               records that were originally intended to compensate for the limitations of memory. By
               such a process, he tries to recapture, for instance, the smells of the saw-mill once
               owned by his father, whose tumbled boards
                  and offcuts are pictured in an old photograph .
               Drawing on a synaesthetic imagination, he uses the visual stimulus to prompt an
               olfactory memory. This complex interplay between mechanism and memory structures the
               poem as a whole and shapes its manifold meanings.
            
               Agrippa’s core themes are expressed through form as well
               as content: some of Ashbaugh’s etchings are overlaid with images printed in uncured
               toner, which are inevitably smudged and distort those beneath and facing them when
               the pages are turned . More stunningly, as
               has been often described, Gibson’s electronic poem is encrypted to scroll
               automatically down the screen once before being irrevocably lost, its text
               disappearing after a single reading. Agrippa is
               therefore subjected, like all material objects, to the forces of decay, but here
               those forces are manufactured rather than natural, causing the work to disintegrate
               at an accelerated rate. Ashbaugh, in particular, took considerable delight in
               anticipating how this volatility would confound librarians, archivists, and
               conservators: as Gavin Edwards explains, to register the book's copyright, Ashbaugh
                  would need to send two copies to the
                  Library of Congress. To classify it, they . . . [would] have to read it, and to
                  read it, they . . . [would have to] destroy it.
               . Significantly, however, it was not the librarians who
               found a workaround to the problem, but the pirates. On December 9, 1992, a group of
               New York University students, including one using the pseudonym of Rosehammer
               and another that of Templar, secretly video-recorded a live public performance
               of Agrippa at The Americas Society, an art gallery and
               experimental performance space in New York City. After transcribing the poem, they
               uploaded it as a plain ASCII text to MindVox, a notorious NYC Bulletin Board, the Hells Angels of Cyberspace,
               according to Wikipedia, where it was readily available for download and quickly
               proliferated across the web. 
            
               The Hack, as the incident has come to be called, is told
               with the hard-boiled suspense of a detective story by Matthew Kirschenbaum, who
               uncovered the details while working on his award-winning book Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination. For Kirschenbaum, the
               creation of the surreptitious recording marked a fork in the road for the NYU
               students: What, he
               asks, were Rosehammer and
                  Templar to do with their bootleg video [my emphasis] . In 1992, of course, uploading the actual footage to
                  the Internet would have been impossible to contemplate from the standpoint of
                  storage and bandwidth (let alone with available means of playback). Therefore,
                  just the text of Gibson’s poem was manually transcribed and posted to the MindVox
                  BBS as a plain-text ASCII file, which allowed it to propagate rapidly across
                  bulletin boards, listservs, newsgroups, and FTP sites. Today, however, the footage
                  would have undoubtedly been posted direct to YouTube, Google Video . . . or some
                  other streaming media site, eliminating the need for scribal mediation. It is
                  worth remarking, then, that the brilliant act of low-tech, manual, and analog
                  transcription through which Rosehammer and Templar accomplished their hack
                  of Agrippa (analog video copied by hand as text)
                  ineluctably dates Agrippa as the product of a certain
                  technological moment at the cusp between old and new media .
            
            In the final analysis, network throughput served as the arbiter of significant
               properties, forcing the hackers to attempt to distill Agrippa down to its essence: a static 305-line
                  semi-autobiographical poem. If this austere version seems wholly incapable
               of functioning as a proper surrogate for the original, then it’s worth underscoring
               the role it played in bringing about the revival of Agrippa through high-fidelity emulation of the software program.
               Reflecting on the web-based Agrippa Files archive where
               the disk image of the program now lives, Kirschenbaum explains its significance:
                  These materials . . . offer a
                  kind of closure to anyone who, like me, has ever stumbled across the text of
                     Agrippa on the open net and wondered, but how did
                  it get there? Those mechanisms are now known and documented. So we take
                  satisfaction in the release of these new Agrippa
                     files (as it were) to scholars and fans alike, and we marvel that after
                  sixteen years in the digital wild a frail trellis of electromagnetic code once
                  designed to disappear continues to persist and to perform. 
               
            
            The example of Agrippa reminds us that preservation
               sometimes courts moderate (and even extreme) loss as a hedge against total extinctive
               loss. It also indirectly shows us the importance of distributing the burden of
               preservation among the past, present, and future, with posterity enlisted as a
               preservation partner. However weak the information signal we send down the conductor
               of history, it may one day be amplified by a later age. 
            
               Recommendations
               The Recommendations section of this paper
                  reproduces, with a few modifications, portions of the Intellectual Property and Digital Preservation: Widening the
                     Discussion section of the Preserving Virtual Worlds Final Report, which
                  Kraus and Donahue collaborated on with other members of the PVW team. The report
                  was issued as a white paper to the Library of Congress' National Digital
                  Information Infrastructure for Preservation Program. Co-authored with Jerome
                  McDonough (first author; all other authors grouped by institution), Robert
                  Oldendorf (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign); Matthew Kirschenbaum, Kari
                  Kraus, Doug Reside, Rachel Donahue (University of Maryland); Andrew Phelps and
                  Christopher Egert (Rochester Institute of Technology); Henry Lowood and Susan Rojo
                  (Stanford University). September 2011 http://hdl.handle.net/2142/17097
               
               There is a need for memory institutions interested in establishing video game
                  repositories to support policy positions and offer services that are better
                  aligned with the preservation and use practices of the game community, not only
                  because of the potential for integrating the members of this community into the
                  larger preservation network, but also because their attitudes and values may well
                  influence those of professional archivists in years to come. With their deep
                  curatorial investment in games, players have adopted a versatile set of approaches
                  for collecting, managing, and providing long-term access to these cultural
                  artifacts. While bitstream preservation and emulation are an essential part of the
                  overall picture to which gamers have made enormous contributions, so too are
                  re-releases, remakes, demakes, ports, mods, and ROM hacks.
                     Remake and demake are game design terms coined by Ian Bogost. As
                     defined by Bogost, remakes are recreations of earlier works, irrespective of the hardware platform of
                        original creation or recreation. Conversely, demakes are retro-inspired reimaginings of modern games, as if they had been created on
                        earlier hardware. Demakes are not necessarily created to run on older
                        machines, but their design and behavior are constrained by the real or
                        perceived constraints of vintage systems. See Bogost’s spring 2010
                     syllabus for Atari Hacks, Remakes and Demakes: Special
                        Topics in Game Design and Analysis, available at http://www.bogost.com/teaching/atari_hacks_remakes_and_demake.shtml.
                  As a result, game archives in the wild often reflect notions of authenticity that
                  are different from those of memory institutions.
                     Archives in the wild is a phrase coined by Jeremy John, et al. in the
                     British Library’s Digital Lives / Personal Digital
                        Archives for the 21st Century: An Initial Synthesis (3 March 2010)
                     Beta Version 0.2 http://britishlibrary.typepad.co.uk/files/digital-lives-synthesis02-1.pdf.
                   While the dominant orientation of archivists is toward the stabilizing of
                  cultural records, gamers can tolerate, and indeed embrace, greater variability in
                  the objects with which they interact.A notable exception to this argument,
                     however, is the Software Preservation Society, founded in 2001 by videogame
                     enthusiasts. SPS, whose mission is to preserve original game releases, has
                     issued several diatribes against hacked, cracked, pirated, and otherwise
                     altered versions of games. See The Software Preservation Society, The Importance of Digital Preservation
                     http://www.softpres.org/article:importance_of_digital_preservation.
                   The Mario Brothers franchise, for example, has persevered largely because
                  of the consumer appetite for new and altered game levels, powerups, graphics,
                  characters, and items. The softer view of authenticity that underlies these
                  strategies operates at what Seamus Ross would call a lower threshold of verisimilitude
                  . 
               What policy initiatives and preservation services might be adopted in response to
                  the needs, practices, and perspectives of players and player-archivists? We
                  propose the following:
               
                  Digital Preservation Services: Comparative Methods and Stemmatics
                  In addition to providing authenticated capture, ingest, hashing, and storage
                     services for archival copies of games, digital repositories might also offer
                     appropriate services for access copies of games in the wild. Because these
                     copies are often modified rather than fixed representations and in line with
                     the softer canons of authenticity previously mentioned, repositories
                     could provide users and player-archivists with the means to analyze, document,
                     and measure their inter-relationships using similarity metrics and other
                     approaches.
                  Applying the techniques of digital stemmatics, archivists could help users
                     visualize and interpret these patterns in sophisticated ways. Developed in the
                     19th Century, stemmatics codified a set of methods for analyzing the filiation
                     of literary manuscripts. Significantly, the tree structures representing these
                     relationships have parallel importance in evolutionary biology and historical
                     linguistics, where they are used to group genomes or languages into families;
                     show how they relate to one another in genealogical terms; and reconstruct lost
                     archetypes . Speculating on the role of digital
                     stemmatics (or phylogenetics, as the comparative method is called in biology)
                     in the context of personal digital archives, Jeremy John of the British Library
                     has postulated that future
                        researchers will be able to create phylogenetic networks or trees from
                        extant personal digital archives, and to determine the likely composition of
                        ancestral personal archives and the ancestral state of the personal digital
                        objects themselves
                     . 
                  Stemmatic methods have already been applied to board games: Joseph Needham, a
                     pioneering historian of East Asian science, technology, and culture, published
                     a family tree of board games connecting divination, liubo, and chess through a
                     long line of ancestry and descent ; and
                     biologist Alex Kraaijeveld has applied phylogenetics to variants of chess to
                     help determine its place of origin . The methodology therefore shows great promise for the study of video and
                     computer games in the wild, where variability rather than fixity of
                     representation is often the norm.
                  Two other tools cited recently by Jeremy John are also relevant in this
                     context:
                  
                     
                        ccHost – an open-source content management system developed
                        under the auspices of Creative Commons that can be used to track and
                        document how media content is used, reused, and transformed on the web.
                        (ccMixter, the popular music site for remixing and sharing audio samples, is
                        powered by ccHost.)Information about ccHost and ccMixter can be found
                           online at http://wiki.creativecommons.org/CcHost and http://ccmixter.org/. See also
                              
                           .
                     
                     
                        Comparator – a tool developed by Planets (Preservation and
                        Long-term Access through Networked Services), a four-year project funded in
                        part by the European Union. Comparator is designed to measure degrees of
                        similarity between different versions of a digital object. For more on
                           PLANETS, see http://www.planets-project.eu/about/
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Digital Preservation Services: Calculating Trust in Fan-Run Game
                     Repositories
                  Because game archives in the wild cannot usually be authenticated according to
                     standard integrity checks, an alternative method for evaluating the
                     authenticity of their holdings might involve the application of trust-based
                     information. Jennifer Golbeck, for example, has demonstrated how the trust
                     relationships expressed in web-based social networks can be calculated and used
                     to develop end-user services, such as film recommendations and email filtering
                        . Applying Golbeck’s insights, archivists could
                     leverage the trust values in online game communities as the basis for judgments
                     about the authority or utility of relevant user-run repositories, such as
                     abandonware sites and game catalogs. Under this scenario, authenticity is a
                     function of community trust in the content being provided. One consequence of
                     this approach is that authenticity and mutability need not be considered
                     mutually exclusive terms; on the contrary, fan-run game repositories that make
                     provisions for transformational use of game assets — such as altering the
                     appearance of avatars or inventory items — might in many instances increase
                     trust ratings.
               
            
            
               Coda
               In her book Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and
                     How They Can Change the World, veteran game designer Jane McGonigal
                  argues that far from jeopardizing
                     our future, as author Mark Bauerlein would have it , video and massively multiplayer online games have
                  the potential to help us solve some of the world’s most pressing challenges, from
                  energy crises to climate change to global hunger. Game design isn’t just technological craft,
                  she says, it’s a
                     twenty-first-century way of collaborating, thinking, problem-solving,
                  and changing attitudes and behavior . As a
                  proof of concept, McGonigal has spent the last several years developing and
                  implementing a number of highly influential Alternate Reality Games – including
                     World Without Oil, , and Evoke – whose collective purpose is to arrive at creative solutions to our most urgent social
                     problems
                  through planetary-scale
                     collaboration
                   Urgent Evoke: About the Evoke Game, 27 January
                     2010, posted by Alchemy http://blog.urgentevoke.net/2010/01/27/about-the-evoke-game/; Jane
                     McGonigal, Biography
                     http://www.avantgame.com/bio.htm. . Although the games have
                  spawned a gripping counterfactual record of convincing antidotes to and scenarios
                  of near-future epidemics and calamities, none of them, McGonigal has remarked, in
                  referring to the entire universe of MMO and video games, not just her own, have saved the real world yet.
                  
               
               Or have they?
               Vincent Joguin, an expert in computer emulation, was an avid gamer and demoscene
                  programmer in the 1990s, producing so-called intros to
                  cracked games, organizing demoscene parties, and later helping to develop a number
                  of widely used emulators for classic home computer and console systems, including
                  the Atari ST.Vincent Joguin Home Page
                     http://vincent.joguin.com/;
                     Joguin, Keep — Major European Research Project on
                        Emulation, Game_Preservation listserv, 7 February 2009 http://six.pairlist.net/pipermail/game_preservation/2009-February/000859.html;
                        Meet KEEP People at the Assembly, KEEP website
                     22 July 2009 http://www.keep-project.eu/ezpub2/index.php?/eng/About-KEEP/News/Meet-KEEP-people-at-the-Assembly;
                     ARTtech Seminar Speakers, Vincent Joguin, Summer
                     2009 http://www.assembly.org/summer09/seminars/speakers; Joguin,
                     conversation with the author (Kraus) 5 July 2010, at the Digital Lives Research
                     Seminar, Authenticity, Forensics, Materiality, Virtuality
                        and Emulation: Advances in the Curatorship and Scholarship of Personal
                        Digital Archives, Personal Digital Manuscripts Project at the
                     British Library http://britishlibrary.typepad.co.uk/digital_lives/2010/07/index.html
                   In 2009, Joguin and his collaborators secured external funding for an
                  ambitious project to create emulation-based preservation services and technologies
                  in partnership with a number of renowned European institutions and the already
                  extant PLANETS initiative.Keep Project (Keeping Emulation Environments
                     Portable), funded by the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme for
                     Research and Technological Development (FP7), 2009 http://www.keep-project.eu/ezpub2/index.php
                   One component of the system is Dioscuri, an emulator that is modular in
                  design: modularity in this context means that a range of standard hardware
                  components have each been individually emulated, creating a collection of
                  mini-emulators that in theory can be combined and extended in myriad ways to mimic
                  almost any imaginable computer architecture. Joguin’s signature contribution,
                  however, is a virtual computer small and simple enough to be continuously ported
                  to new platforms. One virtue of Olonys, as the system is called, is that it in
                  effect liberates emulators such as Dioscuri from hardware-specific environments,
                  allowing them to execute on any computer. It thus addresses one of the great
                  paradoxes of preservation through emulation: the need to create meta-emulators to
                  run already existing emulators, whose host systems will themselves expire in
                     time.For more on Dioscuri and Olonys within the context of the KEEP
                     project, see KEEP, Beyond the State of the Art,
                     http://www.keepproject.eu/ezpub2/index.php?/eng/About-KEEP/Technical-solution/Progress-beyond-the-state-of-the-art.
               
               In its broad strokes, the trajectory of Joguin’s career – from video game
                  enthusiast to programmer hobbyist to dedicated digital preservationist – is
                  recapitulated in the trajectories of countless numbers of players, who over the
                  last two decades or more have been modeling community-driven practices and
                  solutions to collecting, documenting, accessing, and rendering video games,
                  arguably the most culturally resonant digital artifacts of our time. As we have
                  seen, there is no shortage of preservation challenges with which to contend: bit
                  rot, the scourge of technological obsolescence; the parasitic reliance of software
                  programs on code libraries supplied by the operating system and other software
                  packages; and the growing number of digital collections sitting on shifting foundations of silicon, rust,
                     and plastic as one writer has ominously expressed it . Complex interactive computer games represent the
                     limit case of what we can do with digital preservation. If we can
                  figure out how to keep a classic first-person shooter alive, we’ll have a better
                  idea of how to preserve computational simulations of genetic evolution, climate
                  change, or the galactic behavior of star systems. Just as importantly, we’ll also
                  have the technical and social knowledge to maintain the billions of quotidian
                  electronic records — emails, memos, still images, sound files, videos, e-books,
                  instant messages — that constitute the collective memory of our civilization. 
               To speak of the contribution of gamers exclusively in the future tense, however,
                  is to fail to do justice to the scope and ingenuity of their accomplishments thus
                  far, as demonstrated in this paper. The
                     internet is populated with legions of amateur digital archivists,
                     archaeologists, and resurrectionists, wrote Stewart Brand of the Long
                  Now Foundation more than a decade ago . He went
                  on to elaborate: They track down the
                     original code for lost treasures such as Space
                        Invaders (1978), Pac-Man (1980), and
                        Frogger (1981), and they collaborate on
                     devising emulation software that lets the primordial programs play on
                     contemporary machines. The . . . techniques pioneered by such vernacular
                        programmers are at present the most promising path to a long-term platform
                        migration solution . . . such massively distributed research can convene
                        enormous power. (emphasis added) .
               
               It is no accident that this tribute to the heroic efforts of the player community
                  comes at the conclusion of a chapter entitled Ending the
                     Digital Dark Ages. For Brand, video games serve as a skeleton key for
                  unlocking the complexities of digital preservation, empowering us to prevent an
                  epochal digital black hole. The import of his message is clear: for love of
                  space invaders and bonus fruits, of rescuing the girl and fighting and defeating
                  the boss; for love of treasure, power-ups, and sprites; for love of all these
                  things, players have been inspired to save our video game inheritance. But in the
                  process of salvaging these fragile 8-bit worlds, they have also helped save some
                  of the real world. Like the technology trees found in popular strategy games,
                  where the acquisition of one technology is dependent on that of another, the
                  solution to any of the superthreats conjured by McGonigal, from pandemics to fuel
                  shortages to mass exile, is predicated on methods for reliably transmitting
                  legacies of knowledge from one generation to the next. When those legacies are
                  encoded as bitstreams, it is video game players who have been in the vanguard of
                  figuring out how to do it, bolstering McGonigal’s assertion that gamers are a
                  precious human resource that we can
                     use to do real-world work 
                  . 
               
                  Games can save the world, Jane McGonigal
                  emphatically tells us.
               Jane, they already have.
            
         
