Title:  Best Practices: Teaching Typographic Principles
                    to Digital Humanities Audiences
Volume:  012
Issue:  4
Date:  4 February 2019
Abstract:  
                
                Typography, the arrangement and use of type, permeates our visual landscape, from
                    printed pages and digital interfaces to physical environments and interactive
                    experience. Those who study and work in the digital humanities are called upon
                    to make typographic choices everyday, yet few have any training in how to
                    effectively design with type. Over the past several years, I have been involved
                    in several initiatives that seek to help educate digital humanities scholars,
                    technologists and students about the value of information design, including
                    typography. This paper will discuss these experiences and some guiding
                    principles for helping a digital humanities audience understand the basic
                    principles of typography and apply them to their projects and research.
            
Full Body Text: 


                Introduction
                While digital tools allow digital humanities scholars and publics to analyze and
                    display information in new ways, a focus on the interface and information design
                    of these tools is often overlooked. Design education models are often
                    preoccupied with examining teaching methods for educating future professional
                    designers , while ignoring how to introduce design
                    principles to those outside of traditional design disciplines, including the
                    digital humanities. From word-processing and blog theme customization to data
                    visualization and interface design, those engaged with digital humanities
                    research and teaching activities interact with the visual formatting of
                    text-based information in a variety of contexts. Based on my current research
                    into the role of visual communication and information design in the digital
                    humanities, many digital humanities practitioners, who do not have a formal
                    training in design, are called upon to make typographic choices for their
                    projects, yet do not have a solid understanding about how to make these
                    decisions. This paper will discuss some basic principles of typography as well
                    as the approaches I have taken when teaching these principles in a workshop
                    environment for digital humanities audiences. I will discuss some of the
                    challenges, as well as opportunities, of providing a basic awareness of
                    typography and its significance to design practices in the digital
                    humanities.
            

                The role of design in the digital humanities
                Digital humanists must become, at the very least, familiar with basic design
                    principles and the breadth of practices, ranging from interface design and
                    typographic design, to data visualization and information architecture . Tools such as Omeka, Tableau or Mapbox help
                    democratize visual presentation while providing existing templates, color
                    palettes, and typographic styles that limit the amount of information design
                    choices one needs to make. Are designated designers even necessary?
                Prior to my engagement with the digital humanities, my creative research focused
                    on future implications for typography in digital environments. I was introduced
                    to the digital humanities by a colleague in theatre history who needed an
                    interface designer to collaborate on a web-based historical timeline tool. After
                    what felt like a crash course in current digital humanities practices and
                    discourse, I attended a THATCamp in 2012 and offered a session entitled, Where are all the artists and designers? (http://amypapaelias.com/thatcampne2012/wherearealltheartists.html).
                    In Summer 2013, I participated in One Week One Tool (http://oneweekonetool.org/), an
                    NEH-funded Institute for Advanced Topics in the Digital Humanities, hosted at
                    the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media at George Mason University
                    that brought together twelve participants from diverse fields to create a
                    digital humanities tool in 5 days. As the sole graphic designer on the team, it
                    was clear that working with a designer helped many of the humanities-based
                    participants understand the value design can bring to digital projects . Designers and design principles can play a positive
                    role within the context of digital humanities scholarship and public projects,
                    yet participation and knowledge is limited. 
            

                Why is typography important?
                Historical descriptions of good typography tend to describe
                    it as 
                        invisible
                        
                    . Like many designed experiences, we often don’t notice what works until
                    we notice something that glaringly doesn’t. The way type is arranged and
                    information is organized impacts audience comprehension and engagement, both in
                    print and in digital forms. Within the field of information design, typography
                    functions as a visual system for organizing and structuring text-based content
                        .
                Humanists have embraced a variety of digital tools and their interfaces and
                    outputs without questioning their forms and values through the humanist's
                    critical lens . The division of labor between the
                    author / publisher has traditionally separated these tasks: research and writing
                    and publishing and distribution. With the possibilities of self-publishing
                    digital projects, the division between writing-designing-disseminating becomes
                    blurred. Digital humanities research and public projects rely on a host of tools
                    and applications that allow for some customization but most practitioners put
                    little emphasis on the basic principles of typographic design. We may assume
                    that the typographic choices already set forth within these tools and
                    applications are satisfactory without considering better alternatives. We may
                    accept that the typography of digital scholarship projects is sufficient to the
                    user’s experience without understanding basic typographic principles.
                Several years before the rise of web font services (Typekit or Google Fonts),
                    Oliver Reichenstein, designer and founder of Information Architects, wrote a
                    popular essay entitled, Web Design is 95%
                        Typography
                    . In the essay, he concurs with web designer
                    Cameron Moll that text on the web should be treated as 
                        a user interface
                        
                    , and that information designers are doing the work of traditional
                    typographers (setting type in preparation for a printing job), but perhaps
                    without the proper knowledge or training. Ten years later, and despite the great
                    wave of browser support for web fonts, responsive design  and countless resources for typography on the web,
                    the implementation of typographic principles within digital scholarship remains
                    limited. Good typography helps give form to an argument, and an awareness of
                    typographic principles applied to digital environments is paramount.
                As an example, Tableau, a data visualization software platform used by many
                    digital humanities scholars and students, commissioned a custom typeface that is
                    utilized in a variety of visualization contexts, from tables and bar charts to
                    maps and timelines. 
                        Without having to think about
                            it, our users should create legible, meaningful text that informs and
                            expands on the visual expression of their data
                        
                    . By commissioning a typeface designed for the specific contexts of a data
                    visualization platform, Tableau is making typography a priority in its visual
                    design.
                Scholarly publications and journals have always maintained a level of design and
                    typographic neutrality in order to, perhaps intentionally, distinguish
                    themselves from more popular or commercial venues .
                    Consider the differences in reading experience between this journal (Digital Humanities Quarterly) and The Atlantic or Wired. What does the
                    difference in tone imply about the importance of teaching and understanding
                    information design within the context of the digital humanities? If typography
                    does exist to honor content , humanities scholars
                    should be concerned with how information is visually presented in digital
                    environments for a wide range of audiences.
            

                Typography for [digital] humanists workshop
                In February 2016, I offered a free workshop, Typography for
                        [digital] Humanists, through NYC DH Week 2016. The title of this
                    workshop was inspired by the book, Typography for
                        Lawyers, by Matthew Butterick . Both a
                    lawyer and a type designer, Butterick’s book is a no-nonsense field guide for a
                    profession that is intimately involved in document typesetting with little
                    concern, historically, for best practices. The workshop was held at the Fordham
                    Graduate Center in Manhattan and attracted 15 participants. Workshop attendees
                    included librarians, humanities graduate students, instructional technologists
                    and web developers, with a wide range of technical skill levels and personal
                    goals. With only 2 hours, the workshop was divided into four parts: 
                        Typeface selection in digital projects
                        Basic typographic principles
                        Discussion and analysis of examples
                        Overview of typography tools and demonstration
                     Following is a detailed discussion on these four sections of the
                    workshop.
                
                    Workshop Part #1. Typeface selection in digital projects
                    Choose a good type family, one with extensive character support and a
                            variety of styles gives you design flexibility.
                    We have more typefaces available for use in digital projects than ever
                        before. Selecting a typeface can feel like a daunting task, whether limited
                        to our font menus or searching distributors or foundries. When choosing a
                        typeface for a specific project, we want to make sure we are choosing fonts
                        that have a full character set with necessary accents, punctuation and
                        numerals, including extended language support. While it is popular to
                        criticize Comic Sans for its overuse and playful, childish feel, it is a
                        useful example for discussing how to begin talking about the visual tone we
                        are trying to set with our typeface selection. In the workshop, I ask
                        attendees to pick a typeface like they are choosing an outfit: what’s the
                        occasion? How are you feeling? What is the weather like? An appropriate
                        typeface choice is relative to the content. Next, I go over some basic type
                        classifications (including serif, sans, decorative, script, etc.), which can
                        help when searching for typefaces. Body text, display text, UI text, and
                        tabular data are each different kinds of content where certain typefaces may
                        work better than others . Typefaces with obvious,
                        visual personality (like Comic Sans) generally only work for very specific
                        situations and are not the best choice when the reader is trying to absorb
                        complex information. I give an example of Source Sans by Paul J. Hunt,
                        Adobe’s first open source typeface. Source Sans is a large type family with
                        many different styles (from very light to very heavy and italic of all of
                        these weights). I use Source Sans in a lively type specimen I created, to
                        show that even a simple, sans-serif typeface can feel playful but still
                        related by using multiple weights from the same type family. 
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    Workshop Part #2. Basic typographic principles
                    Contrast [in size, weight and style] creates hierarchy. To demonstrate this,
                        I show the attendees a phrase set in one typeface in one weight. In the
                        example, the hierarchy of visual information is even. The same style is used
                        throughout (it’s all italic), the same weight of the typeface and the same
                        size. In some cases, we are striving for an even reading experience (think
                        long paragraphs of text). However, what happens when we take that same
                        phrase and incorporate contrast, in size, weight and style?
                    
                        
                    
                    In the next example, we can see how a shift in size or weight creates a sense
                        of visual hierarchy, placing emphasis in specific places. I also remind
                        participants that this is still the typeface we looked at previously, Source
                        Sans. In digital projects, levels of visual hierarchy are absolutely crucial
                        to the display of complex information, especially on the web. Hierarchy is
                        already built into our web-based projects (HTML tags <p>, <h1>,
                        <a>) and style sheets allow us to customize these elements through
                        contrast of weight, size and style of type.
                    
                        
                    
                    Negative space is a term that helps describe the absence of content or
                            white space that plays a vital role in readability and visual
                        interest. It is a natural inclination to want to fill the
                            page with content but in fact, our eyes and brains appreciate
                        it when there are ample amounts of margins and negative space to give a
                        visual pause when needed.
                    Here, I show an example of a paragraph of text that is taking up the entire
                        width of the screen. There is negative space between the lines of text, but
                        it is quite monotonous and doesn’t do much to give a needed visual pause as
                        we are reading. I then show the same paragraph, this time presenting the
                        text with a shorter line length and more uneven negative space on the page.
                        There is now less space between the line, so that most of the negative space
                        is relegated to the right side of the screen. Even though it is
                        approximately the same amount of space, it is far more dynamic and easier to
                        read. I also show how I divided the space using a very simple three column
                        grid. A grid is a powerful and fairly simple way to organize information.
                        Establishing grid guidelines helps make decisions that will make your
                        content easier to read.
                    
                        
                    
                    Typographic details, including the conventions of typesetting punctuation,
                        spacing, and alignment, are important for longer reading experiences. These
                        rules and details are considered by professional designers and create a
                        reading experience that is controlled and comfortable, without much thought
                        or consideration by the reader. Many times, a professional designer makes
                        typographic decisions not only on specific, dictated rules, but on what
                        feels right for the situation. Typography, while dictated by some
                        fundamental rules, is still contextual, subjective and interpretive.
                
                
                    Workshop Part #3. Discussion and Analysis
                    Analyzing a web interface and describing the visual hierarchy can help one
                        gain an understanding of typographic principles. We practiced this with
                        several examples of website home pages for non-profit and public agencies to
                        review some of the discussed principles. I asked the participants to
                        consider the following open-ended questions when looking at the examples:
                            
                            In this example, how is hierarchy
                                created?
                            In this example, what feeling is the type
                                    conveying?
                            In this example, how is negative space being
                                    utilized?
                        
                    
                        
                    
                    For example, we reviewed Audubon.org. First, we analyzed the number of type
                        treatments we found on the homepage. Although the page initially looks quite
                        simple (a menu, a large full window image, a caption), we discovered that
                        there are over 10 different typographic treatments on that one screen. We
                        discussed how the size, color, typeface selection, alignment and spacing of
                        each treatment affects one another and how deliberate these decisions are in
                        order to make the page feel simple. The more
                        information we add (scrolling down on the site, we discover paragraphs,
                        columns, maps, and other content), the more we begin to identify the
                        relationships between each of these decisions regarding hierarchy, typeface
                        selection, contrast and negative space. The ability to explain not only
                        whether something works but why it works, is a skill that can be cultivated
                        through practice and exposure. These questions help frame a valuable
                        discussion on identifying successful typographic principles in practice.
                
                
                    Workshop Part #4. Typography tools and demonstrations
                    At the end of the workshop, I present some current resources and digital
                        tools for experimenting with typography on the web. Participants were able
                        to practice basic principles of typographic hierarchy through contrasts of
                        weight and styles, within the browser. TypeCast is a web-based tool that
                        allows the user to test typefaces in the browser. For the purposes of this
                        workshop, it worked as a simple way to experiment with typographic hierarchy
                        in context. As of 2018, TypeCast, while still available online, is no longer
                        being supported. This remains a challenge of teaching with free, online
                        tools: maintenance and long-term availability of the tool can shift
                        overnight. A longer workshop with more time for setting up HTML pages and
                        CSS stylesheets would allow for more experimentation with web fonts in
                        context.
                
            

                Workshop approaches and reflection
                In reflecting upon the workshop, several approaches were successful in teaching
                    general concepts. Critiques of existing projects allowed participants to
                    practice the concepts discussed in the workshop related to typeface selection
                    and principles of contrast and hierarchy. Introducing and briefly experimenting
                    with tools and techniques during the workshop helped solidify understanding.
                    Because the workshop was offered to a wide range of people and skill sets, it
                    was important to leave time for individual and small group discussions. Prepared
                    examples of organizations, books and web resources were provided to
                    participants. Workshop slides were made publicly available on SlideShare so that
                    anyone can have access to these resources: http://www.slideshare.net/AmyPapaelias/typography-for-digital-humanists. 
                Although I originally intended to focus on design and formal principles of
                    typography, many attendees were interested in discussing concerns related to
                    professional practice, type use and implementation. For example, type licensing,
                    especially for educational or research contexts with limited budgets, can feel
                    quite complicated and came up in our discussions. As with any digital product,
                    it is important for users to read the end user license agreement if purchasing a
                    font from a foundry or distributor. Attendees were also interested in talking
                    about how to find design collaborators on campus. Creating collaborative
                    projects with design faculty and students has challenges and rewards. This
                    requires time and planning, and clear expectations for all responsibilities, in
                    order to develop successful collaborations. Questions arose about digital labor
                    and fair compensation for work being done by students. A longer or separate
                    workshop topic dealing with professional and practical concerns would be
                    suitable for the audiences.
            

                Conclusion
                When introducing basic typography principles to audiences beyond designers, we
                    must consider the range of practitioners who engage in information design
                    activities: researchers, scholars, developers and professionals. Short workshops
                    on typography for digital humanities audiences can provide a general overview of
                    best practices and demonstrate the value of typography as an important part of
                    creating a visually engaging experience in digital projects. Web-based tools
                    allow participants to experiment and test some basic principles related to
                    typeface selection, hierarchy of information and visual contrast. Exposure to
                    the complexity of typographic choices may encourage digital humanities scholars
                    to include trained designers as collaborators earlier on in project development.
                    Longer workshops, with time for discussion on professional practice and
                    licensing, would ultimately benefit digital humanities researchers and
                    professionals who seek ways to embed typographic best practices into their
                    projects.
            
