Title: N/A
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  02 October 2017
Abstract:  
                
                Recent years have seen widespread interest in digital humanities (DH) and growing
                    interest in undergraduate-centered digital curricula. However, few undergraduate
                    DH programs resemble those at large research institutions, where digital
                    initiatives tend to be housed in graduate programs and rooted in graduate
                    pedagogy or faculty research. Further, no two undergraduate DH programs are
                    alike. This article seeks to move beyond graduate- and faculty-centered models
                    by exploring new possibilities for undergraduate DH initiatives. It describes a
                    workshop held at the ADHO DH2015 conference. This workshop brought together
                    practitioners of digital pedagogy from small liberal arts colleges and from
                    undergraduate centers within larger institutions. This article details the
                    workshop’s exploration of undergraduate DH education, situating those practices
                    in the context of broader trends in digital pedagogy. Finally, this article
                    charts three broad challenges faced by programs which emphasize undergraduate
                    digital curricula and offers suggestions and strategies to address these common
                    issues.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction The authors would like to thank Mark Sample for his
                        guidance and generosity in reading over early drafts; our workshop
                        committee, James Baker, Mark Sample, Jentery Sayers, and Sara Sikes, for
                        providing feedback and planning assistance; the Mellon Foundation and
                        Digital Studies at Davidson College for funding the authors’ travel to
                        DH2015; E.H. Little Library at Davidson College for professional development
                        funding; and Kristen Eshlemen, Jakub Kabala, Andrew Rikard and Bobby Smiley
                        for providing feedback on early drafts. We would also like to thank workshop
                        participants for the contributions to the workshop itself, and for reviewing
                        an early draft of this article.
                The digital humanities began in research projects and at research universities.
                    As a result, both scholarly and popular discussions of digital pedagogy have
                    coalesced around faculty-driven digital humanities labs and graduate digital
                    humanities education 
                    
                    . In these discussions, commentators have tended
                    to focus on supporting digital graduate theses, building Masters and PhD
                    programs, or running training opportunities designed to support faculty research
                        
                    . However, faculty and graduate students are not the
                    only humanities practitioners interested in the digital turn, and graduate
                    programs are not the only spaces in which digital practices happen. Alongside
                    the development of graduate and professional programs, institutions around the
                    world have begun to build curricula that emphasize the digital humanities in
                    undergraduate education. Faculty are not alone in shaping these curricula - they
                    work alongside librarians, archivists, IT specialists, program directors and
                    students themselves. However, there remains little consensus about how those
                    curricula should be developed, who should participate in them, or even what they
                    should cover. See, for example, the kind of funding work done by the
                        Mellon Foundation to support programs in digital scholarship and training.
                            https://mellon.org/programs/higher-education-and-scholarship-humanities/research-universities-and-institutes/
                
                In 2015, we facilitated a workshop at the Alliance of Digital Humanities
                    Association’s (ADHO) Digital Humanities Conference in Sydney, Australia. This
                    workshop - entitled Starting from Scratch: Building Undergraduate #DH
                        Programs - aimed to bring together representatives from programs
                    in Australia, Hong Kong, South Korea, the United Kingdom and the United States.
                    Together, we hoped to map the current state of undergraduate digital humanities
                    practice, identify shared concerns, and propose new practices for future
                    development. This article describes and builds upon the workshop’s findings. It
                    begins by discussing the methodological and conceptual challenges posed by two
                    common models of student digital engagement: the digital
                        native and apprentice-research assistant. It
                    then summarizes the concerns articulated by workshop participants, before
                    suggesting that both the digital native and
                        apprentice researcher models fail to account for the
                    experiences of students, faculty and staff at institutions primarily geared
                    towards undergraduates because at these institutions digital humanities training
                    is often not a precursor to graduate work or future research. 
                Finally, the article elaborates on some of the workshop’s findings, and argues
                    that undergraduate-centered DH should adopt a theoretical model which centers
                    student agency. We argue that programs which foster student agency share certain
                    common practices: 
                
                    They emphasize research collaboration between faculty and students, with
                        an eye towards building skills beyond the classroom.
                    They are often housed in libraries or centers of excellence unmoored from
                        traditional programs, but which are in keeping with liberal arts pedagogy. 
                    They are often highly flexible because they must respond to the particular
                        needs of individual institutions, and because labor at academic institutions
                        is often distributed among faculty, librarians and staff. 
                
                The article closes with a list of long-term suggestions for undergraduate digital
                    humanities programs. Together, we hope that our theoretical discussion as well
                    as the discussion of best practices that came out of the workshop will serve as
                    the beginning of a conversation about what digital humanities undergraduate
                    education does, can and should look like in the future. 
            

                Conceptualizing Undergraduates and Technology
                Underlying our workshop’s discussions - and many other debates about how the
                    digital should inflect education - are questions about students’ relationship to
                    technology. There is, however, little consensus on what precisely that
                    relationship is. The two dominant models - digital native
                    and apprentice-research assistant are in many ways opposed
                    to one another. Additionally, we argue, both fail to account for the digital
                    humanities practiced in undergraduate spaces. 
                As originally conceived by Marc Prensky, digital native was
                    meant as a metaphor to describe why many people in some generations - who
                    Prensky called digital immigrants - feel at
                        sea when faced with digital technologies 
                    . More recently, the phrase has been used to signify
                    someone who has grow[n] up in a digital country,
                    any person born after the widespread adoption of digital technology or as
                    a tech-infused alternative to millennial
                    
                    . In the context of undergraduate pedagogy,
                        digital native can draw attention to very real
                    differences between students and educators. Indeed, students who grew up with an
                    omnipresent internet have different relationships to information access and
                    consumption than did previous generations .
                        Journals like Computers & Education are
                        primarily concerned with questions like these. At the same time,
                        digital native is often used pejoratively and
                    paradoxically, to point out that while students belong to a
                        native generation, they are in fact often less
                    conversant with the workings of technology than their teachers and mentors.
                    According to this narrative, these students are perfectly comfortable engaging
                    with some aspects of the digital humanities – participating in online
                    communities, sharing, hacking, snapping, or forking content – but often don’t
                    understand things that instructors view as basic, such as file structures,
                    differences between printed and digital journals, or the differences between
                    texts and e-mails. This discrepancy between what instructors expect of these
                    digitally native generations, and what the students
                    themselves know has been a challenge for digital humanities pedagogy in
                    undergraduate contexts. 
                The gaps between instructor and student expectations have led scholars to develop
                    to the apprentice-research assistant model of digital
                    humanities pedagogy. This model takes on board the criticisms of
                        digital native and assumes that even smartphone- and
                    text-savvy undergraduates need to be technologically coached in order to do the
                    kinds of digital humanities work required at the college or university level.
                    Accordingly, apprentice-researcher digital humanists are
                    brought onto large, faculty-run projects as research assistants, and then molded
                    into proto-graduate students or proto-faculty primed to explore the new
                    possibilities of future digital humanities scholarship. This model presumes that
                    a large-scale digital humanities lab is the ideal space in which students might
                    learn to do academic work. While such a space might be feasible in the context
                    of a large research university, such approaches are substantially less workable
                    at smaller, undergraduate-centered institutions. The
                        apprentice-research assistant model also assumes an
                    intellectual trajectory that leads to graduate work and the professoriate. Since
                    the liberal arts are predicated on the assumption that humanistic, quantitative,
                    and social scientific researchers produce better citizens, and that these skills
                    should not be reserved to those students who intend to go on to graduate or
                    professional schools, the apprentice digital humanists
                    model often seems at odds with the aims of the liberal arts. See, for
                        example, Duke’s Humanities Lab: http://www.fhi.duke.edu/labs/phd.html
                In addition to the critiques outlined above, neither the
                        apprentice-researcher nor the digital
                        native model suit many undergraduate students’ sense of the
                    digital scholarship they are doing. In fact, their expectations about what
                    constitutes innovative and cutting edge digital humanist projects can differ
                    markedly from instructor expectations. This has an impact on the tools and
                    mediums used for digital projects. For example, while faculty might assume that
                    the best platform for a digital exhibit is Omeka, students may prefer
                    microblogging tools - such as Tumblr, Instagram, Snapchat, and YouTube - when
                    making digital art and scholarship. This should not be a surprising trend, but
                    rather the inevitable result of students’ experiences growing up in a
                    digitally-mediated world. Faculty-designed assigned choice of tools may
                        also reflect the landscape of how other academics are creating digital
                        projects - such as using Omeka or Scalar - and might also include
                        preservation and support concerns that students aren’t made fully aware
                        of.
                
                As with all oppositional models, there is a middle ground between the
                        apprentice-researcher and digital
                        native frames. Adeline Koh recently contended that everyone is
                        already a digital humanist, whether or not [they] know it, because we
                    and our students all use technology in [our] daily lives. She went on to
                    note that 
                        at its best, the digital humanities is about engaging
                            more critically with the intersections between technology and how we
                            act, think and learn
                        
                    . Similarly, Ryan Cordell argues that while students are inherently
                    embedded in webs of digital humanities meaning, they do not care about DH
                            qua DH. Rather, they see value in the skills that often
                    fall under the digital humanities umbrella, but are frustrated by the ways in
                    which 
                        the priorities, required skills, and reward structures
                            of their disciplines have shifted under their feet in ways they cannot
                            account or adjust for
                        
                    . In short, although students use digital tools, they have no training for
                    how to use those tools in academic contexts. 
            

                The Workshop
                The variety of conceptions surrounding undergraduate roles within DH work
                    together to confound the development of undergraduate humanities programs. Not
                    only must undergraduate digital humanities programs subscribe to the mission
                    statements and goals of their home institutions, they must also be pitched to
                    attract student populations who seem simultaneously digitally native and
                    uninformed, deeply digital but also disengaged. The Starting from
                        Scratch workshop grew out of discussions among the authors, our
                    colleagues, and other educators about the myriad ways in which undergraduate
                    digital humanities education was developing. The workshop was planned by
                        Shrout and Christian-Lamb, with feedback from their DH 2015 pre-conference
                        workshop committee, which consisted of the authors, as well as James Baker
                        (University of Sussex, UK), Mark Sample (Davidson College, USA), Jentery
                        Sayers (University of Victoria, Canada), and Sara Sikes (Massachusetts
                        Historical Society, USA).  DH2015 presented us with the opportunity
                    to bring those educators together, to lay out some of the central concerns that
                    preoccupy undergraduate digital pedagogy, and to begin to build a list of best
                    practices for building digital curricula. 
                Workshop participants negotiated some of the apparent contradictions outlined
                    above by rejecting models which pitted students and instructors against one
                    another, or which presumed an inexorable path towards graduate school. Instead,
                    they embraced strategies that centered student agency, rejected of siloed
                    fields, and innovatively explored ways of integrating the digital into extant
                    liberal arts structures.
                In preparation for this workshop, we solicited participants from
                    undergraduate-centered institutions around the world, and from as wide a range
                    of geographical locations as possible. These included representatives from
                    Europe, Asia, North America and Australia. We strove to include
                    practitioners in many roles within digital initiatives. These included faculty,
                    students, librarians, archivists, instructional technologists, IT professionals
                    and program directors. Finally, we sought contributions from colleagues who
                    could not attend the workshop, but who were interested in participating in a
                    preliminary discussion. Workshop participants and the contributors to the
                        preliminary discussion consisted of Anelise Hanson Shrout (Davidson College,
                        USA), Caitlin Christian-Lamb (Davidson College, USA), Erik Simpson (Grinnell
                        College, USA), Sayre Greenfield (University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg,
                        USA), Joanna Hare (City University of Hong Kong), Simon Burrows (University
                        of Western Sydney, Australia), Paul Gooding (University of East Anglia, UK),
                        Juan Steyn (North-West University, Potchefstroom campus, South Africa),
                        Elizabeth Hale (University of New England, Australia), Kyunghoon Jung (Ajou
                        University, South Korea), MyoungSuk Kwak (Ajou University, South Korea),
                        YeBeet Jang (Ajou University, South Korea), James Baker (University of
                        Sussex, UK), Ryan Cordell (Northeastern University, USA), and Sara Sikes
                        (Massachusetts Historical Society, USA). We asked this group to contribute
                        to a shared Zotero library to compile the most current and relevant sources
                        for undergraduate digital humanities pedagogy. We also asked them to provide
                        case studies describing how their undergraduate digital humanities programs
                        began and are structured, and to identify pedagogies, challenges and
                        questions they wanted the workshop to address. See the library here: https://www.zotero.org/groups/starting_from_scratch. During the
                        pre-workshop discussions and during the workshop itself, participants were
                        asked to contribute to a collaborative note-taking document, which the
                        editors then synthesized into a coherent set of comments and concerns. The
                        document is available here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WZX6aZh_lfF5pbp7zOnVPMoafiakLV0-41usMJxjwUA/edit?usp=sharing
                    
                Participants in the pre-workshop discussion were interested in exploring the ways
                    in which the pedagogical needs of undergraduate institutions and
                    undergraduate-centered digital humanities programs differed from those of larger
                    research universities; the challenges that undergraduate-focused DH programs
                    faced around the world; and how the discussions about digital humanities taking
                    place on liberal arts campuses related to broader questions that animated the
                    field of digital pedagogy. While some concerns were nationally specific, there
                    were many similarities across countries and regions. 
                Participants’ concerns fell into three broad categories: how to shape digital
                    humanities pedagogy to fit with undergraduate curricula, how the digital
                    humanities fit within the liberal arts, and how to distribute labor among the
                    many different digital humanities practitioners on undergraduate campuses. After
                    articulating these general concerns, participants worked through design-thinking
                    exercises and formal discussions to link the identified problems with local
                    challenges, collaborate on strategies for particular problems, and define common
                    principles and pedagogical reasoning. We built on Stanford University’s
                        Design Thinking Crash course, and on a version of that exercise developed by
                        Kristen Eshleman and Anelise Hanson Shrout. For the structure of the DH2015
                        design thinking exercise, see https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Ztd_phWYskdLAOU4FdivwSnz_ALyrIehNaCHBjQ1z3Q/edit?usp=sharing
                     Some of these strategies took the form of structural changes that would
                    ideally support undergraduate digital pedagogy. Others were more radical, or
                    more long-term solutions. Many were untested. Together, they suggested new paths
                    forward in undergraduate digital pedagogy. The challenges and proposed solutions
                    are the basis for the remainder of this article. 
            

                The Importance of Student Agency
                Workshop participants were particularly concerned with how institutions, programs
                    and educators define (and in some cases, police) the boundaries of undergraduate
                    digital humanities. The scholars assembled wondered whether many undergraduate
                    DH programs were merely translating graduate work to the
                    undergraduate level without attending to how DH pedagogy fits into broader
                    liberal arts curricula . 
                Many participants argued that undergraduate programs should contain “more [focus]
                    on pedagogy and smaller, discrete projects” than the large-scale projects common
                    to graduate DH programs. For examples of such projects, see Harvard’s
                            Initiative for the Science of the Human
                            Past (http://sohp.fas.harvard.edu/) or Stanford’s Mapping the Republic of Letters (http://republicofletters.stanford.edu/)  These kinds of
                    projects were considered to be emblematic of the
                        apprentice-researcher model, and in most cases simply
                    not applicable to undergraduate education. Participants also contended that
                    undergraduates need to be the primary audience, not additional labor for
                        projects. Further, they argued that engaging undergraduates in
                        pre-existing long-term projects in ways that allow them to clearly cite and
                        define their ownership could be an exciting opportunity provided by DH
                        methods, which potentially lends a sense of meaning to undergraduate
                        Humanities production. Much of our commentary is drawn from a
                        collaborative note-taking document that participants worked on during the
                        workshop. The full collaborative document can be seen here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WZX6aZh_lfF5pbp7zOnVPMoafiakLV0-41usMJxjwUA/edit?usp=sharing
                     Finally, participants suggested that shifting attention from DH tools
                    and training to the production of original digital scholarship would support the
                    missions of undergraduate-centered and liberal arts institutions while
                    simultaneously providing students with grounding in the digital humanities.
                One potential challenge that participants noted was that if undergraduates were
                    to be included in digital projects, they needed to be distinguished from
                    graduate students, who often owned their projects much in
                    the same way as faculty or staff were able to. Graduate students can devote
                    longer periods of time - in some cases, years - that many undergraduate programs
                    do not afford to their students, though this model is being challenged by the
                        Domain of One’s Own movement . In some institutions, the problem of undergraduate time
                    commitments is addressed by incorporating undergraduates into (and using their
                    labor to accomplish) large digital humanities projects. However, in these cases,
                    a new problem arises; even if student contributions are noted in the final
                    product, it is often difficult to ensure that the undergraduates are getting
                    concrete learning experiences, and not merely serving as a convenient source of
                        free labor. Finally, in addition to critical thinking
                    about student labor and agency, educators engaging in undergraduate DH must
                    consider privacy concerns - if student work is to be made public digitally or
                    archived within an institution repository, the students involved must be made
                    aware of the issues and their rights.
                These critiques of the use of student labor in projects have been echoed by
                    students themselves, who note that even when undergraduate students are able to
                    take ownership of their work, integrating a digital component into an existing
                    undergraduate course without significant redesign may not serve any pedagogical
                    purpose, and may use the curriculum as a cudgel to force students into a
                    different kind of labor. As Andrew Rikard, a Davidson College undergraduate
                    student, wrote in edSurge, 
                        [We need] to shift the emphasis from data possession to
                            knowledge production. Gaining ownership over the data is vital–but until
                            students see this [digital] domain as a space that rewards rigor and
                            experimentation, it will not promote student agency. Traditional
                            assignments don’t necessarily empower students when they have to post
                            them in a public space.
                        
                    
                In accord with Rikard, workshop participants felt that undergraduate digital
                    humanities pedagogy needs to focus on course-integrated digital assignments,
                    rather than large, long-term projects more typically associated with graduate or
                    faculty work. However, they emphasized that digital humanities coursework,
                    particularly for undergraduates, requires scaffolding to both teach technical
                    skills students may not already possess and also critically examine those
                    skills, digital scholarship as a whole, and the situation of their own work in a
                    digital space. Something that was not discussed in the workshop, but which
                        obviously requires careful consideration, is how to teach digital methods
                        courses to students with a broad range of technical abilities and different
                        kinds of access to technologies. Programs generally - but especially those
                        which serve diverse student populations - will have to work to meet students
                        at various levels of technical expertise, and design flexible programs than
                        can accommodate a range of student perspectives. Finally, they agreed
                    that these safeguards are meaningless if students are not given agency over
                    their own work, and if that agency is not supported beyond the classroom.
            

                Fitting Digital Humanities into Liberal Arts Structures
                In institutions without established DH programs, nomenclature was a frequent
                    point of contention. One concern that workshop participants raised was that
                    because there are few curricularly driven digital humanities centers in
                    undergraduate-centered institutions, the DH programs that develop at these
                    institutions have tended to be shaped by unique curricular needs of particular
                    department, college or university. This is one of the reasons that so few
                    undergraduate digital humanities programs are alike. For instance, some schools
                    have digital departments, though there is little consensus about whether these
                    should be called digital humanities,
                    digital studies, As an example, Davidson College
                            (https://www.davidson.edu/academics/digital-studies). University
                        of Wisconsin-Madison (http://digitalstudies.wisc.edu/). University of Michigan’s
                        Department of American Culture (https://lsa.umich.edu/digitalstudies) all use the term
                            digital studies.
                    experimental humanities, Such as at Bard College,
                        where DH is EH: http://eh.bard.edu/about/
                    digital liberal arts As an example, Hope College
                            (http://www.hope.edu/academics/mellon-scholars/about-program/digital-liberal-arts.html),
                        Middlebury College (http://sites.middlebury.edu/dla/about/). Whittier College (https://diglibarts.whittier.edu/), Grinnell College (https://www.grinnell.edu/academics/centers/ctla/dlac), and
                        Occidental College (http://www.oxy.edu/center-digital-liberal-arts) all use the term
                            digital liberal arts for their programs. or
                    something else entirely . Other institutions
                    incorporate classes on digital methods and digital culture into instructional
                    technology through libraries and archives. Still others locate digital classes
                    in traditional departments ranging from English, to
                    History, to Computer Science to Anthropology. As a result of these different
                    institutional affordances, participants agreed, undergraduate digital humanities
                    education has developed in extensively varied ways .
                Workshop attendees came from a variety of institutions, with a variety of titles
                    for the digital scholarship being conducted at their places of work, but as far
                    as pedagogy and centering the undergraduate, they argued that title of the
                    program they develop or support does not matter as much as the mission and
                    vision underpinning it. 
                When focusing on undergraduate-centered digital humanities pedagogy, some
                    participants felt that undergraduate-only institutions, (in the United States,
                    particularly liberal arts colleges) already supported DH initiatives by focusing
                    on interdisciplinary and original student research. But they wondered how
                    undergraduate DH could be made to fit in places with a less robust liberal arts
                    tradition. Some participants advocated for institutions should consider DH as
                        a set of practices, not necessarily a separate field. These
                        quotations come from the collaborative document: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WZX6aZh_lfF5pbp7zOnVPMoafiakLV0-41usMJxjwUA/edit?usp=sharing
                     By conceptualizing digital humanities as a broadly applicable set of
                    methods, practice, and pedagogy, participants argued, the digital humanities
                    could be distributed across curricula. This broader vision of digital humanities
                    could make DH applicable to numerous majors and programs, rather than only a
                    few. In this way, DH becomes one of the liberal arts. 
            

                Avoiding Silos with the Distributed Model
                As undergraduate scholarship increasingly focuses on digital research and more
                    public-facing work, participants were concerned that DH theory was being taught
                    alongside digital skills methodology, to the detriment of both. They noted that
                    integrating a digital humanities project into an already existing course often
                    requires that something must be removed in order to allow time for students to
                    learn required technologies, implement them, and assess their work. 
                One of the strategies proposed during the design thinking exercises was that some
                    of the structure surrounding technical training and assessment could be aided by
                    collaborating with other faculty, librarians, archivists, and instructional
                    technologists. This strategy intersected with another central concern for many
                    of the workshop participants. During the workshop, participants debated whether
                    this dearth of homes for DH education in
                    undergraduate-centered institutions meant students would be best served by
                    building bespoke programs or initiatives from scratch.
                    However, many felt were concerned that these programs could become siloed, like
                    graduate programs which might have an Intro to Digital
                        Humanities course in each department, or could be organized around a
                    bounded digital humanities centers. See, for example, the CUNY digital
                        humanities initiative (http://cunydhi.commons.gc.cuny.edu/), the Carolina Digital
                        Humanities Initiative (http://digitalhumanities.unc.edu/), Carleton University’s
                        Collaborative MA in English and Digital Humanities program. (http://carleton.ca/english/graduate-programs/english-and-the-digital-humanities/)
                        the Institute for Advanced Technology in Humanities (http://www.iath.virginia.edu/), the Maryland for Technology in
                        the Humanities (http://mith.umd.edu/), or the many centers listed on centerNet’s
                        website (https://dhcenternet.org/centers). In contrast, many
                    undergraduate programs seem to be spreading teaching DH methods and tools
                    throughout several courses and on smaller, more discrete projects. This more
                    distributed model may be more suited to the nature of undergraduate education,
                    but it makes it difficult to identify or implement a core digital humanities
                    pedagogy .
                One proposed solution to this conundrum was that a DH center or staffed
                    initiative could support digital scholarship across departments, without
                    offering any classes in DH qua DH.  For example, while
                        Davidson College offers digital studies courses, it also provides support
                        for the creation of new courses in traditional departments that incorporate
                        digital methodology. Similarly, the University of Iowa’s Public Humanities
                        in the Digital World initiative (http://clas.uiowa.edu/phdw/home) provides support for digital
                        projects across the university, Duke University’s Digital Scholarship
                        Services (http://sites.duke.edu/digital/about/) provides DH support across
                        the university, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill’s
                        Digital Innovation Lab (http://digitalinnovation.unc.edu/) Carolina Digital Humanities
                        Initiative (http://digitalhumanities.unc.edu/) supports courses and trainings
                        across disciplines and institutions. Another was to locate classes in
                    digital scholarship within libraries and instructional technology, so that
                    students could have access to digital expertise without having to devote
                    curricular time to DH classes. In both of these, digital humanities training
                    could be distributed across an institution, drawing on the native talent of DH
                    practitioners already on faculty or staff. 
                This distributed model raised questions about how
                    undergraduate institutions can create programs that are flexible enough to allow
                    for a variety of methods and approaches from across disciplines while still
                    adhering to the graduation and major requirements of individual colleges and
                    universities. However, distributing DH throughout the undergraduate curriculum
                    can allow wider engagement with students. For instance, Davidson College,
                    Grinnell College, Washington and Lee University, and Hope College have all
                    formed or are in the process of forming interdisciplinary initiatives that
                    support undergraduate DH but are not run out of a formal campus DH center.
                        For more about these individual programs, see: https://www.davidson.edu/academics/digital-studies, http://www.grinnell.edu/news/expanding-use-digital-technology,
                            https://digitalhumanities.wlu.edu/about/, and http://www.hope.edu/academic/mellon/aboutprogram.html.  On
                    an even larger scale, groups like ILiADS are working to form distributed digital
                    humanities training networks across American liberal arts colleges.
                        http://iliads.org/
                Another challenge that participants raised in establishing a distributed,
                    decentralized DH program was that individually-spearheaded efforts might lead to
                    untenable amounts of labor for one person or a small group of people, since
                    becoming the face of DH for an institution can also lead to
                    significant organizational challenges. Ideally, digital scholarship within an
                    institution would not be driven by a single personality, but supported via
                    buy-in from senior faculty and administration. Similar to the scaffolding needed
                    to integrate DH into existing undergraduate courses, structural support is
                    necessary to make a DH program a success at any institution. Workshop
                    participants felt openly discussing the challenge of building a new program was
                    valuable, as ways of distributing labor and establishing formal support varied
                    depending on each institution. Labor within academia, and particularly
                        within digital scholarship, remains a major challenge for faculty and staff
                        supporting and engaging in digital pedagogy. For some background, see Miriam
                        Posner’s Money and Time (http://miriamposner.com/blog/money-and-time/), Helen J. Burgess
                        and Jeanne Hamming’s New Media in the Academy: Labor
                            and the Production of Knowledge in Scholarly Multimedia (https://dhq.digitalhumanities.org/vol/5/3/000102/000102.html),
                        Stacie Williams’ Implications of Archival Labor
                            (https://medium.com/on-archivy/implications-of-archival-labor-b606d8d02014#.zuoaiupav),
                        Julia Flanders’ Time, Labor, and ‘Alternate Careers’ in
                            Digital Humanities Knowledge Work (http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/26), Roxanne Shirazi’s
                            Reproducing the Academy: Librarians and the
                            Question of Service in the Digital Humanities (http://roxanneshirazi.com/2014/07/15/reproducing-the-academy-librarians-and-the-question-of-service-in-the-digital-humanities/),
                        and Trevor Muñoz and Jennifer Guilano’s Making Digital
                            Humanities Work (http://www.trevormunoz.com/notebook/2014/07/14/making-digital-humanities-work.html).
                     That support could come from valuing digital scholarship and pedagogy in
                    the tenure and promotion process, consideration of DH within core and major
                    requirements at the institution, and providing resources to support students in
                    and outside of the classroom, including placing an emphasis on student
                    agency.
            

                Moving Forward: Radical and Long-Term Ideas
                At the end of the workshop, participants came up with a list of radical or
                    long-term suggestions aimed at addressing some of the structural challenges
                    facing undergraduate digital humanities pedagogy. These suggestions coalesced
                    around building and sustaining flexible structures that support digital
                    scholarship, critically considering the placement of DH within curriculum, and
                    practicing advocacy and outreach on behalf of DH.
                They concluded that unless digital scholarship received support and buy-in from
                    the institution, efforts to build digital initiatives and programs are not
                    likely to succeed. The Mellon Foundation has provided funding for many
                        digital humanities initiatives in the past, and their new Higher Education
                        and Scholarship in the Humanities guidelines include a mention of special
                        initiatives for digital humanities training and scholarship (https://mellon.org/programs/higher-education-and-scholarship-humanities/research-universities-and-institutes/),
                        as well as a strengthened emphasis on develop[ing] students' critical,
                            analytical, and creative capacities through the use of digital
                            technologies, including blended learning in liberal arts college
                        settings (https://mellon.org/programs/higher-education-and-scholarship-humanities/liberal-arts-colleges/).
                        The NEH Office of Digital Humanities (https://www.neh.gov/divisions/odh) also provides opportunities to
                        apply for funding to create sustainable DH. Some suggested writing
                    collaboration into job descriptions for digital humanities positions. Doing so
                    would scaffold a DH community, especially in places where one is not developing
                    naturally. Purpose-hired digital scholarship coordinators might also serve as
                    hubs for faculty, student, and staff training, and as a point person for
                    long-term planning and growth. These types of positions seem to be on the
                        rise, with institutions such as Michigan State University (http://digitalhumanities.msu.edu/) Whittier College (https://diglibarts.whittier.edu/project-leadership/), and
                        Hamilton College (http://www.dhinitiative.org/about/aboutus) having digital
                        scholarship baked into various point-person roles. 
                
                Another set of long-term solutions focused on teaching, suggesting that such an
                    approach would lead to adoption from the ground-up rather than top-down. These
                    included providing learning opportunities on campus for the entire community,
                    such as brown bag lunches or workshop series; including spaces for practitioners
                    to share successes and frustrations in digital humanities pedagogy; and
                    supporting teaching institutionally by ensuring that instructors are allowed the
                    time, resources, and freedom to experiment. These kinds of initiatives would
                    allow faculty and lecturers to more fully integrate technology into their
                    teaching, rather than simply appending a DH week or assignment to already robust
                    classes.
                Distributing digital scholarship throughout the existing curriculum, and
                    integrating it as part of core requirements was seen by participants one of the
                    most promising models for undergraduate digital humanities. However,
                    participants agreed that in order for this distributed model to be successful,
                    critical thinking and careful planning would be necessary at the outset.
                    Participants hoped that those building these programs would consider how to best
                        embed digital humanities across the curriculum by
                    noting where DH fits in naturally, and where a critical frame around digital
                    research and scholarship could benefit existing curriculum. They also
                    recommended integrating DH practices into substantive capstone projects, which
                    would illustrate how DH practices fill gaps, assist in making new arguments, and
                    shows how this kind of work results in more impressive (and higher graded)
                    projects. This kind of practice would both allow for flexibility within existing
                    programs, and illustrate the inherent flexibility of digital approaches.
                    Participants also called for an emphasis on the ways in which digital resources
                    allow undergraduates to engage in truly original research. 
                While the undergraduates discussed in this workshop seemed generally aware of
                    digital humanities as a set of practices and desirous of learning digital
                    things, participants pointed out that undergraduate students are often difficult
                    to engage with, because they can have trouble seeing an immediate utility in
                    learning digital methods, both for current and future scholarship as well as
                    marketability when looking for jobs. However, participants found that
                    undergraduates too can benefit from DH immediately and as a possible
                        resume booster, but that value needs to be more clearly
                    communicated. There is potential here to collaborate with other campus entities,
                    such as career development offices, academic advising, and the library, who may
                    be able to generate student interest and gauge student needs.
                 Simultaneous with this kind of work, participants called for digital
                    practitioners to continue to critically engage with debates around digital
                    pedagogy. This would include building upon previously existing digital
                    humanities projects, and using these as models and possible data sources rather
                    than beginning truly from scratch; to begin, as scholars, to write about the
                    weak points of our projects as well as the strengths and to teach students to be
                    critical of digital projects, both their own and others, by questioning the
                    limitations of data sets and what gives a digital project authority. This kind
                    of engagement would create better, more publicized platforms for sharing digital
                    humanities syllabi and pedagogical outputs in order to form a wider
                    undergraduate digital pedagogical community. 
                 Finally, without advocacy and outreach on behalf of digital initiatives and the
                    value of DH as a set of practices, digital scholarship cannot thrive at the
                    institutional level. Participants’ suggestions included considering how
                    undergraduate students can serve as ambassadors - as they gain a greater
                    understanding of digital humanities, they can communicate their knowledge and
                    benefits of the program to other students. They also called for those who are
                    already working in DH to practice advocacy by communicating why DH is important,
                    as a set of practices and at your specific institution; and recognizing that
                    shifts within academia may require change agents,
                    digital evangelists, and aggressive communicators in order
                    to succeed. Institutions might find ways to reward this kind of advocacy, as
                    service credit or in annual reviews, thereby reinforcing the importance of
                    digital pedagogy to individual colleges and universities. In sum, faculty,
                    students and staff all need to embrace change and communicate the value of
                    digital scholarship and pedagogy to their wider campus and disciplinary
                    communities. 
            

                Conclusions
                At the heart of this workshop were concerns about the value undergraduate
                    students are deriving from digital humanities programs and courses. Because many
                    of these programs are still developing, there is little precedent for how to
                    evaluate what students would like to get out of DH-inflected courses, and few
                    rubrics for how we assess student learning after the fact. Digital humanists
                    from a range of spaces and professions wondered how, given the differences
                    across programs, and particularly around structure of programs and funds
                    available, it might be possible to develop a shared set of best practices. We
                    concluded that these issues have manifold solutions, with each institution's
                    culture, personnel, and strategic priorities playing a role in how DH programs
                    are shaped and managed. By centering on student-driven scholarship and desirable
                    learning outcomes, and by building programs that are inherently flexible -
                    adapting to the changing needs of students, educators and institutions, we can
                    articulate shared pedagogical values, rather than prescriptive best
                    practices.
                Programs which implemented a clear structure for undergraduate digital humanities
                    education, and linked that structure to clear pedagogical outcomes were seen by
                    participants as the most satisfactory models for undergraduate digital
                    humanities. These kinds of programs tended to avoid silos and closed circles,
                    preferring instead to draw from a wide range of interests and competencies.
                    Finally, these programs centered student agency, and encouraged students to take
                    on digital projects as a means to better presenting themselves and their
                    research to the world, rather than as a means to acquiring individual digital
                    skills. Together, these findings point to the need for new and flexible models
                    for undergraduate DH education in which faculty, staff and institutions work to
                    scaffold undergraduate DH education while empowering students to produce, share,
                    critique (and be critiqued on) their work in the wider world.
            
