Title:  Building a Toolkit for Digital Pedagogy
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  02 October 2017
Abstract:  
                
                Despite the perceived newness of electronic methods in physical classrooms,
                    electricity–and the distributed labor on which it runs–has long powered the
                    spaces of pedagogy. Routing electronic practices in undergraduate teaching
                    through the digital infrastructures with which they operate, this writing tests
                    circuits of power that migrate between disciplinary and physical learning
                    systems. It does so through a discussion of Pedagogy Toolkit, an open source and
                    community-authored teaching repository built with Jekyll and deployed via GitHub
                    Pages. Contributing to an increase of energy for project-based interventions in
                    digital humanities teaching, Pedagogy Toolkit circulates digitized teaching
                    materials, guides to teaching with digital humanities tools, a curated sample of
                    online syllabuses accompanied by a syllabus templating tool, and an accessible
                    website templating framework. An overview of new methods for digital teaching in
                    the undergraduate classroom leads in turn to a reflexive discussion of the
                    design of digital platforms as pedagogical objects, activating issues of labor,
                    diversity, and knowledge transmission along the way. Ultimately, building a
                    toolkit for digital pedagogy constructs infrastructure as a mode of intellectual
                    inquiry, exposing classroom power as a conduit for ethical connections between
                    students, teachers, and digital development teams. Rerouting logics that
                    partition teaching practice and tool development, this article situates building
                    communities at the heart of humanities learning.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Building a Toolkit for Digital Pedagogy (pedagogy-toolkit.org)
                Attending to the communities imbricated in digital pedagogy requires accounting
                    for power. There is a panel at the front of my classroom with two switches for
                    the lights and two buttons to activate the projector. I engage these mechanisms
                    and electricity flows into the classroom. My students walk into a room of desks,
                    chairs, notebooks, chalkboards, and markers. Such tools are always waiting,
                    ready for us to learn with, and we may additionally learn from these tools by
                    asking who assembled them or where they came from. The classroom brings us into
                    contact with material traces of human labor: wood, plastic, metal, halogen bulbs
                    and the circuits of power that light them. Such power circulates through the
                    intellectual cultures of our classrooms, as we organize chairs in a semicircle,
                    write with students on the whiteboard, or display a PowerPoint on the projector
                    screen. The contemporary classroom exists as an infrastructure, a blend of
                    physical materials with values and practices through which students and teachers
                    alike bring those materials to life.
                Just as a classroom infrastructure is shaped and guided by the pedagogical
                    philosophy of the teacher, so too are digital pedagogical spaces structured and
                    designed to foster specific forms of user engagement. Taking a pedagogical
                    approach to tool development, digital humanities developers build intellectual
                    and cultural values into the digital infrastructures that constitute their tools
                        
                    
                    . Such digital continuations and reimaginings of
                    existing humanities infrastructures are grouped under the term
                    cyberinfrastructure, as defined in the ACLS report on Our
                        cultural commonwealth. The American Council of Learned
                        Societies defines cyberinfrastructure with the following: 
                            [C]yberinfrastructure is more than a tangible
                                network and means of storage in digitized form, and it is not only
                                discipline-specific software applications and project-specific data
                                collections. It is also the more intangible layer of expertise and
                                the best practices, standards, tools, collections and collaborative
                                environments that can be broadly shared across
                                communities of inquiry
                            
                        . Far from being a radical break from existing forms of
                    knowledge sharing in the humanities, cyberinfrastructure exists as digital
                    continuations of physical infrastructures, including conferences, departments,
                    scholarly organizations, and classrooms. These and other environments blend
                    physical support for intellectual discovery with cultural, institutional, and
                    interpersonal dynamics through which such inquiry can flourish and be shared. In
                    all environments, theories are deployed as design principles meant to impact the
                    real world use of material, thinking through how, why, and under what
                    circumstances people engage with the tools at hand. Users and students alike
                    work and think through these environments to create knowledge, meaning the
                    theories and values built into their design also function as pedagogies. Digital
                    pedagogy requires accounting for the epistemological limits of tools both
                    digital and analog and coming to grips not only with how to make knowledge with
                    tools, but also how tools make knowledge. By taking stock of principles and
                    practices for tool design as critical pedagogies, digital humanities can account
                    for their epistemologies at the technical and applied level, as they affect
                    users and students.
                 Digital pedagogy operates through an emerging nexus where the practices and
                    protocols of multiple infrastructures permeate and interpenetrate each other.
                    Routing and navigating the switches and junctures between such systems always
                    requires handling power. This writing treats electric power as a metaphor for
                    disciplinary and institutional forms of power. Specifically, I argue that such
                    forms of cultural power enter our classrooms when one community of practice
                    wields the product of another while overlooking that resource’s status as
                    community-generated. Electricity, and the technological objects it powers, may
                    be the most ubiquitous of these resources. Instrumentalizing our relationship to
                    them risks separating our classroom communities from the working communities
                    with which they are deeply intertwined, including facilities services, support
                    staff, distribution networks, and development teams, among many others. Doing so
                    narrows the contexts within which student learning takes place and the
                    communities our teaching may benefit. In what follows, I consider how these
                    concerns structure relationships between communities of students, teachers, and
                    digital humanities tool developers. The interfaces of plastic, metal, and screen
                    often suggest we are safely separated from such power, even as we control and
                    direct its flow.
                The above claims are far from new, but instead contribute to a cultural critique
                    of teaching technologies pioneered through scholars such as Cynthia Selfe and
                    Cathy Camper 
                    . As Selfe warned in her 1999 Technology and Literacy: A Story about the Perils of Not Paying
                        Attention,
                    
                        We manage to have the best of both worlds–we have
                            computers available to use for our own studies, in support of our
                            classes and our profession–but we have also relegated these technologies
                            into the background of our professional lives. As a result, computers
                            are rapidly becoming invisible, which is how we like our technology to
                            be. When we don’t have to pay attention to machines, we remain free to
                            focus on the theory and practice of language, the stuff of real
                            intellectual and social concern.
                        
                    
                Arguments such as Selfe’s are of renewed relevance in a moment where humanists
                    themselves have turned to the work of building technologies. Selfe unpacks
                        deeply nuanced connections between learning and technology
                        instrumentalization. See Selfe’s complex argument at work in her original
                        article. For teachers and students alike, bringing the digital into
                    the classroom often means figuring out how to access and navigate the platforms
                    digital humanists build, as well as understanding the values and assumptions
                    that shape the way they work. This makes meaningful pedagogical deployments of
                    technology an elusive puzzle, a nebulous tangle of technological and
                    disciplinary power that is always hidden just out of reach. Digital pedagogy is
                    therefore always at the same time a question of digital humanities pedagogy,
                    about an open reformulation of disciplinary relations that often appear as
                    either invisible or opaque when viewed from the comfortable perspective of one
                    field alone. It therefore embodies Alan Liu’s characterization of the symbolic
                    “meaning of the digital humanities.” Liu writes: 
                            For the humanities, the digital humanities exceed
                                (though they include) the functional role of instrument or service,
                                the pioneer role of innovator, the ensemble role of an "additional
                                field," and even such faux-political roles assigned to new fields as
                                challenger, reformer, and (less positively) fifth column. This is
                                because the digital humanities also have a symbolic role. In both
                                their promise and their threat, the digital humanities serve as a
                                shadow play for a future form of the humanities that wishes to
                                include what contemporary society values about the digital without
                                losing its soul to other domains of knowledge work that have gone
                                digital to stake their claim to that society. Or, precisely because
                                the digital humanities are both functional and symbolic, a better
                                metaphor would be something like the register in a computer's
                                central processor unit, where values stored in memory are loaded for
                                rapid shuffling, manipulation, and testing-in this case, to try out
                                new humanistic disciplinary identities evolved for today's broader
                                contention of knowledges and knowledge workers.
                            
                         As he writes: 
                        In both their promise and their threat, the digital
                            humanities serve as a shadow play for a future form of the humanities
                            that wishes to include what contemporary society values about the
                            digital without losing its soul to other domains of knowledge work that
                            have gone digital to stake their claim to that society.
                        
                    . This shadow play unfolds equally in the
                    disciplinary configurations of digital humanities research as it plays out in
                    the values and experiences of undergraduate students, as they encounter digital
                    humanities tools and, through them, shape and share their views of the world.
                    Digital pedagogy is not solely a venture invested in bringing tools into
                    humanities classrooms, but also a series of intellectual engagements that bring
                    humanist critique to bear on the tool’s role in knowledge construction,
                    particularly as such critiques are engaged and lived out by students
                    constructing knowledge with and through electronic environments. Opening such a
                    pedagogy to non digital humanists involves laying the groundwork for that
                    critical digital inquiry. In other words, digital humanities, as a set of
                    disciplinary, institutional, and technological protocols, are developing a
                    pedagogical theory. Such theories are being designed by a range of projects,
                    including Hybrid Pedagogy and the Digital Pedagogy Lab; the MLA Commons Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities: Concepts, Models, and
                        Experiments; the Digital Pedagogy Institute; HASTAC’s Pedagogy
                    Project; the Journal of Interactive Technology and Pedagogy; the DiRT Directory;
                    teaching Modernist Women’s Writing in English; Outcome-Centered Electronic
                    Library of Teaching Resources (O.C.E.L.O.T.); the Digital Repository of Academic
                    Writing (DRAW); the Digital Writing and Research Lab (DWRL); Katherine D.
                    Harris’s PBworks Technology and the Classroom; and
                    Alan Liu’s DH Toychest. Engaged in such work, scholars including Jesse Stommel,
                    Sean Michael Morris, Katherine Harris, Catherine McLoughlin, Rebecca Frost
                    Davis, Jentery Sayers, and Matt Gold are building pedagogies into points of
                    contact between digital humanities communities and the diverse academic
                    communities with which they do now and might still engage.
                Contributing to what might be called the infrastructural
                        turn in the digital humanities, or a growing research interest in
                    the cultural values built into humanities platforms, this article works through
                    a pedagogy of infrastructure that crosses the circuits of classroom and server
                        alike. An articulation of this turn can be found in Alan Liu’s Drafts for Against the Cultural
                                Singularity (book in progress), which calls for 
                            digital humanities research and development
                                informed by, and able to influence, the way scholarship, teaching,
                                administration, support services, labor practices, and even
                                development and investment strategies in higher education intersect
                                with society, where a significant channel of the intersection
                                between the academy and other social sectors, at once symbolic and
                                instrumental, consists in shared but contested
                                information–technology infrastructures.
                            
                        . Navigating such crossings requires engagements with power:
                    learning how it is directed, distributed, and might ultimately be rerouted. The
                    Pedagogy Toolkit project undertakes these engagements by working directly with
                    and through teaching infrastructures as its primary mode of inquiry. At the
                    front–end, Pedagogy Toolkit is a teaching website that offers open access
                    materials for use in composition, rhetoric, literature, and digital humanities
                    classrooms. This includes downloadable resources for classroom use, as well as
                    community–generated guides for deploying digital humanities tools in the
                    classroom. In short, the Toolkit website is designed as an accessible starting
                    point for a range of teachers to share and integrate digital components into
                    their classrooms, particularly first–year composition and literature classrooms.
                    On the back–end, these resources are built on top of a public GitHub repository
                    of teaching documents that is free and open to all contributors. The repository
                    is coded with Jekyll, a static site generator that makes additions to the open
                    source repository automatically update the project website (where all content is
                    shared under a Creative Commons-ShareAlike license). Pedagogy Toolkit is
                    designed not as a neutral tool or object for hosting and finding resources–it is
                    not an instrument, a factory, or a bank; instead, it is an evolving mesh of
                    community–driven interests and advancements that, in its design, thinks through
                    digital models for interdisciplinary knowledge exchange.
                Like a course syllabus, the Toolkit project is designed for scaffolded
                    engagement. First, users will encounter resources for deploying digital
                    humanities tools in their physical classrooms. As they dig deeper into the
                    project’s documentation and website templating frameworks, users are introduced
                    to the code and infrastructure through which those materials are shaped and are
                    invited to reuse the open source code to author their own digital teaching
                    platforms using the Pedagogy Toolkit framework. The project includes a Getting Started with Pedagogy Toolkit Templates guide
                    that leads users through the creation of their own teaching website, generated
                    and hosted at no cost using the project source code with Jekyll and GitHub
                    Pages. The guide takes roughly an hour to complete and assumes no previous
                    coding knowledge, introducing users to the codes, frameworks, and servers that
                    subtend the static content viewed on the Toolkit website. Pedagogy Toolkit is
                    designed as a teaching platform that teaches scholars how to build their own
                    teaching platforms in turn. Doing so invites teachers to directly engage with
                    the assumptions and motivations that shape digital tools, offering transparent
                    protocols that teachers can reuse and reshape to their own pedagogical ends.
                    While the immediate utility of the project lies in making digital pedagogy
                    accessible to interested teachers, its ultimate goal is to render transparent
                    its own modes of constructing digital knowledge for users to reshape and
                    reconfigure. As a digital humanities project, Pedagogy Toolkit uses a
                    pedagogical framework to build reflexive awareness of its epistemological limits
                    and values into the project itself. In so doing, the project shares accessible
                    protocols for querying the assumptions and limits of digital knowledge
                    platforms, thereby facilitating self-directed lessons in infrastructural
                    literacy. The interface of the website frontend pays skeuomorphic homage to an
                    analog box of tools: resources are listed under color-coded headers and
                    organized into neatly-arranged rows and columns of sorted categories. The
                    documentation and templating frameworks of the project make such design
                    decisions legible at the level of code: showing users how the drawers and
                    dividers that frame teaching tools are built, as well as how they can be broken
                    down, rearranged, and refashioned. Pedagogy Toolkit is built to be
                    dismantled.
            

                Open Pedagogies
                 As an open source repository, Pedagogy Toolkit’s engagement with the
                    preservation and dissemination of humanities documents is also an engagement
                    with the complex work of an archive. The role of digital archives in
                    reconstructing past histories, as well as in illuminating the ethics of
                    contemporary attempts to recover such histories, is deeply complex. As Lauren F.
                    Klein writes: 
                        among the greatest contributions of the digital
                            humanities is its ability to illuminate the position of the critic with
                            respect to his or her archive of study, and to call attention to the
                            ethical and affective as well as epistemological implications of his or
                            her methodological choices.
                        
                    . While Klein’s claim carries significant implications for the work of
                    historical archives, it also helps illuminate a cultural vision of the archive
                    of teaching. By circulating material documents that trace pedagogical approaches
                    and values, teaching archives carry the promise of surfacing (or suppressing)
                    diverse pedagogical practices, theories, and methods. Archives are sites of
                    power. This is particularly true of the informal archive of humanities labor,
                    which often elides or overlooks lesson plans, activities, and syllabuses as
                    documents through which scholars disclose, shape, and share evolving
                    methodologies and approaches in their fields of study (as discussed in detail
                    below, a number of projects are redesigning these archives in electronic
                    environments). Furthermore, the development of such methodologies is often
                    inscribed in systems of contingent labor, relegating the intellectual advances
                    contributed by part-time faculty and graduate instructors to classroom documents
                    traditionally divorced from the record of scholarly production in journals,
                    monographs, and born-digital projects. Surfacing and circulating the theories,
                    values, and intellectual advancements of contingent faculty therefore takes part
                    in an act to restore a diverse record of humanist thought. Doing so exposes
                    valuable and overlooked perspectives on the project of tool building in the
                    humanities, teaching humanists how their theories and values shape and frame the
                    creation of new knowledge in the classroom (at times charting new routes for
                    students to grasp concepts through visual and project-based learning and, at
                    others, prompting students to follow the prescribed pathways of a given tool,
                    dataset, or workflow). While systems of contingent labor frame such classroom
                    experiences as attempts to reach up towards the research of established faculty,
                    established research may simultaneously reach out to student experience to
                    better understands its lived uses, limits, and influences. Open pedagogies stage
                    flexible circuits of knowledge as a counter to top-down transmissions of
                    influence; in such an open source ethos, research learns from student
                    experience, teaching documents scholarly production, and humanities better
                    understand and represent themselves by illuminating their contingent
                    contributions. These open circuits are energized by feedback loops between
                    people in various positions, roles, and stages.
                Pedagogy Toolkit’s teaching resources demonstrate the importance of intellectual
                    exploration in a student-directed space. Teachers construct their documents as
                    actionable objects that invite a variety of student problem-solving strategies,
                    rather than lists of information or steps to repeat. Documents are referenced as
                        strategies,
                    recipes,
                    workshops, and exercises; writing
                    prompts are paired with open-ended videos; and guides blend video and text with
                    analog and anecdote. Rather than requiring students to keep to the intellectual
                    pathways prescribed by a given method or workflow, such action-oriented
                    worksheets encourage students to find their own answers and share them with the
                    learning community of the class. This is an approach to critical digital
                    pedagogy that permeates the documents shared by the Pedagogy Toolkit
                    contributors. The emergence of digital teaching archives thus also signals the
                    emergence of teaching documents as an important record of the ongoing nature of
                    humanities inquiry, as it unfolds through the ongoing creation of knowledge in
                    undergraduate classrooms. Such documents reveal digital pedagogy as an
                    exploratory endeavor, in which knowledge is created by reworking and retooling
                    existing schemas and strategies rather than reinscribing legacy frameworks by
                    rote; this open source model lies at the heart of the documents shared through
                    Pedagogy Toolkit, as well as the Toolkit platform itself.
                Pedagogy Toolkit is not alone in extending pedagogies of collaborative knowledge
                    production and disciplinary border-crossing to digital platform development and
                    dissemination. This interdisciplinary field of work was pioneered by Kairos, the long-standing online journal that first
                    shared project-based and multimodal arguments that take up rhetoric, technology,
                    and pedagogy. Disseminating complex arguments about teaching and technology that
                    work with and through technological interfaces online, Kairos joins arguments by Cheryl Ball, Alan Galey and Stan Ruecker,
                    and Susan Brown, Patricia Clements and Isobel Grundy in demonstrating that
                    digital scholarship makes arguments by performing and enacting cultural and
                    critical theories 
                    
                    . Kairos has paved the
                    way for related projects that embed theories and values of knowledge exchange
                    into their design and use. Digital Pedagogy in the
                        Humanities: Concepts, Models, and Experiments reshapes the form of
                    the book to explore collaborative models for teaching development. Organized
                    around fifty keywords and nearly 550 pedagogical artifacts, the project invites
                    teachers to replicate and remix each other’s projects, activities, and
                    assignments, all shared under a Creative-Commons license. This remixing
                    mechanism allows teaching practitioners to shape and grow each keyword by
                    updating it with their own adaptations of existing teaching materials. In so
                    doing, it embeds the values of pedagogical collaboration into the book’s digital
                    design: 
                        [taking] advantage of the affordance of the digital
                            form to allow readers to respond to, rearrange, regroup, and remix
                            sample projects along a range of axes
                        
                    .
                Similarly, HASTAC’s Pedagogy Project shares an open repository of teaching
                    assignments and experiments, which is openly accessible for community comments,
                    updates, and additions. The scope of the Pedagogy Project is vast, including
                    creative and multimedia projects, collaborative digital projects, and examples
                    of social media and public scholarship. Crucially, the project encourages
                    teachers to comment on its resources, offering feedback on how the exercise went
                    in their classroom as well as suggestions for future improvement. Through the
                    open access and commenting features of the HASTAC platform, this project invites
                    teaching communities to collectively share and reflect upon their teaching
                    practices online. Echoing Lisa Spiro’s reminder that 
                        sharing energizes and shapes a community,
                        
                     Pedagogy Toolkit joins the efforts and energies of these projects. The
                    community building mission of Pedagogy Toolkit forms but one node in an emerging
                    constellation of work that builds pedagogy into the disciplinary and digital
                    frameworks of the humanities.
                The aims and aspirations of this project emerge from a specific institutional
                    context. It began under a Learning and Teaching Development Grant from the
                    University of Victoria Learning and Teaching Centre, headed by Misao Dean and
                    Lisa Chalykoff. My work on this project first began as a research
                        assistant hired by Misao Dean and Lisa Chalykoff to create a stable
                        electronic archive to preserve the results of their project in an online
                        archive. Throughout this work, Dean and Chalykoff encouraged experimentation
                        with the project and were highly supportive of my goal to create a
                        repository whose scope might extend beyond our local institution. Following
                        my work as a research assistant, I secured a microgrant from the Association
                        for Computers and the Humanities (ACH) to continue work on the Toolkit
                        project. It is thanks to the encouragement of Dean and Chalykoff that the
                        project exists in its current form.  This grant facilitated a pilot
                    program that added a lab component to the University of Victoria’s first-year
                    writing curriculum. Throughout the year-long project, participating teachers
                    used Moodle to share materials and resources developed as part of this
                    curriculum, forming a local community of networked teaching practitioners. These
                    materials populate the resources section of the Toolkit, which includes
                    excellent classroom materials from instructors at the University of Victoria.
                    Samantha Macfarlane contributes a comprehensive grammar-revision worksheet that
                    invites students to identify six common writing errors; Gerald Baillargeon
                    shares handouts on paragraph unity and the analysis of poetry; still others
                    share their writing prompts, sample texts, and presentations on close reading.
                    Working with these documents served not primarily as an exercise in archiving
                    the content my colleagues produced, but in crafting a digital continuation of
                    the informal teaching community the project’s initial LTC grant made possible.
                    Beyond collaborating with tool developers and teachers to author the tool
                    guides, the project has engaged digital teaching communities primarily through
                    outreach events and digital demonstrations, including a workshop at the Digital
                    Humanities Summer Institute. Since the project’s launch in January 2015, the
                    site has seen over 2,000 interactive sessions (defined as a user actively
                    engaging with and navigating the website). Analytics are gathered using
                        Google Analytics. All data is current as of February 20, 2017.
                As I developed the project, the work of curating pedagogical content became the
                    work of curating community, access, and exchange. Such an approach echoes
                    Bethany Nowviskie’s call for supporting practice in
                        community, which argues that 
                        We should put as much energy into connecting and
                            building up people–into developing supporting, motivated, skilled,
                            diverse, and intersecting communities of expert practitioners–as we do
                            into connecting the services, systems, and corpora that are the other
                            pillars of a national digital platform.
                        
                    
                With funding from the Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH), I
                    worked to build pedagogy into the project materials so the local forms of
                    knowledge exchange taking place at my home institution could be re-situated as
                    distributed, global, and asynchronous. The project thus transitioned from a
                    local institutional memory base to a global and open repository designed to
                    share the work of many diverse digital practitioners. Scaling up the toolkit
                    project was not primarily concerned with bandwidth, server space, or computing
                    power. Instead, scale became about people and communities of practice, a
                    function of building diverse sets of perspectives and benefits into tools,
                    expanding them as a function of community need and uptake. Actionable
                        models for deploying scale as a function of community care can be found in
                        the FemTechNet collective and THATcamp, among other initiatives.
            

                Teaching Tools
                The Toolkit project is powered by code and GitHub servers as it is equally
                    powered by the intellectual contributions of a diverse online community. Rather
                    than channeling resources from one community to another, such power is
                    reflective of the vitality of interrelated sets of practitioners. All content on
                    the site is authored through collaborative input from teachers of composition,
                    rhetoric, literature, and digital humanities, as well as developers and expert
                    users of digital humanities tools. From this perspective, 
                        the Toolkit project not only seeks to build communities
                            in and around digital pedagogy, but also demonstrate[s] how and where
                            those communities contribute raw material for building the project out
                            in new directions
                        
                    . In building community-authored materials online, the Toolkit therefore
                    works to build intellectual crosswalks that digital pedagogues can traverse
                    through their teaching. Authored through the contributions of digital tool
                    development teams as well as teachers who implement those tools in their
                    classrooms, Pedagogy Toolkit includes guides to teaching with Juxta Commons,
                    NewRadial, Neatline, Zotero, Voyant Tools, For Better For Verse, Scholarslab
                    Prism, He Do the Police in Different Voices, and Serendip-o-matic. A warm thanks
                    goes to all those who shared their work and thoughts to develop these guides. By
                    making the work of both digital pedagogues and digital tool developers visible,
                    the guides are written with both classroom and developer contexts in mind.
                    Classroom deployments of digital humanities tools can serve as feedback for
                    development teams, demonstrating specific applications of the tool and its
                    features. From this perspective, the guides show tool developers specific ways
                    in which students are engaging with their project, including which features are
                    accessible and which might prove difficult to grasp. At the same time, features
                    released by developers can inspire applications of a tool in the classroom.
                    Student experience is communicated through the teaching materials that populate
                    the guides, often authored by instructors; the guides also include student
                    projects developed using a given tool, allowing developers to see directly how
                    students deploy given platform features. Ultimately, by sharing the online
                    presence, digital products, and intellectual labor of students, teachers, and
                    tool developers in the same space, the Toolkit is meant to facilitate further
                    communication and mutual feedback across classroom and development labs via
                    social media, opening channels for teachers to situate their work in relation to
                    digital humanities research and development. As developers learn from student
                    experience, teachers benefit from development teams, and students see their
                    knowledge operating in contexts beyond the physical classroom, the work of one
                    community is meant to energize and empower others. 
                With this intellectual cross-pollination and cross-fertilization in mind, the
                    Toolkit guides offer an introduction to the tool, followed by teaching
                    applications shared by contributors. In many instances, the introduction
                    includes an interactive tutorial authored within the tool environment itself
                    (produced by a developer or expert user). While the guides offer a space for
                    experienced users to share their digital activities, they also offer an
                    accessible venue for those new to digital pedagogy to access those activities
                    and include them in their own classes. Designed to share and unite the interests
                    of multiple communities of practice in and around digital pedagogy, the guides
                    reflect the input, interest, and meaningful contributions of a range of diverse
                    digital practitioners. Beyond offering exercises in souping up a classroom with
                    tech, the tools section is developed as a collaborative zone where users can
                    reframe their digital work in the contexts of various other communities engaging
                    in tangential and continuous lines of inquiry. Doing so, in turn, reframes
                    contingent classroom labor as an essential node in digital humanities networks,
                    growing such networks by empowering students to build knowledge of and on
                    digital platforms. In this way, established hierarchies and dynamics within the
                    field are contingent upon the teaching work of adjuncts, sessionals, and
                    teaching assistants, who actively conduct knowledge of such disciplinary
                    formations to students.
                The teaching shared by the project comprises nearly one hundred hosted documents
                    and over forty contributors. Many offer strategies for teaching and authoring
                    digital project-based scholarship. Alicia Peaker shares strategies for creating
                    non-linear arguments using Neatline and Omeka. Peaker’s work invites students to
                    conduct research from a shared repository of sources, which they then curate and
                    visualize on a map using Neatline. Arguing from these shared materials, each
                    student generates his own means of synthesizing and displaying the sources to
                    build a web-based geospatial argument. Also working with Neatline, Areti
                    Sakellaris shares her project that maps correspondence from the Library of
                    Congress’s Woody Guthrie Manuscript Collection. Sakelarris’s project is designed
                    to be reproduced in the classroom, offering materials for student curatorial
                    work and web-based arguments. Others invite students to reflect upon their
                    composition and revision practices using online tools. For instance, Jeffery
                    Boruszak asks students to generate text analysis visualizations of their primary
                    and secondary research sources in Voyant Tools. This enables students to
                    visually explore trends in their research as they work to shape a research topic
                    and thesis. Students may then use the trends they identify as new search terms
                    to expand their collection of research sources.
                 Elsewhere, Brandon Walsh and Amy Robison share digital activities that use
                    digital environments to teach literary and theoretical concepts. In Prism in the Classroom: Questions to Frame Discussion,
                    Walsh asks students: 
                        How do the tool and our framing of it affect how we
                            read the text?
                        
                    . Through a collaborative reading of James Joyce’s  A
                        Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man using the Prism tool, Walsh
                    teaches the differences between realism and modernism as well as the concept of
                    the binary. Demonstrating similar theoretical flair, Amy Robinson uses the New
                    Radial interface to invite students to map the structure of Charlotte Perkins
                    Gilman’s The Yellow Wallpaper (moving beyond
                    thematic or trope-based readings of the text). As Robinson writes: 
                        I started by asking them to show using the nodes…not
                            what the story means but what it does.
                        
                    . Both Walsh and Robinson frame their tools as environments that mediate
                    students’ engagement with text, as well as venues in which students can grapple
                    with theoretical approaches through deliberate engagements with the tool and its
                    interface.
                 Other contributors teach close reading skills. Julia Bninski’s assignment
                    collates the 1818 and 1831 editions of Frankenstein
                    to view shifts in diction, punctuation, and characterization. Bniksi also
                    includes a reflective statement on the assignment, offering suggestions for
                    improvement and thoughts on deploying the assignment with other texts. Chuck
                    Rybak asks students to identify poetic devices and difficult passages by reading
                    the poetry of Rimbaud in Prism. Rybak also uses Prism to ascertain a detailed
                    account of student engagement with course reading, identifying locations in the
                    text that prove difficult for the majority of the class. Echoing Rybak’s use of
                    digital tools to reveal trends in student engagement, Norah Andrews uses Prism
                    to mark up historical text. Her exercise focuses on legal culture, gender roles,
                    and progress in Maria Eugenia Echenique’s The Emancipation
                        of Women. As Andrews argues, this exercise reveals as much about the
                    points of confluence and division in the class as it reveals about the text in
                    question. While digital tools may reveal cultural and theoretical structures
                    present in a course reading, contributors equally demonstrate how tools can also
                    expose intellectual and cultural currents in their own classrooms.
                 Overall, teachers share experiences using digital humanities tools and methods
                    to teach abstract thinking through practical electronic applications. The above
                    and related exercises let students approach multimodal collaboration, literary
                    theory, and close reading through the systematic and step-by-step procedures of
                    a given digital tool. Doing so lets students craft concrete and systematic
                    strategies for critical thinking with a given tool and environment. Furthermore,
                    teaching critical thinking skills through digital tools often carries the added
                    benefit of revealing and reworking classroom cultures. As many contributors
                    confirm, exposure to digital tools lets students better grasp the class’s
                    collective relationship to course material, as they note shared sources of
                    confusion with certain aspects of a tool, a text, or both. Chuck Rybak’s
                    students share relief upon realizing that they all become stuck at similar
                    places in the course material, allowing them to move forward with a newfound
                    sense of confidence and team-based learning (a dynamic I have also observed in
                    my own classrooms). While such approaches prove largely effective, they further
                    expose a key zone of intellectual concern where teaching and the digital
                    humanities meet at the experience of student learning. Developing abstract
                    thought in programmed environments risks reproducing the ideological
                    architecture of digital humanities interfaces in students’ own learning
                    strategies. As Amy Robinson explains: 
                        Students without a critical education in digital
                            technology risk being programmed by their programs, trained like
                            computers to follow the same intellectual pathways over and over
                            again
                        
                    . By teaching students to build a given skill set within a digital
                    environment, teachers risk making knowledge proprietary, tied to the technical
                    infrastructure and design logic of a tool or suite. As such, a key component of
                    digital pedagogy entails transmedia literacy, or teaching students how to
                    translate skills from one environment to another. From this perspective,
                    Robinson’s warning revives the urgency of pedagogy within the digital
                    humanities, since understanding the role of digital humanities development in
                    building knowledge requires navigating the boundaries between learning
                    experience and interface design.
            

                Learning Interfaces
                 In addition to sharing classroom activities for teaching with digital tools, the
                    project also includes a syllabus templating tool that allows instructors to
                    remix and repurpose elements of digital syllabuses to create a downloadable
                    template course syllabus. The tool is automatically populated with CC BY-SA
                    content from syllabus information in the Pedagogy Toolkit repository. Syllabus
                    components are stored in the project repository in JSON format, which enables
                    new syllabuses to be added to the templating tool by sharing syllabus
                    information as a JSON file. The templating tool currently includes syllabus
                    contributions from Constance Crompton, Lisa Gitelman, Steve Jones, Amanda
                    Licastro, Eric Rettberg, Janine Utell, and Jacqueline Wernimont. Energized by
                    contributors from a range of academic positions and levels, the tool empowers
                    teachers to rapidly prototype digital pedagogical materials from a breadth of
                    colleague contributions. In so doing, it strives to avoid drawing power from
                    consolidations of disciplinary and canonical influence (and thereby conducting
                    such establishments of power, in turn, to the teacher engaged with the tool).
                    The templating process is divided into three stages: prepare, remix, and revise.
                    In the preparation stage, users enter basic information for their course. The
                    remix stage allows users to weave elements of existing syllabus data into their
                    working syllabus. As of this writing, the templating tool includes a
                        selection of learning outcome statements, attendance statements, and course
                        readings for New Media and Writing, Digital Games, Digital Mapping, and
                        Composition Technologies. The information included is far from
                    exhaustive, and serves as an initial starting point for syllabus construction,
                    rather than an end-to-end environment for syllabus replication. The final
                    revision stage invites instructors creating their syllabus to reflect upon the
                    cultural choices, values, and philosophies of learning that figure into syllabus
                    revision. It includes readings that frame syllabus writing as cultural work from
                    Jacqueline Wernimont, Roopika Risam, and Trent Kays, along with an interface for
                    editing the draft syllabus taking shape onscreen 
                    
                    . Instructors are invited to read these materials as
                    they edit the syllabus in the online interface. Once the instructor has
                    completed her editing process, she may download the template syllabus as a .txt
                    file. In addition to the templating tool, Pedagogy Toolkit also includes a
                    selection of open access syllabuses that cross digital humanities, digital
                    literary studies, and digital rhetoric and composition. In consultation with
                    this curated selection of syllabuses that explicitly cross digital humanities
                    and composition, users are encouraged to continue work on draft syllabuses
                    produced using the tool. They are also encouraged to visit CUNY Academic Commons
                    and the Open Syllabus Project for an expansive selection of online syllabuses
                    that surpasses the project’s curated sampling.
                 The production and design of the templating tool works through the constraints
                    of both code and culture. Rather than being purely an exercise in building a
                    tool under the constraints of Jekyll and Javascript, the development process of
                    the templating tool was also an exercise in working to understand and reshape
                    the cultural constraints of digital humanities syllabuses. This approach is
                    deeply inspired by a conversation I had on Twitter with Jacqueline Wernimont,
                    Daniel Powell, and Whitney Trettien. We discussed Wernimont’s Build a Better DH Syllabus, which responds to, as she
                    writes, the inexcusable absence of women’s work from DH syllabi. Inspired
                    by this conversation, as well those that stemmed from it at the 2015 Digital
                    Diversity conference, the templating tool interface plays out tensions between
                    instrumental and diverse visions of syllabus composition. Particular
                        thanks goes to Julia Flanders, Roopika Risam, and Alex Gil for their
                        thoughts and engagement during the Digital Diversity conference.
                
                Like the switchboard at the front of my physical classroom, the switches and
                    boxes that populate the digital interface restrict the flow of information
                    through the binary logic of the toggle button. Interfaces equally shape the
                    user’s experience of the tool, from text boxes to the disclaimer “all fields
                    optional” that accompanies them. While the tool interface encourages users to
                    remix and interweave elements of other syllabuses, such weaving is ultimately
                    reduced to acts of activating, deactivating, deleting, and rewriting. The tool
                    therefore presents engagements with online syllabuses as simultaneously an
                    intellectual venture in incorporating diverse pedagogical choices and values
                    into one’s teaching and also a bureaucratic venture in toggling flows of text to
                    produce syllabuses on the fly. Rather than eliding or resolving such tensions,
                    the templating tool inhabits and dwells in them. Combined with the critical
                    readings highlighted at the end of the templating process, the tool’s design and
                    user experience prompts teachers drafting a syllabus to wrestle and tangle with
                    the mechanisms of digital teaching in their full messiness, failing to neatly
                    resolve disjunctures between structures of knowledge and interface. This failure
                    lays bare the everyday tensions between the challenge of course content and the
                    immediate access to that content afforded by teaching tools including textbooks,
                    worksheets, and screens, not to mention structures of contingent labor in the
                    academy. 
                The syllabus templating tool responds, in part, to a twofold technical and
                    cultural pressure exerted upon contingent faculty. While part-time instructors
                    are often required to rapidly produce and vet teaching materials, the
                    availability of canonical sources used to inspire and produce those materials
                    (as Wernimont and others note) often corresponds to entrenched hierarchies of
                    gender, class, and sexuality. The templating tool responds to these pressures as
                    an initial resource to facilitate productive action within a stratified labor
                    system that does not succeed by reproducing corollary cultural stratifications.
                    Such complex tensions between diversity and instrumentalism play out through the
                    powered interfaces of classroom and computer alike, with the templating tool
                    (whose switches and boxes downsample diverse content through the binary logic of
                    selection) as no exception. The templating tool embodies the messy and uneasy
                    tensions between efficiency and accountability that shape tool-based learning in
                    digital environments. In this way, it embraces John Unsworth’s claim that
                    failure is an act of discovery, revealing limits to current theories and methods
                    that a field may yet expand upon and explore. Unsworth frames this
                        argument through the concept of problem-based modeling, arguing that if
                            we really want to get our money's worth, we should make sure that we
                            don't fund research that investigates problems the
                            solutions to which are already known, nor should we fund research that
                            selects problems likely to be solved successfully in one funding
                            cycle...we should favor those projects that stake out difficult
                            territory, have a well-thought out approach to that territory, and can
                            at least define what failure, or in a narrower compass, falsification,
                            would be. Unsworth continues: 
                            I think, a very compact, elegant, and persuasive
                                criterion for deciding whether a real problem has been addressed,
                                and solved — namely, the test of whether the solution of that
                                problem has raised new problems
                            
                        . While the tool’s main aim is to invite digital teachers to
                    circulate and account for diverse pedagogical choices and philosophies when
                    planning their course, it also works to prompt reflexive awareness of the role
                    digital tools play in shaping and framing teacher awareness of and engagements
                    with such pedagogies in the first place. This, in turn, cultivates a more
                    diverse learning ecosystem where students gain exposure to pedagogical
                    experiences designed across a range of positions and identities, rather than
                    anthologized by a select few. As concerns of contingency and diversity meet at
                    the interfaces of student learning, they indicate syllabus production as a zone
                    of action for diverse digital humanities.
            

                Building Communities
                Structural interventions in technology and teaching are not problems with easy
                    solutions because teaching is always an unfinished act, an ongoing negotiation
                    of self and other. Cross-pollinating the values, choices, and assumptions that
                    figure into the structures of classroom and technology requires a constant
                    re-evaluation and how, where, and why they intersect. Just as electric power
                    circulates through teaching environments, so too may forms of cultural and
                    disciplinary power propagate through the digital tools and platforms such
                    electricity drives. Through deliberate, pedagogical entanglements of circuits of
                    communication, community, and cultural critique, students may come to better
                    understand how such power shapes their learning, finding themselves empowered to
                    re-situate coursework in relation to the various communities of practice it
                    relies on and supports. This tangle of symbolic, disciplinary, and literal,
                    electric power expresses what Elizabeth Ellsworth calls the wicked problem of
                    pedagogy: 
                        Wicked problems are problems that can’t or haven’t been
                            fully defined. Questions about them can always be asked and
                            reformulated. There is no explicit end to a wicked problem because
                            solutions can always be developed further
                        
                    . When applied to the epistemological limits and possibilities of digital
                    humanities development, the problem of digital pedagogy emerges as an ongoing,
                    unfinished mode of critical self-evaluation through which digital humanities
                    invite reflection upon their own practices, protocols, and power structures,
                    equally considering how these elements impact lived human experience in the
                    classroom. Identifying digital pedagogy (inclusive of digital humanities
                    pedagogy) as a wicked problem illuminates the importance of a variety of
                    projects and voices in this area; among their four criteria for wicked problems,
                    E. Jeffrey Conklin and William Weil include the following two:
                
                    The problem is an evolving set of interlocking issues and constraints.
                        Indeed, there is no definitive statement of the problem. You don’t
                        understand the problem until you have developed a solution.
                    Since there is no definitive Problem, there is no definitive Solution. The
                        problem-solving process ends when you run out of time, money, energy, or
                        some other resource, not when some perfect solution emerges. 
                
                Rather than a singular or universal solution to the wicked problem of pedagogy
                    then, Pedagogy Toolkit serves to energize the complex terrain on which every
                    teacher, developer, and digital project freshly faces such problems through
                    their practice. This terrain is shaped by the interlocking practices of
                    communities both inside and beyond the classroom. 
                The community of the physical classroom always stands connected to the building
                    communities that shape and design its teaching infrastructures. Digital pedagogy
                    carries the promise of rendering visible and legible the often silenced, labor,
                    assumptions, and values of such communities. This work not only reveals future
                    engagements between the cultures and classroom and coder, but also existing
                    entanglements of physical and digital infrastructure that often go unaddressed.
                    As Valerie Robins explains: 
                        The technologies we work with every day–even programs we
                            take for granted like MSWord–take the intellectual capital of an entire
                            community of people in order to build and maintain: inventory,
                            designers, builders, mangers, and even testers working together in a
                            variety of ways. Like a telephone wire up the side of a mountain,
                            programs like Word must be assembled and maintained by a team of workers
                            who we don’t see, and almost never think about, until there’s an
                            issue.
                        
                    
                Rendering transparent the black-boxed technology that informs classroom practice
                    is a mission directed towards the future equally as it invites us to reconsider
                    the past. Even traditional, analog classrooms exist enmeshed with technologies
                    such as Microsoft office, Moodle, Outlook and Mail.app, and so on. Such
                    technologies, built as bureaucratic and information management tools, inform the
                    assignments, lectures, and other documentary expressions of student-teacher
                    communication most teachers author on a regular basis. While the pedagogical
                    applications of corporate technologies do not necessarily signal the
                    bureaucratic subversion of learning management, the role these tools play in
                    shaping learning remains overlooked and under-theorized. Locating pedagogy as a
                    zone that reconfigures the classroom’s connection to the diverse communities it
                    impacts and relies upon thus invites student and teacher awareness of the
                    corporate production teams to which their learning is silently linked. Attending
                    to the histories of the classroom as it has been impacted by the widespread
                    adoption of information management tools is a task that digital pedagogy might
                    still undertake.
                 Pedagogy Toolkit invites teachers to supplement existing classroom technologies
                    with tools whose development teams and values resonate in humanist terms. The
                    tool guides strive to render clear the values and assumptions of a given tool
                    and its development team, reconfiguring the relationship between teacher and
                    tool developer as a two-way process marked by mutual visibility. They empower
                    teachers and students alike to situate their coursework within ongoing
                    communities and their built products outside the classroom, thereby building
                    community across student experience and developer environments. Designed by
                    digital humanities development teams, many tools included in the Toolkit offer
                    expanded contexts for student research, particularly as they translate learning
                    objectives into design goals. Consider Serendip-O-Matic, which is designed
                    explicitly to help scholars discover diverse research sources from unexpected
                    sources drawn from the Digital Public Library of America (DPLA), Europeana, and
                    Flickr Commons. Designed in one week from the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History
                    and New Media, this tool conceives research not as a process of information
                    retrieval, but rather one of serendipitous discovery. Similarly, the interface
                    for New Radial facilitates the visual annotation and organization of related
                    resources. It allows students to import and collaboratively annotate primary and
                    secondary sources, using annotation as a means of constructing complex
                    connections that transform a collection of related sources into a connected
                    network of ideas. Elsewhere, Scholarslab Prism constructs online reading as an
                    environment for crowdsourced interpretation, allowing teachers and students to
                    explore shared reactions to a text through the online interface. As the project
                    website explains, the 2011-2012 and 2012-2013 Praxis fellows designed the tool,
                    first, to translate the physical exercise of marking a text into a digital
                        one, and, second, 
                        to expand Prism to a format that would promote
                            classroom use and scholarly conversation.
                        
                    . Incorporating such tools into the humanities classroom offers an
                    opportunity for students and teachers to consider how classroom learning might
                    align with the cultural sections with which these tools operate, including
                    museums, libraries, archives, and humanities labs. Doing so frames humanities
                    skills as ones which extend beyond the classroom, exposing students to teams and
                    organizations that methodologically engage with approaches and materials
                    considered in the class. Accounting for the mechanisms of technological
                    development through our teaching renews a Freireian critique of the banking
                    model of education. Paulo Frerie’s Pedagogy of the
                            Oppressed needs no introduction. See this work for further
                        information on Freire’s banking model of education.  The opaque
                    mechanisms of black-boxed technology risk turning teaching technology into
                    teaching skills for information recording and broadcasting, framing students and
                    teachers as data processors who record, deposit, and exchange documents (in
                    addition to framing critical thinking as the development of tool literacy).
                    Accessing tools that invite users to live out and work through knowledge
                    creation, in addition to recording its products, promises to complicate this
                    dynamic. A humanist approach to learning tools charts a path through which
                    students extend critical and cultural work to information technologies, as well
                    as the productions teams and environments amongst which they might continue such
                    work after the course concludes.
            

                Conclusion
                 Far from exercises in deploying digital tools in physical classrooms, digital
                    pedagogy signals the analog classroom as a community that reflexively evaluates
                    its own means and modes of learning in relation to the unseen communities that
                    shape it. Among such communities are digital humanists at a range of positions
                    (from research faculty and project leads to tool developers and designers).
                    Digital pedagogy engages the products of digital humanities communities as those
                    communities design technical frameworks within which digital pedagogy may
                    operate, forming loops and recursions between the two zones of practice. Such
                    loops operate through the electric interfaces of tools analog and digital alike,
                    as well as the disciplinary power they conduct into the hands of users. At the
                    same time as teachers and students channel and direct such power through the
                    tools they use, the design and interfaces of the environments at hand may
                    empower or disempower critical awareness of the tool’s role in knowledge
                    construction. This awareness challenges the traditional concept of
                        teaching with technology in its suggestion that both
                    concepts can be neatly compartmentalized and contained from each other’s
                    influence. Such a challenge restores the intellectual mission of pedagogy as an
                    ongoing interpersonal dynamic that invites participants to learn about the world
                    around them, while simultaneously coming to grips with what and how they know,
                    as well as strategies for exploring the limits of such metacognitive awareness.
                    Teaching both offers a critical evaluation of technologies of learning as well
                    as a reflexive awareness of how such technologies permeate and inform that very
                    teaching. Rather than framing digital pedagogy as teaching with
                        technology, it might instead be conceived to be
                        teaching as technology. This formulation echoes calls
                    by Jesse Stommel and Paul Fyfe that digital learning need not always be
                    electronic 
                    . As Stommel writes: 
                        My call is to stop attempting to distinguish so
                            incessantly between online and on-ground learning, between the virtual
                            and the face-to-face, between digital pedagogy and chalkboard pedagogy.
                            Good pedagogy is just good pedagogy
                        
                    . Indeed, facile separations between analog and digital pedagogy risk
                    devaluing the full complexity of epistemological engagements with learning
                    tools. Digital pedagogy does not operate in or through a learning interface, but
                    rather at its surface, where it comingles with the thinking, talking, feeling,
                    histories, and embodied experience of physical individuals collaborating in a
                    shared knowledge space. These dynamics play out through physical classroom
                    objects, including textbooks, hands, whiteboards, eyes, keyboards, pens, desks,
                    paper, and ears. They also enable a pedagogy of awareness and inclusivity, one
                    that reveals self and other as already interlinked through the powered
                    apparatuses of classroom, screen, discipline, sector, and institution.
                Digital pedagogy promises connection and collaboration across contiguous
                    communities equally as it risks entrenching the separations and partitions that
                    divide them, segregating teaching from research, emerging from established, and
                    faculty from information technologist. Such divisions often constitute frozen
                    hierarchies of power and labor. They frame communities of practice in
                    competition with each other, manufacturing discrete knowledge commodities
                    instead of building interconnected structures for intellectual sharing and
                    advancement. The emergence of social infrastructure in the humanities conceives
                    pedagogy as an intersubjective act through which communities reach, share, and
                    grow together to challenge and overturn such divisive logics and frameworks.
                    More than a register of electrified currents in humanities teaching, digital
                    pedagogy teaches dynamics through which humanities continue to grow.
            
