Title:  An Enlightenment Utopia: The Network of Sociability in 
Volume:  011
Issue:  2
Date:  2 May 2017
Abstract:  
                
                 This paper approaches Corinne, ou l'Italie through
                    an inter-disciplinary lens, drawing on literary, historical, and digital
                    methodologies. If Corinne is first and foremost a
                    Romantic novel that foregrounds the love plot between Corinne and Oswald, it is
                    as much a novel about the role of women in society, articulated through the
                    figure of the femme de génie. The plot of the
                        femme de génie finds its expression through
                    the trope of sociability, which I analyze through a social network analysis of
                    the characters in the narrative and a computational analysis of collocates. I
                    argue that through the constellation of sociability in the novel and the
                    national allegories that accompany it, Staël evokes an enduring partiality for
                    an Enlightenment ideal of sociability that remains deeply connected with female
                    emancipation. The lens of sociability thus allows for a re-articulation of the
                    novel as a social critique of patriarchal society. 
            
Full Body Text: 
Corinne ou l’Italie: An Allegory of Utopian
                Sociability

                Introduction
                The salon is considered the milieu of sociability par
                        excellence in eighteenth-century France, and carries with it
                    mythic associations as an incubator of literary and philosophical discourse.
                    Women, for the most part, governed these spaces of mediation between the
                        gens de lettres and the gens du monde, which allowed for the formation of
                    networks of philosophes, writers, historians,
                    economists, politicians, and aristocrats. Whether the salon served as a motor of
                    the Enlightenment or rather as a place of aristocratic divertissement, the
                    Enlightenment ideal of a vibrant, mixed-gendered salon that thrives on
                    intellectual and literary exchange is precisely the mode of sociability that
                    Madame de Staël championed, both in theory and in practice.Recent studies
                        of 18th-century sociability have challenged the
                        notion of salons as places of philosophical debate, suggesting that the
                        salon was more for worldly entertainment, see 
                Staël inhabited a complex historical position between the Enlightenment and
                    post-revolutionary France. She remained firmly attached not only to the ideas of
                    the Enlightenment, but also to the aristocratic culture of the ancien régime, as evidenced by her desire to
                    repurpose Enlightenment practices of sociability after the Revolution . The society that Staël assembled at the château de
                    Coppet during her time in exile constituted an alternative to the state-run
                    institutions of the 19th century that formally
                    excluded the participation of women, institutions intended to replace the salon
                    of the ancien régime
                    . Staël’s mastery of the 18th-century salon allowed her to expand her
                    sociocultural influence from a Parisian salon in the years leading up to the
                    Revolution to a bastion of intellectual exchange at Coppet, where she
                    perpetuated Enlightenment modes of sociability and fostered female and male
                    intellectual collaboration. Coppet was a place of literary, philosophical and
                    political exchange that occurred between nations as well as across disciplines.
                    It became such a powerful center of influence that Stendhal will refer to Coppet
                    as having been The Estates General of Europe
                    .
                A significant amount of the scholarship on Staël takes either a literary or a
                    historical approach. For literary historians, Staël is not only a pioneer of
                    French Romanticism, but she is also an early feminist figure who addresses
                    singularly female conflicts in her theoretical and literary works. On
                        Staël and Romanticism, see , , and ; for a work of
                        feminist criticism on Staël, see . Many
                    studies focus on Staël’s biography, from her precocious childhood in Madame
                    Necker’s salon to her own salon on rue du Bac in the years leading up to the
                    Revolution, her efforts to create safe havens abroad for endangered aristocrats
                    during the Terror, the exile and censorship she faced under Napoleon, and her
                    intellectual circle at Coppet.For biographical studies of Staël’s life and
                        work, see Simone Balayé, Madame de Staël: Lumières et
                            liberté (Klincksieck, 1979) and Madame de
                            Staël: écrire, lutter, vivre (Droz, 1994), Sergine Dixon, Germaine de Staël, Daughter of the Enlightenment
                        (Amherst, Mass: Prometheus Books, 2007), Francine Du Plessix Gray, Germaine de Staël: The First Modern Woman (New
                        York: Atlas, 2008), Angelica Goodden, Madame de Staël:
                            the dangerous exile (Oxford University Press, 2008), Michel
                        Winock, Madame de Staël (Paris: Fayard, 2010).
                        For a detailed account of Staël’s relations with Napoleon, see Paul Gautier,
                            Madame de Staël et Napoléon (HardPress,
                        2013). For a brief history of the intellectual activity at Coppet, see
                        Etienne Hofmann and François Rosset, Le groupe de
                            Coppet: une constellation d’intellectuels européens (Collection
                        le savoir suisse, 2005). Scholars particularly underscore Staël’s
                    influence in the world of letters and in public affairs on an international
                    level. Recent studies have turned to her role in forging a network that fostered
                    new thought through the exchange of ideas between thinkers from diverse nations,
                    granting Staël a central role in the narrative of European cosmopolitanism that
                    while strong during the Enlightenment, would profoundly mark 19th-century intellectual production. See Karyna
                        Szmurlo, ed., Germaine de Staël: Forging a Politics of
                            Mediation (Oxford: Voltaire Foundation, Oxford University,
                        2011). See also Marie-Claire Hoock-Demarle, Un lieu
                            d’interculturalité franco-allemande: le réseau épistolaire de
                            Coppet,
                        Romantisme 21, no. 73 (1991): 19–28. 
                
                In line with the continued interest in Staël’s practices of sociability, her
                    Enlightenment heritage, and her feminist critique of society, this paper
                    demonstrates how these preoccupations intersect in her novel Corinne. I combine more traditional literary and
                    historical methods with – for the first time – digital methodologies to examine
                    the trope of Enlightenment sociability in the novel. Sociability was far more
                    than a cultural practice for Staël; it constituted a key component of Staël’s
                    political thought. For Staël, the salon was essential in affording women a role
                    in public life. What’s more, as Steven Kale notes, Staël considered the salon to
                    be 
                        the crucible of an enlightened
                            politics, where aristocrats and intellectuals came together to
                            consummate the marriage of politics and philosophy
                        
                    . For more on the role of sociability in Staël’s political thought,
                        see Steven Kale, Women, Salons and Sociability as
                            Constitutional Problems in the Political Writings of Madame de
                            Staël (Historical Reflections/Réflexions
                            Historiques 32.2 (2006): 309-338); see also Staël’s Considérations sur les principaux événemens de la
                            Révolution française, where she discusses the history of
                        sociability in France. The ideal mode of Enlightenment sociability
                    that Staël cultivated in her own circles finds its manifest expression in her
                    novel Corinne, ou l’Italie. 
                While Staël’s literary work is often discussed in relation to the establishment
                    of a Romantic topos, the influence of the Enlightenment on her work and her
                    continued faith in les lumières ought not to be
                        eclipsed. Florence Lotterie shows for instance in “Madame de Staël. La littérature comme «philosophie sensible»,”
                        Romantisme 34, no. 124 (2004), how Staël’s view
                        of literature as a form of activism, and her faith in the social utility of
                        literature and philosophy for progress, is an Enlightenment ideal. For more
                        on Staël's synthesis of the 18th century's reflections on aesthetics,
                        philosophy, and society, see the volume edited by Tili Boon Cuillé and
                        Karyna Szmurlo, Staël’s Philosophy of the Passions:
                            Sensibility, Society and the Sister Arts (Lewisburg, PA:
                        Bucknell University Press, 2013). Staël draws on a variety of
                    influences, not only German philosophy and English proto-romanticism, but also
                    ideas from the French Enlightenment, which synthesize into a distinct pensée staëlienne that can be traced throughout her
                    literary and philosophical works . If
                        Corinne is first and foremost a Romantic novel
                    that foregrounds the love plot between Corinne and Oswald, it is as much a novel
                    about the role of women in society, articulated through the figure of the
                        femme de génie. The social conflicts that
                    plague Corinne as a result of her talents and emancipated lifestyle are
                    entangled within the amatory intrigue, which has led scholars to suggest that
                        Corinne
                    
                        n’est pas un roman d’amour, mais
                            l’amour y est constamment essentiel
                        
                    .
                        [Corinne is] not a love story, but love is constantly
                            essential to it. All translations from French to English of
                        secondary literature and of Corinne have been
                        executed by myself. The novel can be read as having two plots: the
                    love plot, which allows for the development of Romantic tropes – passion,
                    suffering, the sublime experience of nature and ruins, melancholia, to name a
                    few – and the plot of the femme de génie. 
                The plot of the femme de génie is a fundamental
                    component of the pensée staëlienne, finding its
                    expression in Corinne through the trope of
                    sociability. What’s more, Staël’s allegorical use of nations in the novel serves
                    to qualify the cultural conditions of possibility for this ideal sociability,
                    contrasting a modern model of gender relations and female autonomy in Italy with
                    the more archaic mores represented by British society in Corinne. In this paper, I argue that through the constellation of
                    sociability in Corinne and the national allegories
                    that accompany it, Staël evokes an enduring partiality for an Enlightenment
                    ideal of sociability that remains deeply connected with female emancipation. The
                    lens of sociability allows for a re-articulation of the novel as a social
                    critique of patriarchal society in juxtaposition with an alternative,
                    enlightened social model.
            

                Methods
                The first digital method employed is a social network analysis of Corinne. On social network analysis, see Stanley
                        Wasserman and Katherine Faust, Social Network Analysis:
                            Methods and Applications (New York: Cambridge University Press,
                        1994); and David Knoke and Song Yang, Social Network
                            Analysis (Los Angeles: Sage Publications, 2008). The
                    application of social network analysis (SNA) to the study of literature is on
                    the rise as scholars experiment with how this quantitative method from the
                    domain of the social sciences can confirm or challenge existing theories in
                    literary studies, identifying larger patterns or shedding new insights on
                    specific works. A network is made up of nodes and edges; when applied to a
                    literary text, nodes are very often the characters and edges are the
                    interactions between characters . Network
                    theory allows us to quantify plot and create models of literary texts. As Franco
                    Moretti demonstrates, a networks approach to literature can be useful in several
                    ways. One major change introduced by networks is the way in which they make
                    visible all aspects of a plot at once. Networks reveal underlying structures in
                    the process of reducing and abstracting the narrative. By creating models of a
                    text, scholars can also intervene on the model and experiment, rethinking the
                    hierarchy of characters and their centrality . As Moretti notes, removing the protagonist can reveal a
                    completely altered network of the same text, and peripheral characters can point
                    to subplots . Furthermore, as Andrew Piper,
                    Syed Ahmed, Faiyaz Al-Zamal, and Derek Ruths suggest, the study of character
                    networks in literature offers a way to study not only types and themes, they
                    also 
                        afford us the ability to understand the
                            social imaginings of writers, periods, and genres
                        
                    .
                While some scholars focus on individual texts, others use computational methods
                    in large-scale studies of thousands of texts. See for instance Agarwal et
                        al.’s study of Lewis Carroll’s Alice in
                            Wonderland, which shows how networks can provide insights into
                        the roles of characters in a narrative. David Bamman, Ted Underwood,
                    and Noah Smith have used automatic text extraction on a vast corpus of 18th and 19th-century
                    English novels to show that computational methods can support the same range of
                    critical judgments offered by traditional literary scholarship about character
                    types . David Elson, Nicholas Dames, and
                    Kathleen McKeown also used an automated approach on a large sample to examine
                    the social communities portrayed by 19th-century
                    British novels, suggesting that narrative voice is the most determinative of a
                    novel’s social network, which counters the common scholarly emphasis placed on
                    setting . Another area of interest has been the use of
                    social network analysis to understand the social features specific to different
                    genres. Piper et al employed social network analysis to elucidate the social
                    dynamics of detective fiction and the function of character types in the genre
                        . 
                Whether SNA is applied to the study of a single text or several, scholars who
                    employ digital methodologies to analyze literature all underscore the challenges
                    of extracting data and constructing social networks from literary texts. While
                    in plays, the interactions between characters can be easily quantified based on
                    speech acts, translating character interactions computationally in a novel is
                    not self-evident . Scholars have approached this
                    issue in a variety of ways. Some build their networks based on concrete
                    interaction between characters that requires 
                        active co-presence
                        
                    . For others, dialogue interactions suffice: Elson et al. construct
                    networks relying on character name chunking and quoted speech attribution . It is important however to distinguish between
                    interactions and observations by characters about others . Apoorv Agarwal, Augusto Corvalan, Jacob Jensen, and
                    Owen Rambow conducted network analysis based on concrete interactions between
                    characters, or, instances of observation where one character is thinking of or
                    talking about another character. They also point to the suitability of different
                    types of networks to understand different aspects of a text, and the usefulness
                    of dynamic networks, where metrics such as directionality, weighting, and degree
                    centrality can nuance analysis . 
                In this study of Corinne, I apply social network
                    analysis to a single text and in a vein similar to Moretti, I experiment with
                    the model in order to shift the perspective from the love plot to the trope of
                    sociability . The method applied to Corinne understands interactions between characters as
                    taking place in the unit of the text that is topically consistent: the
                        paragraph. See Mark Algee-Hewitt, Ryan Heuser, and Franco Moretti’s
                        Pamphlet 10, On Paragraphs. Scale, Themes, and
                            Narrative For, of the Stanford Literary Lab, http://litlab.stanford.edu/pamphlets/.  Using the R
                    statistical software environment, interactions, defined as instances of
                    characters’ names appearing in the same paragraph, were extracted automatically.
                    The more frequently this occurs, the stronger the interaction, thus the edge
                    between the characters in the network has a higher weight. This is closest to
                    Agarwal et al.’s approach in that it takes into account not only instances of
                    physical interaction, but also instances where characters are being discussed or
                    thought about by a third party. Based on the narrative context, it becomes clear
                    whether or not the network is slanted more towards physical interaction or
                    towards abstract interaction. For instance, Oswald and Corinne, the two
                    protagonists in love, spend a significant amount of time thinking of one
                    another, while other secondary characters only appear in physical interactions
                    and do not become central narrative foci. Since the object of interest for this
                    paper is sociability, the visualizations primarily reflect interaction involving 
                        active co-presence
                        
                    . 
                Instead of concluding my study with an analysis of the metrics of the character
                    network, I sought to anchor my interpretation in the language of the text. The
                    second digital method applied to the text executes a computational analysis of
                    the semantic fields in the narrative by deciphering collocates of specific
                    aspects of the novel. How does this relate, however, to the character network
                    and the trope of sociability? In contrast to the large-scale studies that
                    automatically extract data from novels and derive conclusions from the data
                    alone, the benefit of applying computational methods to a single text is being
                    able to tailor the approach with specific aims based on knowledge of the text.
                    What’s more, while many computational studies of literature analyze data in
                    isolation from the narrative, I combine the network analysis and the
                    collocate-analysis with more traditional literary analysis of the novel. 
                For the purposes of this study, I identified the collocates of two of the primary
                    national poles of the novel, Italy and England. The collocates associated with
                    these nations serve as a first point of entry to understand their symbolic
                    significance to the thematic tensions surrounding gender and the trope of
                    sociability in the novel. Through a Fisher’s exact test, it is possible to
                    identify how many times collocates occur meaningfully (up to 25 words before or
                    prior the countries of interest) versus how many times they would be expected to
                    occur if equally distributed throughout the novel. As I will demonstrate, the
                    collocate-analysis allows for a qualification of the tensions that underlie the
                    social network. These two separate digital methodologies direct attention to and
                    shed light on the issue of Enlightenment sociability in Staël’s novel.
                    Sociability is an aspect of Corinne that receives
                    little critical attention, but is no less significant to the novel and for
                    situating Staël’s work more broadly. 
            

                Sociability in Corinne: A Network Analysis 
                On first glance, a social network analysis of the interactions between characters
                    in Corinne immediately highlights certain
                    determining characteristics of the narrative (see Figure
                        1). The love plot constitutes the focus of the character network, with
                    an overwhelming majority of interactions between Corinne and Oswald. This is
                    unsurprising considering the lengthy portions of the narrative involving only
                    these two characters. The love triangle also occupies a central place in the
                    network; although Corinne and her sister Lucile only physically interact towards
                    the end of the novel, Oswald is constantly comparing the two women as he is torn
                    between his love for Corinne and his inculcated British values of domesticity.
                    Likewise Lady Edgermond gains prominence through Oswald’s interactions with her
                    in England and Corinne’s recounting of her past interactions with her
                    stepmother. Another facet of the network that is evident is that it is
                    strikingly British. Oswald, Lord and Lady Edgermond, Lucile, and Juliette
                    constitute the majority of the characters in the network. 
                
                        Character Network: Undirected; colored by nationality (including the
                            created nationality of cosmopolitan for Corinne and the
                                    amis); sized by
                            Eigenvector centrality which calculates the approximate importance of
                            each node based on how many edges it has that also attach to other nodes
                            with a high number of edges. The size of the nodes is proportional to
                            their centrality to the network. All visualizations have been
                                produced through the open-source network analysis and visualization
                                software Gephi.
                        
                    
                
                 The character network of the novel as a whole indicates that Corinne is a novel about relationships and familial
                    ties; the network becomes so profoundly insular that even the two characters who
                    are simply close friends (the comte d’Erfeuil and the prince Castel-Forte) are
                    connected in terms of co-occurrence within paragraphs to characters within the
                    novel that they may or may not ever interact with face-to-face. Yet due to their
                    high involvement in one another’s lives as friends, they end up discussing, with
                    Oswald and Corinne, the entire array of characters who are central to the love
                    plot. The network also reflects the manner in which certain parts of the novel
                    are narrated in the first person and concern events anterior to the plot,
                    causing characters with little relation to the intrigue, or at the very least,
                    little active interaction with the main characters throughout the narrative, to
                    populate the network, such as the comte de Raimond, Madame d’Arbigny, Lord
                    Edgermond, and the prince d’Amalfi. 
                The love plot and the accompanying drama however detract attention from a trope
                    with equal significance that simply occupies a smaller portion of the novel,
                    that of sociability. If the character network of the novel as a whole is fairly
                    self-evident and hardly requires the intervention of digital tools, there is a
                    consequential sub-network that is derived from the word amis, which is where the trope of sociability manifests itself
                    (See Figure 2). While the novel features few
                    characters in the traditional sense of the word, Corinne’s acquaintances in
                    Italy who constitute her circle of sociability are repeatedly referred to in the
                    plural amis. What’s more, the instances where
                    the amis are present correspond with the scenes
                    of sociability in the novel. Thus to create this network, I included amis as a character and tracked its co-occurrence in
                    the text. When one focuses on this node, it reveals the primary network of
                    sociability, without the distracting ties of love and kinship. 
                
                        Amis Network or Network of
                            Sociability
                        
                    
                Although it is a patently smaller network, it is profoundly symbolic of a network
                    of Enlightenment sociability. It is composed of a French aristocrat, an Italian
                    prince, an English Lord, Corinne, and the amis.
                    I labeled both the amis and Corinne as
                        cosmopolitan since Corinne can be considered an expatriate, a
                    British woman living abroad, and the amis may
                    include individuals of nationalities other than Italian who similarly have made
                    a home abroad. The Amis network is
                    striking because in contrast to the full network that displays varying degrees
                    of edge weights, the Amis network has
                    almost equal edge weights between characters. Corinne’s connections to the comte
                    d’Erfeuil, the amis, and the prince
                    Castel-Forte are all approximately equal. In addition, each of those characters,
                    including Oswald, have the strongest connection to her over any other node in
                    the entire network, which underscores the centrality of Corinne in this network
                    of sociability as well as in the narrative as a whole.
                In the Amis network, we can interpret
                    this relative equality of edge weights as indicative of moments in the narrative
                    of equal exchange taking place in mixed company, manifesting the ideal mode of
                    Enlightenment sociability. Staël portrays a vibrant cosmopolitan milieu of
                    literary sociability in the chapters that take place at Corinne’s abode. Oswald
                    describes her dwelling as 
                        un mélange heureux de tout ce qu’il
                            y avait de plus agréable dans les trois nations, française, anglaise et
                            italienne; le goût de société, l’amour des lettres, et le sentiment des
                            beaux-arts
                        
                    .
                        a happy medley of all that is most
                            agreeable in the English, French and Italian nations; the taste for
                            society, the love of literature, and a passion for the fine arts
                        (Subsequent citations from Corinne will be
                        prefixed by a C). The narrator notes that Corinne assembles a
                    society of individuals every evening. The first occurrence of this follows
                    Corinne’s public oratory, and the conversation centers on Corinne’s talent for
                    improvisation and Italian poetry (C82). The most extensive scene of sociability
                    occurs in Book VII, in which Corinne, Lord Nelvil, the prince Castel-Forte, the
                    comte d’Erfeuil, and M. Edgermond engage in a lively debate over poetry, prose,
                    and theater. Corinne speaks at length of Dante, Petrarch, Cesarotti, Ossian,
                    Machiavelli, and Boccaccio. When discussing French literature, the comte
                    d’Erfeuil refers to the literature under Louis XIV as the perfect
                        models of prose, citing Bossuet, Montesquieu, Buffon, and La
                    Bruyère (C176). They discuss classical theater and the English claim to
                    theatrical glory, Shakespeare. Through Corinne’s character, Staël articulates
                    theories of literature and engages in comparisons of national literatures.
                    Corinne even echoes the philosophy of literature expressed in Staël’s treatise
                        De la littérature, when she remarks that l’observation du coeur humain est une
                        source inépuisable pour la littérature (C181).
                        the observation of the human heart
                            is an inexhaustible source for literature
                
                Corinne’s role in the Amis network is that of
                    the femme de lettres, a woman who occupies a
                    prominent place in the world of letters and maintains a regular circle of
                    sociability that fosters intellectual and literary exchange. In this sense,
                    Corinne represents the literary node in this network of sociability, and the
                    core group of her acquaintances is composed of aristocratic men from different
                    European nations. The characters in this network thus reconstruct an archetypal
                    space of 18th-century sociability in which a
                    distinguished woman assembles a society comprised of a majority of male
                        attendees. Some salon hostesses of the Enlightenment such as Mme
                        Geoffrin and Julie de Lespinasse limited the number of women who could come
                        to their salons. Similarly, Staël hosted a majority of men, in Paris and at
                        Coppet. While they are not men of letters per se, they exemplify the
                    Enlightenment culture of intellectual participation. As Dan Edelstein notes, the
                    Enlightenment depended on much more than simply [penning] a treatise, instead, the
                    interaction between gens de lettres  and
                        gens du monde  in the salons served as a
                    precondition of the Enlightenment’s existence . This small network of sociability thereby reflects on a micro
                    scale the social composition of the French Enlightenment, which was highly
                    aristocratic, literary, and male-dominated, barring certain exceptional women
                    who established hubs of power in the world of letters through practices of
                        sociability. See Maria Teodora Comsa, Melanie Conroy, Dan Edelstein,
                        Chloe Summers Edmondson, and Claude Willan, The French
                            Enlightenment Network, The Journal of
                            Modern History 88, no. 3 (2016): 495-534.
                
                Corinne’s circle represents at once the social composition of the French
                    Enlightenment and exemplifies an ideal of sociability. If Staël succeeds in
                    making this ideal a reality at Coppet, she transposes Coppet’s model of
                    cosmopolitan sociability into fiction in Corinne.
                    Corinne incarnates the autonomous femme de lettres
                    who enjoys an eminent position in society as a result of her literary and
                    artistic gifts, and her capacity to cultivate a rich circle of sociability. She
                    unites a myriad of languages, arts, literary genres, and people in a utopian
                    exchange. The Amis network in the novel
                    thus represents a modern schema of male and female relations that centers around
                    female intellectual agency and is conducive to female autonomy. The notion of a
                    distinctly modern ethos is further developed through Staël’s symbolic treatment
                    of the various nations in the novel, which the collocate-analysis underscores.
                
            

                Collocate-Networks of Italy and England: Allegories of Social Values
                The characters that compose the network of sociability are inseparable from their
                    respective national identities. Nations in Staël’s Corinne become allegories of social values. The collocates of Italy
                    and England thus allow us to qualify the social network of the characters.
                    Specifically, the collocates of Italy elucidate the social conditions that make
                    the Amis network possible. 
                Staël’s representation of the different nationalities in Corinne has been interpreted in a variety of ways. Some scholars
                    point to the distance between Staël’s portrayals of nations and historical
                    reality, arguing that Staël’s cultural portraits perpetuate stereotypes.
                        See for instance Angelica Goodden, The Dangerous
                            Exile, Robert Casillo, The Empire of
                            Stereotypes: Germaine de Staël and the Idea of Italy (Macmillan:
                        New York, 2006), and Joseph Luzzi, Romantic Europe and
                            the Ghost of Italy (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
                        2008). This interpretation, however, ignores the strategic purpose of
                    these portrayals of nations in the tradition of Voltaire and Montesquieu, a
                    technique used for social critique rather than historical accuracy. Edward
                        Ousselin, Germaine de Staël et Voltaire: de l’usage des
                            modèles littéraires étrangers (Dalhousie
                            French Studies 92 (2010): 65-73). Many studies point to
                    the politicization of the novel through these national representations,
                    suggesting that Staël obliquely challenges Napoleon’s power by opposing literary
                    arts to military spirit, idealizing a nation conquered by Napoleon, and
                    characterizing the French in an unfavorably frivolous light. See Suzanne
                        Guerlac Writing the Nation (Mme de Stael),
                        French Forum 30, no. 3 (2005): 43–56, Susan
                        Tenenbaum, Corinne: Political Polemics and the Theory
                            of the novel in The Novel’s Seductions:
                            Staël’s Corinne in Critical Inquiry (Bucknell University Press,
                        1999): 154-164, Giulia Pacini, Hidden Politics in
                            Germaine de Staël's Corinne ou l'Italie (French Forum. Vol. 24. No. 2. University of Nebraska Press,
                        1999), and Edward Ousselin, Germaine de Staël et
                            Voltaire: de l'usage des modèles littéraires étrangers (Dalhousie French Studies 92 (2010): 65-73).
                    What Staël critiques in Corinne, however, extends
                    beyond Napoleon, to the status of women and the possibilities afforded to them.
                    Staël portrays Italy as a utopia, free from the social constraints of
                    patriarchal societies. Michel Delon associates the social freedom in this
                    idealized Italy with the ancient Roman traditions of public oratory and poetic
                    creation in the novel . I argue, however, that the
                    classical motif rather affords a theatricalized setting for a mode of
                    sociability that, by contrast, is not reminiscent of ancient Rome but rather
                    reminiscent of the ancien régime during the
                    Enlightenment.
                The symbolic value of Italy and England are of the utmost importance in conveying
                    the opposition between an ideal of Enlightenment sociability conducive to female
                    emancipation and another form of society that precludes this. The comparative
                    framework allows Staël to address the condition of women in different social
                    contexts, specifically the issue of the social conditions that allow women to
                    enjoy intellectual agency. This is a topic that Staël actively engages with in
                    her theoretical works, particularly with respect to post-revolutionary society.
                    The heightened climate of misogyny in France after the revolution is something
                    that Staël had to confront firsthand as she endured political persecution,
                    exile, and censorship. On the culture of misogyny in post-revolutionary
                        France and women’s social and political setbacks in the 19th century, see .
                     She addresses this issue explicitly in her theoretical works,
                    pinpointing the non-institutionalized power that was available to women through
                    practices of sociability under the ancien
                        régime in contrast to post-revolutionary France. She asserts that
                        l’opinion which reigned in the ancien régime was 
                        l’ouvrage des dames distinguées par
                            leur esprit et leur caractère
                        
                    .
                        the work of women distinguished by
                            their esprit and character
                        (subsequent citations of De la littérature will
                        be prefixed by DL). Staël reveals the shift in the status of
                    women through her remarks on the stigma associated with publicity and writing
                    under the two regimes, Dans les
                        monarchies, elles ont à craindre le ridicule, et dans les républiques la
                        haine (DL333).
                        In monarchies, women feared
                            ridicule, and in republics hatred, underlining the misogyny
                        associated with republicanism. She criticizes the social and
                    political trend since the French Revolution de réduire les femmes à la plus absurde
                        médiocrité (DL335).
                        reducing women to the most absurd
                            mediocrity
                
                Staël was far from alone in expressing these views; Stendhal observes that women
                        étaient des déesses et sont
                        devenues des esclaves in the 19th
                    century .
                        women were goddesses and have become
                                slaves What Staël theorizes concerning the
                    political structure of the ancien régime as
                    conducive to female agency has been similarly underscored by historians today
                        . The Revolution solidified the
                    growing malaise arising from now
                        disturbingly fluid gender borders, yielding ideological and legal
                    setbacks for women linked to republican ideology . As Madelyn Gutwirth notes, the increasing relegation of women to
                    the private sphere would prove to be the single most unalterable measure effected by the
                        Revolution, surviving all the 19th
                    century’s changes of regime . The idea of
                    a malaise concerning fluid gender roles takes center stage
                    in Corinne as Oswald struggles with Corinne’s
                    emancipated life of celebrity in Italy, and ultimately privileges the relegation
                    of women to the domestic sphere. 
                Staël’s portrayals of England and Italy constitute key motifs that convey the
                    thematic conflicts of the novel in relation to issues of gender and sociability.
                    The romantic intrigue in Corinne is fueled by the
                    social realities of cultural difference – Italy symbolizes a society that
                    simultaneously supports and thrives on literary arts, in stark contrast to the
                    representation of England in the novel . A
                    computational analysis of the collocates of England and Italy sheds light on the
                    social frameworks that Staël constructs through her representations of these two
                    nations throughout the novel as a whole. For ease of visualization, the
                    variations such as Italien(s),
                        Italienne(s) and Anglais,
                            Anglaise(s) have been subsumed under Italie and Angleterre respectively. Conjunctions, articles,
                    pronouns, and the verbs avoir and
                            être have also been excluded
                    from these networks to focus predominately on the more connotative and
                    descriptive semantic fields employed. See Appendix for a full list of the
                        nation collocates. 
                
                
                    
                        England Collocates: Directed; Nodes colored and sized by OutDegree
                            (how many outgoing edges each node has); Edges weighted by observed over
                            expected.
                        
                    
                
                England’s collocates seem to indicate that it serves primarily as a point of
                    comparison in the novel (see Figure 3). Its
                    collocate of the most frequency is in fact, Italy, seconded by French,
                    accent, and reputation. A comparative framework effectively runs
                    through the novel; Oswald compares Corinne to Lucile, Italy to England, and the
                    other main characters engage in this same comparative activity. The collocate
                        French points to the motif of national comparisons. Accent
                    follows suit; one’s accent serves as a signifier of nationality. Upon his first
                    interaction with Corinne, Oswald is shocked to hear Corinne speak English
                        avec ce pur accent national, ce pur accent insulaire qui presque jamais
                        ne peut être imité sur le continent, for he is unaware of her English
                    origins (C68).
                        with that pure national accent, that pure insular accent that can almost
                            never be imitated on the continent This association is
                    reinforced when Corinne speaks French with an English accent, which perplexes
                    Oswald and the comte d’Erfeuil at this point in the narrative (C74). The
                    collocates for England, moreover, are not particularly descriptive. Some
                    relevant ones include voyage, quitter, mois, ans,
                            patrie, which all relate to the plot and Oswald’s time spent
                    away from England. The high frequency of patrie points to the centrality of the motif of being
                    tied to one’s nation and its social values. Reputation appears to be the
                    most significant non-comparative collocate for England. Social mores, which
                    determine reputation, constitute the primary obstacle to the love plot and
                    contribute to the tragic dénouement.
                
                    
                        Italy Collocates: Directed network; Nodes colored and sized by
                            OutDegree (how many outgoing edges each node has); Edges weighted by
                            observed over expected.
                        
                    
                
                The greater diversity of collocates associated with Italy and their descriptive
                    nature reflect the inextricable association between Italy and the female
                    protagonist (see Figure 4). The collocate of
                    greatest frequency is of course Angleterre, emphasizing the juxtaposition between these two
                    nations. Italy also has collocates that signal the topics that are important in
                    the narrator’s discussions of the two nationalities: society, marriage,
                    characters, and social mores. Yet overall, the kinds of collocates are markedly
                    different than those of England and confer upon Italy a veritable personality.
                    Italy is associated predominately with belle,
                            naturelle, vivacité, vrai. The words étrangers and partout seem to underline the cosmopolitan nature that
                    Staël ascribes to Italy, which has more to do with her allegorical use of Italy
                    than a social reality. There are also words from the semantic field of the
                    letters and the arts, music, tragedy, theater, and penser, imagination, which reflect the way
                    in which Italy symbolizes a place that allows literary and artistic genius to
                    flourish. “Imagination” is also significant because while it occurs 218 times in
                    the novel in a multitude of contexts, it remains specifically one of Italy’s
                    highest collocates. These collocates accentuate the comparative framework of the
                    novel and contribute to the framing of Italy as the only nation in which
                    Corinne’s genius can manifest itself in its full glory. 
                The portrayal of Italy that these collocates construct reveals the close
                    affinities between the country and the female protagonist. This supports
                        what many scholars have noted, see for instance Suzanne Guerlac, Writing the Nation (Mme de Stael),
                        French Forum 30, no. 3 (2005): 43–56. 
                    The association between Corinne and Italy is established explicitly from her
                    first appearance in the novel, regardez-la, c’est l’image de notre
                            belle Italie… comme une admirable production de notre climat, de nos
                            beaux-arts (C57).
                        Look at her, she is the image of
                            our beautiful Italy…like an admirable product of our climate, of our
                            fine arts  Corinne functions as an allegory of this
                    idealized Italy, which I argue serves as a broader metaphor for female
                    emancipation. Corinne represents a figure of literary and artistic genius; she
                    is introduced as a woman who unites, l’imagination, les tableaux, la vie
                        brillante du midi, et cette connaissance, cette observation du coeur
                        humain (C55).
                        imagination, florid description and all the brilliancy of the south, with
                            that knowledge, that observation of the human heart What’s
                    more, she is characterized by her vivacité; Oswald seeks to provoke, for example, her natural
                    vivacity when they are gathered in her apartment discussing literature (C173).
                    These are the very qualities for that matter, which solidify Oswald’s father’s
                    disapproval of her. When she reveals to Oswald that their fathers had
                    entertained the idea of their marriage, she describes her behavior during her
                    encounter with lord Nelvil, mon esprit, longtemps contenu, fut peut-être trop
                        vif en brisant ses chaînes and reflects je parus à lord Nelvil une
                        personne trop vive (C373).
                        my spirit, long repressed, was perhaps too lively in breaking its
                            chains; I appeared to lord Nelvil too vivacious of a
                        person
                Both collocate-networks feature femme as
                    a high frequency collocate, highlighting the fact that the national discussions
                    largely focus on what role each nation makes available to women, a central
                    tension surrounding the female protagonist. Staël renders the social freedom
                    that is possible in Italy more concrete through her portrayal of love in Italy.
                    Corinne claims that Italy is the country où le bonheur des femmes est le plus
                        ménagé, pointing to the possibility in Italy of love independent of the
                    institution of marriage (C163).
                        where female happiness is the best ensured, Corinne also
                    emphasizes that Italy is conducive to une sorte de libéralité, non dans les
                        idées, mais dans les habitudes qui fait de Rome le séjour le plus agréable
                        pour tous ceux qui n’ont plus ni l’ambition, ni la possibilité de jouer un
                        rôle dans le monde (C161).
                        a sort of liberality, not in ideas, but in habits, which renders Rome a
                            most agreeable dwelling for those who have neither the ambition, nor the
                            possibility of participating in the world What this statement
                    gestures towards is the question of institutional recognition and influence, a
                    key issue for women in the early 19th century since
                    women were largely excluded from institutions in society. Staël presents Italy,
                    however, as an oasis of social mobility where individuals benefit from an
                    exceptional freedom in both the private and public spheres, affording women an
                    emancipated lifestyle. Corinne endeavors to explain to Oswald the possibilities
                    for women in Italian society that diverge greatly from his ideals of
                    domesticity: parmi celles qui sont instruites, vous en verrez qui sont professeurs
                            dans les académies, et donnent des leçons publiquement en écharpe noire;
                            et si vous avisiez de rire de cela, l’on vous répondrait: Y a-t-il du mal à savoir le grec? y-a-t-il du mal à
                                gagner sa vie par son travail? Pourquoi riez-vous donc d’une chose
                                aussi simple?
                            among those who are well educated, you
                                will find academy professors who give public lessons in a black
                                scarf; and should this cause you to laugh, you would be told, ‘Is
                                there any harm in knowing Greek? Is there any harm
                                    in earning a living by one’s own work? Why then do you laugh at
                                    something so simple?(C162) The
                    italicized portion of Corinne’s letter to Oswald underlines the socio-political
                    weight that these words convey, insisting that women being erudite and holding
                    institutional positions in society ought to be self-evident and commonplace. 
                 The tension between these two social codes and the way in which they
                    respectively sanction or constrict the possibilities for women to develop their
                    autonomous intellectual existence is reinforced by England’s collocate
                        reputation. Given the empire that public opinion
                    holds over Oswald, the close association between England and reputation
                    would seem to reflect Oswald’s preoccupation with the social mores of his
                    country (C243). Reputation, however, is primarily discussed in relation
                    to the question of female reputation, and assumes a dual meaning for Corinne
                    that accentuates the irreconcilability between the social values that Italy and
                    England each represent. In Italy, Corinne’s reputation carries only positive
                    connotations, je suis venue m’établir à Rome,
                        ma réputation s’est accrue (C386).
                        I came and established myself in Rome, my
                            reputation grew It is universally acknowledged, even by
                    Lady Edgermond in the end, that Corinne jouit…
                        d’une très grande réputation littéraire, a reputation for which she
                    is publically known by the people of Italy (C506; C348).
                        enjoys… a great literary
                        reputation Yet her reputation as a woman is also
                    characterized as precarious with respect to her interactions with Oswald, as
                    something to be imprudently risked and
                        endangered (C477, 279). Oswald
                    experiences similar concerns, recognizing qu’il
                        la perdait à jamais de réputation with any plan to bring Corinne
                    with him to England out of wedlock (C411).
                        that he would tarnish her reputation beyond
                            redemption What’s more, the reputation she acquires
                    through her faculties in Italy takes a decidedly negative valence in England,
                    causing Lady Edgermond to worry about the possibility that Corinne’s extraordinary reputation may harm her
                    daughter’s chances at securing a promising future establishment (C383).
                The portrayal of Italy as the beacon of female emancipation and England as a
                    paradigm of misogynistic prudery is accentuated through the jealousy that Oswald
                    experiences during Corinne’s public display of her talents. The narrator signals
                    to the reader in the beginning of the novel that there was nothing plus contraire aux habitudes et aux opinions d’un
                        Anglais que cette grande publicité donnée à la destinée d’une femme (C49).
                        more contrary to the habits and opinions of
                            an Englishman, than this great publicity given to the destiny of a
                            woman In line with the British social values that Staël
                    paints in Corinne, Oswald’s jealousy is not the
                    product of a rival male character such as the prince Castel-Forte, but rather is
                    derived from the public in general, il eût
                        voulu que Corinne, timide et réservée comme une Anglaise, possédât cependant
                        pour lui seul son éloquence et son génie (C192).
                        he wished that Corinne, timid and reserved
                            like an English woman, should possess her eloquence and genius for him
                            alone Here, the tension between the social values of the
                    two nations is patently manifest. Oswald loves and respects Corinne’s genius,
                    yet he expresses a desire to restrict her talents to the private sphere. The
                    simile comme une Anglaise denotes his
                    desire for her to conform to the social mores of England. His adherence to the
                    mores of his nation and his resulting emotional reaction to their transgression
                    speaks to the high frequency collocate of patrie which runs through the narrative and reinforces
                    the influence des habitudes et des liens de la
                        patrie (C568).
                        habits and ties of one’s
                        country
                
                The contrast between the modern liberality associated with Italy, which makes
                    Staël’s fictional Italy conducive to this ideal emancipatory sociability, and
                    the patriarchal archaism of British mores, allows Staël to construct a narrative
                    of the plight of the femme de génie. The idea
                    that women are subjugated in nations other than Italy serves as a constant motif
                    throughout the novel. Characters engage in comparison of the two nations as
                    evidenced by each country being the other’s most frequent collocate. Characters
                    remind both Corinne and Oswald of how unhappy she would be outside of Italy. The
                    prince Castel-Forte foreshadows the irreconcilability of Corinne’s genius and
                    lifestyle with her love for Oswald, precisely due to his being tethered to
                    British mores: Ses goûts n’ont pas le moindre rapport avec les vôtres. Vous ne vous en
                            apercevrez pas tant qu’il sera sous le charme de votre présence, mais
                            votre empire sur lui ne tiendrait pas, s’il était loin de vous… et… les
                            Anglais en général sont asservis aux moeurs et aux habitudes de leur
                            pays.
                            His tastes bear no relation to your
                                own. You do not perceive it now while he is under the charm of your
                                presence, but your empire over him would not hold if he were far
                                from you…and you know…the English in general are enslaved to the
                                manners and habits of their country. (C90) 
                    The prince Castel-Forte thus anticipates the influence that social pressure and
                    the inculcated British values of female domesticity will wield over Oswald, in
                    the absence of Corinne’s empire, which depends on the pouvoir… de son charme (C397).
                        power… of her charm He
                    echoes the aforementioned pull of one’s patrie.
                    The love plot thus brings to the fore the tensions between the national
                    allegories. 
                While the tragedy of Corinne seems to stem from the
                    tragic ending of the love plot, I suggest that the true locus of tragedy resides
                    in the femme de génie plot. The novel begins by
                    revealing Corinne in all of her brilliance and celebrity. She arrives at the
                    Capitol in Rome for her public oration in a horse-drawn carriage. Roman poets
                    read sonnets and odes to her, exalting her imagination before she begins her
                    improvisation (C56). Her words are followed by outbursts of applause from the
                    entire assembly, and the Senator crowns her a genius with a laurel wreath
                    (C49-69). Once Corinne meets Oswald, however, the trajectory of the narrative
                    moves from this apogee of glory through her physical, emotional, and
                    intellectual demise as the result of her thwarted romantic hopes. As Gutwirth
                    has shown, the difference produced in Corinne’s character that is produced can
                    be read through the motif of silence, le silence est une mort… non pas seulement pour
                        Corinne, mais pour tous. Le roman tourne au réquisitoire contre le silence,
                        mais surtout, il explore les conséquences du silence imposé à la
                        femme
                    .
                        Silence is a death…not only for Corinne,
                            but for all. The novel becomes an indictment against silence,
                            particularly in exploring the consequences of silence imposed on
                            women. Silence functions as the antithesis to
                    empowerment. The national dichotomies accentuate this as Staël engages in a
                    ruthless satire of British domesticity. 
                Staël portrays the British female characters as well as the condition of life for
                    women in England in a particularly unfavorable light. When Corinne recounts her
                    childhood in England, she emphasizes her augmenting despair as she observes the
                    dreary and confined domestic life that awaits her as an aristocratic woman in
                    British society, where une femme était faite
                        pour soigner le ménage de son mari et la santé de ses enfants (C365).
                        a woman is meant to take care of her
                            husband’s household and her children’s health The British
                    women are characterized by an oppressive dullness, those who had some esprit
                    l’étouffaient comme une lueur importune (C365).
                        smothered it like an importune
                            spark Corinne portrays England as the place where ce qui était toujours sacrifié, c’étaient les
                        plaisirs de l’imagination et de l’esprit (C370).
                        what was always sacrificed, were the
                            pleasures of imagination and spirit Italy’s collocates of
                    imagination and the arts, which are precisely the qualities that allow Corinne
                    to be the central node of the Amis
                    network or network of sociability, are thus the qualities that make Corinne
                    unwelcome in England. Corinne, unable to extinguish her imagination, remarks on
                    how her talent ostracized her from British society, je n’y faisais qu’un bruit importun à presque tout le
                        monde (C369).
                        I was nothing but an importune noise for
                            almost everyone. Her faculties, seen in Italy as a gift
                    from God, were considered a curse in British society (C365). 
                The only female character in the novel who emancipates herself from the
                    oppressive, patriarchal social order is Corinne, who chooses to leave England
                    and build a life of intellectual and social freedom for herself in Italy. Yet
                    the paradox that results from this satire of British women is that Corinne too
                    will be silenced, La Sibylle ne rend plus
                        d’oracles; son génie, son talent, tout est fini (C431-32).
                        The Sibyl gives no more prophecies; her
                            genius, her talent, it is no more. The collocates
                    associated with Italy that reflect Corinne’s character, of vivacity and
                    imagination, in the end can no longer be associated with the protagonist.
                    Corinne thus becomes the victim of British social mores too,
                        silenced in that her intense romantic despair leads to
                    her spiritual death as manifest by the decline of her imagination and talents,
                    and ultimately, to her physical demise. 
            

                Conclusion
                Corinne’s lifestyle in Italy incarnates a cosmopolitan sociability that supports
                    a fundamentally modern form of female emancipation. While the romantic intrigue
                    in Corinne occupies the majority of the narrative,
                    the lens of sociability allows a re-oriented focus onto the co-existing femme de génie plot. The motif of female genius and
                    its social conditions of possibility is central to the novel, and critical for
                    tracing the fil rouge of staëlian philosophy.
                    Staël reveals her enduring partiality for the Enlightenment ideal of sociability
                    that allowed women to exert substantial influence in the world of letters and
                    construct a hub of power in society. For Staël, this model of female and male
                    collaboration remains firmly attached to Enlightenment ideals, a mode of
                    sociability that flourishes in Corinne’s milieu in Italy, yet is irreconciliable
                    with the conventional social mores embodied by England that come to dominate the
                    plot. 
                The constellation of characters in the network of sociability recreates a utopian
                    milieu that emulates Enlightenment sociability. Corinne as a femme de lettres assembles a circle of European
                    aristocrats who participate in intellectual exchanges concerning literature,
                    arts, and languages. This circle also constitutes a cosmopolitan sociability
                    through the emphasis on the representation of different nations. Where the
                    constellation of sociability in Corinne diverges
                    from a standard understanding of 18th-century
                    sociability is in its representation of literary and artistic genius through a
                    female figure. Yet far from a fictitious ideal, the mode of cosmopolitan
                    sociability in Corinne conducive to female
                    intellectual ambition reflects the model that Staël constructs at Coppet through
                    her appropriation and transformation of 18th-century
                    practices. The network of sociability in the novel thus embodies a distinctly
                    modern paragon of female and male relations that allow for female emancipation
                    and intellectual activity. 
                The allegories of the nations in the novel are instrumental in articulating this
                    Enlightenment – or even staëlian – ideal. The collocates of Italy qualify the
                    social conditions of possibility for the Amis
                    network to exist, a model of sociability that centers around an autonomous
                        femme de lettres, characterized by equal
                    exchange, and favorable to female intellectual agency. The greater symbolic
                    opposition between Italy and England manifests the tension between modernity and
                    archaism; Corinne strives to teach Oswald, comment on
                            aime chez les modernes
                    . The tragic ending of both plots, the
                    love plot and the femme de génie plot,
                    demonstrates the triumph of archaism. Corinne’s inability to reconcile her
                    intellectual ambition with her romantic desires frames love as a cultural possibility, in this
                    case precluded by Oswald’s adherence to the British values
                    portrayed in the novel . 
                The persistent tension between the social values incarnated by Italy and those of
                    England comes to fruition in the dénouement with Corinne’s tragic demise, victim
                    of the archaic social values that render her identity as a femme de génie irreconciliable with her love for
                    Oswald. The romantic intrigue is thus inscribed within the larger issue of
                    gender relations and the status of women in society. Given the historical moment
                    in which Staël is writing, the tensions in Corinne
                    between her fictitious Italy and England can thus be read as a commentary on
                    post-revolutionary French society, a thematization of the opposition between
                    Enlightenment and republican ideals. The network of sociability in Staël’s
                        Corinne orients our focus towards an
                    alternative sociocultural possibility.
            

                Appendix
                
                    Nation Collocates
                    
                        Angleterre
                        accent
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        francais
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        patrie
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        mere
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        d'erfeuil
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        Italie
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        reputation
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        mois
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        france
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        guerre
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        voyage
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        egard
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        ans
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        quitter
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        pays
                    
                    
                        Angleterre
                        femme
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        ailleurs
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        Angleterre
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        belle
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        caractere
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        femmes
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        italiens
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        langage
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        hiver
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        imagination
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        italie
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        mariage
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        moeurs
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        musique
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        nations
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        naturelle
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        partout
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        penser
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        plupart
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        societe
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        soumise
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        theatre
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        tous
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        tragedie
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        etrangers
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        vivacite
                    
                    
                        Italie
                        vrai
                    
                
            

                Acknowledgments
                I am grateful to Mark Algee-Hewitt for his support with the computational aspects
                    of this project, as well as for his insightful feedback on the article
                    throughout the writing process. I would also like to thank Léonard Burnand for
                    welcoming me to the Institut Benjamin Constant, where I completed a significant
                    portion of my research on Madame de Staël and the Groupe de Coppet.
            
