Title:  The New Itinerancy: Digital Pedagogy and the Adjunct
                    Instructor in the Modern Academy
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  02 October 2017
Abstract:  
                
                In the Fall of 2015, I was hired as contract academic staff at Wilfrid Laurier
                    University’s Department of English and Film Studies to teach the foundation
                    course EN245 The English Literary Tradition (Beginnings to
                        1660) for the first time as a course with a heavy DH component. My
                    paper is a case study investigating the challenges of creating and delivering a
                    partially online course in a university environment where the majority of
                    teaching is done by sessional instructors whose labour is systemically
                    marginalized by administration. Sessional instructors (or educational
                        entrepreneurs) have even more limited resources (in terms of
                    time, access to technical support, and access to administration) than tenure
                    track faculty; however, open-access educational tools aren’t serving merely to
                    level the playing field, but reshape it altogether as technical support and
                    access to administrative support cease to matter in the delivery of an
                    educational product. Today, many of the tools that are sufficient for the
                    creation of a successful online or partially online course, whether generalist -
                    iTunesU, Zotero, YouTube - or specialist - Google NGram, the University of
                    Victoria`s Map of Early Modern London, Internet Shakespeare Editions - are
                    freely available to instructors.
                Such freely available tools problematize the relationship between the instructor
                    and the university insofar as universities tend to use proprietary systems (e.g.
                    Desire2Learn) for everything, including data management, presentation,
                    communication, and gradebook integration with the registrar’s office.
                    Universities, in insisting on using these universal proprietary systems for
                    every aspect of course delivery, exacerbate the disenfranchisement of sessional
                    instructors, as access to the support required to become experts in these tools
                    is limited and taken on at the instructor’s cost. A sessional instructor can
                    create an entire course using freely available online tools, at minimal cost and
                    reaching a tremendously large and diverse audience, yet cannot then market that
                    course to any university that has a similar course as an educational product. At
                    the present moment, the sessional instructor and the course are both subject to
                    the curriculum of an individual university and department, despite the fact that
                    courses with a heavy DH component tend towards portability, interoperability,
                    and modularity that renders such boundaries largely incoherent. Though there are
                    attempts to provide funding for courses that will bridge interuniversity
                    boundaries such as the $4.5 million put forward by the Ontario Ministry of
                    Training, Colleges and Universities as a part of the eCampus Ontario initiative,
                    such funding models largely exclude the sessional instructor, who cannot apply
                    for funding as an educational entrepreneur. My paper will
                    tell the story of how I tried to navigate a university system that tried to keep
                    me from using free tools, while at the same time promoting my course as a part
                    of the eCampus Ontario initiative.
            
Full Body Text: 

                The New Medievalism
                At present in the western academy, sessional and adjunct instructors are not
                    protected from government or private assaults on free speech through
                    institutional mechanisms such as tenure, but neither are they beholden to an
                    individual university’s digital architecture or position regarding copyright.
                    Adjuncts are unprotected yet mobile, and the present scenario we have today in
                    Canada and across the western world echoes the labour model of the medieval
                    university. Then, the majority of academic labour was undertaken by an itinerant
                    class of scholars who would wander from place to place, seeking short term
                    employment, stigmatized for their lack of permanent patronage. Today, across
                    North America and around the world, the labour model of the higher education
                    sector is reliant upon sessional instructors or adjuncts Please note, for
                        the purposes of this paper, sessional and
                            adjunct instructors will be used as interchangeable
                        terms for any part-time, contract based pedagogical work. to shoulder
                    an increasingly large portion of undergraduate teaching load (See Figures 1 and
                        2). Though there are clearly differences for individual national
                        cases, the basic trends across Europe, Australia, and North America have
                        followed the American model over the past twenty years, which is why
                        American data is sourced in this instance. Many of the examples in this
                        study are drawn from the Canadian case, as the primary case study was taught
                        at a Canadian university. Universities in Canada and elsewhere have made it
                        notoriously difficult to gather specific data on numbers of non-full-time
                        instructors as well as their position within the institutions  and the use of online learning technologies,
                        making research in this field particularly subject to local conditions, yet
                        still responsive to international trends. As Monks, CAUT and others point
                        out, the general trends across Canada, Europe, Australia and Asia regarding
                        both the employment of sessional instructors and the use of online learning
                        are clearly tracking the American case. Monks notes that, 
                        in 1975, only 30.2 percent of
                            faculty were employed part time; by 2005 [...] part-time faculty
                            represented approximately 48 percent of all faculty members in the
                            United States
                        
                    . Whereas the systemic inequalities attendant upon the increasing reliance
                    upon adjunct instructors has been widely discussed in the academy, most of these
                    analyses tend to look at part-time contract work in the absence of the digital
                    turn in the academy 
                    
                    . At the same time as universities have
                    become increasingly reliant on sessional labour, administrators are pressuring
                    instructors to integrate technology into their lesson plans as a way of
                    increasing pedagogical efficiency and remaining on the apparent cutting edge of
                    research . What I would like to suggest in
                    this article is that the move towards integrating digital humanities into the
                    pedagogical mainstream of university education, combined with the increasing
                    reliance on sessional and adjunct instruction, is having the unintended result
                    of creating a new kind of wandering academic and changing the way that
                    undergraduate education will be undertaken in the future. Rather than the
                    laborious journeys described by medieval and early modern scholars who went from
                    ducal court to royal court to university and back seeking patronage, we now face
                    a class of online itinerants who can move their course material from one
                    university to another, without regard to geography, local conditions, or
                    (paradoxically) administrative interference. The use of digital tools has opened
                    up an entirely new world of humanities education, but it has also resulted in a
                    turning back of the clock almost 1000 years. 
                
                    Trends in instructional staff employment status from
                            1975-2011. Adapted from Here’s the News:
                            The Annual Report on the Economic Status of the Profession, by
                        J. W. Curtis & S. Thornton, 2013, Academe, 99(2), 7. Copyright 2008 by
                        the American Association of University Professors.
                    
                
                
                    Appointment Status of Full Time Female University
                            Teachers CAUT Almanac 2013-14
                    
                
            

                Policy and Entrepreneurship
                Late in 2015, the Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities in Ontario
                    released the report “Focus on Outcomes, Centre on Students: Perspectives on Evolving Ontario’s
                        University Funding Model”
                    . The report was spearheaded by former Deputy Minister
                    for Advanced Education and Skills Development Suzanne Herbert and was developed
                    in consultation with groups such as the Ontario Undergraduate Student Alliance,
                    Ontario Confederation of University Faculty Associations, representatives of
                    individual universities, and others . As the report
                    analyzed university funding models, it was deeply invested in the rhetoric of
                    commercial value of the educational experience — 
                        Employment readiness and value for money
                            were among key concerns raised by consultation participants [such as
                            students]
                        
                    — and long term sustainability of the university sector. The report also
                    suggested the importance of student experience, understood primarily through the
                    blending of technological skills with traditional academic skills, as a means of
                    gearing students for a competitive job market. This focus on the transferability
                    of skills from inside to outside the academy is in keeping with recent research
                    that suggests that universities have an obligation to develop student competency
                    in technological and workplace based skills 
                    . 
                        Employers hire students based upon
                            the assumption they have learned the newest form of technology in
                            school, thus saving money on getting students trained to use
                            technology
                        
                    . In the report, sessional or adjunct instructors are called “educational
                    entrepreneurs”; the report encourages “entrepreneurial learning [&]
                    research”; quality of education was measured in terms of a 
                        customer satisfaction or
                            value-for-money perspective
                        
                    . Online course delivery (though not exclusively online course delivery)
                    was considered a flexible and attractive alternative to inefficient traditional
                    classroom settings that tend to undermine the “consumer” orientation of many
                    students . Notably absent, however, are key
                    recommendations from scholarly research on the integration of technology in the
                    classroom that call for supplemental pay for instructors who have fully
                    integrated technology into the classroom or the development of training sessions
                    for instructors who seek to follow the guidance of the report . In simultaneously encouraging the
                    integration of technology into the classroom and putting the onus for
                    technological competence on the educational entrepreneur (viz. the instructor),
                    the report absolves universities of the responsibility for paying for the skills
                    they wish to disseminate to their students. The report, however, should be
                    thought of metonymically, as it encapsulates a number of policy positions that
                    are becoming increasingly popular among university administrators and students
                    across Canada and around the world.
                Student attitudes towards the online delivery of courses are notoriously
                    difficult to gauge  and thus they have
                    proven to be relatively unsound foundations upon which to build policy decisions
                    regarding education. There are few studies available that look directly at
                    student attitudes towards sessional/adjunct labour or to attitudes towards
                    digital delivery of courses and there are no studies that look at the confluence
                    between the two issues. When student leaders have been directly asked to
                    participate in policy making projects, such as the AUCC report, The Revitalization of Undergraduate Education in
                        Canada, they provided specific recommendations to expand learning
                    methods 
                        including interactive and
                            participatory methods, not only across courses but within
                            courses
                        
                    , suggesting that increased blended delivery of courses would be welcome.
                    Indeed, online learning policy statements such as the Ministry report tend to
                    resonate with and echo student-centred modes of engagement that posit the
                    student as a kind of consumer, wherein the value that the student sees in their
                    education can be measured, defined and manipulated in the context of an
                    objective, logical-positivist world-view .
                    This view would suggest that by universities increasing digital resources and
                    participatory methods of pedagogy such as blended learning courses (which
                    students are already requesting), students should respond by increased
                    perceptions of educational value and interest in measurable, deliverable ways.
                    Despite this, one of the few studies available on Canadian student attitudes
                    toward online learning shows a far more contradictory and confused response to
                    the increase in online resources and traditional forms of online engagement such
                    as discussion boards. In the report The State of E-Learning
                        in Canadian Universities, 2011: If Students are Digital Natives, Why Don’t
                        they Like E-Learning? the authors conclude, 
                        If students do not — as the
                            foregoing pages have demonstrated — think very much of blended learning,
                            why do they want more electronic resources? [...] the best explanation
                            seems to have to do with convenience. Students prefer physical texts,
                            but they’d like to have the option of having an e-resource to read it
                            wherever and whenever they need.
                        
                    
                Students in the study repeatedly suggested more availability of online resources,
                    in particular electronic versions of course readings, lecture notes and audio or
                    video versions of lectures, yet they resisted interactive forums and discussion
                    boards with instructors and fellow students and live streams of lectures . Despite the articulated student desire
                    for more resources to be made available electronically, students in the study
                    who were in largely online courses were less likely to agree with the statement
                        I find courses with more online resources generally more interesting than
                        courses with fewer online resources than similar students who were in
                    courses with fewer online resources .
                    Though students want the convenience of the online material, providing more
                    resources results in the course being less interesting  and in students being more likely to
                    skip classes . Perhaps one of the most
                    illuminating aspects of the study for the sessional instructor is that students
                    note that entirely in-person delivery is best for evaluating the quality of
                    instructors. 67.3% of students found that an instructor’s quality is best gauged
                    face to face, while only 4.5% believed entirely or partially online courses
                    allow students to assess an instructor’s quality . This last point is particularly noteworthy for sessional
                    instructors as it acts as a disincentive for sessionals to engage with online
                    learning and pedagogy, which then puts them at odds with the policy of
                    increasing student engagement through increasing online learning
                    opportunities.
                The policy suggestion made by the Ministry report and by similar papers tabled by
                    think tanks and government bodies across the world 
                    
                     is a call for increased efficiency and
                    deliverable success. As Milliken and Barnes note, this appeal is itself nothing
                    new. 
                        John Amos Cornelius, a 16th
                            Century scholar, spoke of the need for a methodology whereby
                                teachers teach less but learners learn more.
                            Two centuries later, in 1780, Adam Smith stated that the discipline of
                            colleges and universities is in general contrived, not for the benefit
                            of the students, but for the ease of the masters. Both views would
                            indicate that current complaints have noble pedigrees.
                        
                    The result of these most recent calls for deliverable results for
                    instructors has been that universities have increasingly downloaded
                    responsibility for technological competence onto faculty and non-faculty
                    instructors. The problem is one of funding. Most institutions across North
                    America are 
                        incorporating educational
                            technology tools, such as SMART Boards, starboards, iPads, collaboration
                            tools, WebCT, and so forth, into classrooms in order to improve the
                            quality of education for learners; and educators are expected to fully
                            integrate those tools as soon as the technology becomes available. Most
                            institutions have limited funding available only to train full-time
                            faculty on how to integrate technology into their classroom
                        
                    . This set of policies that are being developed and implemented across
                    North America, though they make universities more efficient by asking more of
                    faculty while providing them with fewer resources in which to achieve intended
                    educational targets, when put into discussion with the permanent rise of the
                    sessional instructor and the movement towards online course delivery, has a
                    number of unintended consequences. To explore those unintended consequences, I
                    want to focus my discussion on the creation and implementation of my recent
                    blended learning class at Wilfrid Laurier University, English 245 The English Literary Tradition, Beginnings to
                    1660.
            

                Devising the Course
                In the fall semester of 2015, I was hired as contract academic staff at Wilfrid
                    Laurier University’s Department of English and Film Studies to teach the
                    half-credit foundation course EN245. This was the first time I taught the course
                    and the first time that the course had ever been offered in a blended learning
                    format. The course is a junior undergraduate canonical literary history course,
                    covering the breadth of literature from Beowulf to Milton, though there is some
                    room for experimentation regarding the interpretation of the canon as taught to
                    undergraduates. For instance, I taught Hrotsvitha of Gandersheim, who wrote the
                    first post-classical drama in Europe, even though she is criminally understudied
                    in junior undergraduate survey courses. Every English student at Wilfrid Laurier
                    is obliged to take EN245 and its companion course EN246 (1660 to Today) as part
                    of their degree requirements, which in practice means that the class is usually
                    one of the most well-populated in the department, with students who are
                    motivated to succeed.
                For the first time in the history of the course, I chose to offer EN245 as a
                    blended-learning, flipped classroom, where all of the lecture
                        material was available online and the classroom meetings would be
                    devoted to exercises and discussions of the texts and the
                        lectures. The hosting of materials online, accessible
                    in part through a gated course management system, is in keeping with blended
                    best practices, such as those outlined by Michael Munger 
                    . I say lectures because the
                    material that I created for the students to consider was multimodal. I created
                    text for them to read and consider, audio lectures for them to listen to, as
                    well as video material that I created using CyberLink PowerDirector, a fairly
                    common video editing software suite. By obligation, all of the material was
                    hosted on the WLU MyLearningSpace website, which is a Desire2Learn based content delivery
                    system. Video lecture material was (and is) hosted on YouTube for ease of access. Major assignments such as a final paper
                    were workshopped during in class tutorial sessions, while minor assignments,
                    which included the creation of a timeline using Knight Lab’s free timeline creation
                        website, were created as digital entities. The flipped classroom,
                    blended-learning style of course delivery has repeatedly been shown to have
                    positive results in terms of student retention and long term recall, however, it
                    also normally requires an intense period of preparatory work in consultation
                    with educational and media experts in order to develop the course in accordance
                    with best practices. Lecture material must be written, rewritten, and edited;
                    film must be shot, reshot, and edited; audio must be recorded, again and again;
                    each phase of the process should (ideally) be thought through in terms of the
                    deliverable educational goals. In many ways, the amount of cooperative effort
                    that ought to go into such a flipped classroom course should be primarily done
                    before the course has even begun and should be effectively invisible to
                    students. Such a model of course creation, however, is primarily geared towards
                    tenured or tenure-track instructors who have the time to prepare courses in
                    cooperation with multiple institutions within the home university. Such a period
                    of preparation and careful consideration is not possible for sessional
                    instructors and was not available in the case of EN245.
                Sessionals are often unable to access the digital infrastructure of the
                    university outside of the term of their contract. Marie Vander Kloet, speaking
                    at the workshop leading to the AUCC report on Revitalizing
                        Undergraduate Education in Canada posed the problem of sessional
                    access to digital infrastructure succinctly, 
                        I can’t access the library system at
                            the university until the first day of my contract, which is typically
                            six days before I start teaching. So I can’t set up my own course
                            website. I can’t figure out what I could potentially put online. I can’t
                            activate my e-mail address … I know there are huge financial constraints
                            in terms of why there are so many contract faculty [...] but there are
                            material conditions around those contracts which severely impact how
                            it’s possible for us to teach.
                        
                     Sessional instructors face restrictions and lack of access to resources
                    (in terms of time, access to technical support, professional development,
                    communities of practice, and access to administration) in comparison to our
                    tenure-track colleagues that can be seen as both a blessing and a curse. Even
                    where technical support is available for sessional faculty, it may not be
                    feasible for sessional instructors to seek out such support. This is in keeping
                    with Ocak’s study, which indicated that 17.26% of faculty felt they had no
                    support from the institution . In my case,
                    university administration and the Office of Open Learning were basically unaware
                    of what I was doing until halfway through the course. This was partially because
                    of the time constraints that are a regular part of the teaching conditions of
                    adjunct instructors. That is, I was awarded EN245 in mid-July 2015 with a start
                    date of the first week of September 2015. Thus, if I had followed the intensely
                    cooperative model of blended learning, flipped classroom delivery outlined
                    above, I would have had only six or seven weeks in which to create an entire
                    course and coordinate with at least three or four different institutional
                    bodies. However little time that may be, I also had another time commitment
                    between mid-July and early August. Between those dates I was teaching an
                    intensive, all day, three week seminar on Shakespeare’s Text at the Stratford
                    Festival, which meant that the amount of actual time I had to prepare to deliver
                    a semester of material for a flipped classroom was approximately three weeks. To
                    arrange for meetings with the Office of Open Learning, who would then arrange
                    for further meetings with on-staff videographers and recording technicians, as
                    well as developing an oversight committee for content delivery was simply not
                    feasible if the course was to be delivered on time and on budget. As an
                    educational entrepreneur, I had to act on my own, using those limited resources
                    that were available to me, or face the possibility of breaking my contract with
                    WLU. This gave me an incredible amount of freedom in terms of course creation,
                    but it also cut me off from access to monies and resources that would have
                    facilitated even some of the more basic elements of the course.
                One of the key elements of the course that students responded to positively were
                    the video components, which were available on YouTube. For each “lecture,”
                    approximately 20-30 minutes worth of somewhat dense video material was made
                    available online. The practices for online lectures created by MIT, Yale, and  Oxford 
                    tends to be to record a professor delivering a lecture. The advantage to this is
                    that the professor’s face and body do not need to be copyright protected and the
                    material shared in the classroom that might be copyright protected (images or
                    film clips) can be edited out or held behind a gated entry point for the course.
                    The talking head, however, is a woefully ineffective way of using the visual
                    medium to the best of its abilities or providing a record of the teaching
                    abilities of professors who are some of the best teachers in the world. The Open University presents a far
                    more instructional model for anyone wishing to create online videos. For
                        instance: “The History of the EU
                            with David Mitchell”; “Freedom of Religion - Rights Enshrined”; or “Behind the Scenes with Monica Grady - In the Night Sky:
                        Stars” The Open University’s model of creation, however, is
                    based on the cooperative model whereby experts from multiple fields
                    (videography, animation, acting, editing, academic subject) come together to
                    create a single educational instrument.
                As time constraints prevented me from using the cooperative model that has been
                    so successful for The Open University, I created all of the educational
                    instruments for my course by myself. Rather than develop a video style that
                    would be unique to the course, or which would reveal my limited graphic design
                    capabilities, I developed the video style for my course using the documentaries
                    of Ken Burns as a template, extensively using still images and panning camera
                    shots. Not being a filmmaker, I had to learn on the spot such techniques as
                    editing, design, pacing, sound mixing, etc. The following is an example of a
                    video lecture where I tried to use the medium to the best of my ability in the
                    period allowed. This is from my lectures on The Second Shepherds’ Play: 10.13 - Social Order in the Second
                        Shepherds’ Play. These videos For a complete list of videos
                        created for EN245, please see the appendix. have been viewed
                    literally thousands of times from locations on almost every continent in the few
                    months they have been available online. Indeed, one video on Lady Mary Wroth is
                    directed viewing in a course on British Literature in
                    Brazil while the video on Liturgical Drama in the early middle ages is a course
                    text at Berkeley Divinity School in California. Private emails.
                The advantages of YouTube are precisely the wide audience and the flexibility of
                    production. Throughout the course I tried to bring in as many open-access
                    educational tools as I could, partially because, as I just described, I had to
                    work without access to the resources available through the administration, and
                    partially because I felt that students may respond more positively to open
                    access tools like Google Drive, Timeline by Knight Lab, and WordPress than they
                    would to D2L. My hypothesis was confirmed. From private interviews with students
                    I conducted after the class was over, one of the primary reasons why students
                    responded well to the video material was that it was available on YouTube.
                        Private Interview. Logging into the Wilfrid Laurier University’s D2L
                    system was a disincentive compared to going to YouTube, which students described
                    as more native to their experience of the world. In using free tools and
                    software like YouTube, EN245 was building student
                        experience — a recommendation of reports like the AUCC report on
                        Revitalizing Undergraduate Education in Canada
                    cited above — upon students’ understanding of the digital world; providing
                    difference (or content) within an architecture of familiarity.
                EN245 highlighted many of the problems faced by adjunct instructors who seek to
                    implement best practices of pedagogy and digital pedagogy. The model of
                    corporate creation that would be ideal in the development of a new online or
                    partially online course is largely out of reach for sessional and adjunct
                    instructors. The proprietary tools and software, as well as the skills of
                    university based full time assistants such as videographers and teaching support
                    services, are effectively cut off from the instructor who has a mandate to
                    produce a course almost overnight. At the same time as instructors are being
                    isolated from administrative support to create online material, policy
                    documents, like the one issued by the Ontario Ministry of Advanced Education and
                    Skills Development, encourage educational entrepreneurship and the creation of
                    online or partially online material to develop student
                        experience. A sessional instructor can take the challenge on
                    alone, as I did, but this poses an interesting question that I will develop in
                    the next section, namely Who holds copyright over the material
                        produced for the course? Whereas wholly online courses are
                    usually governed by contracts that state which party (university or instructor)
                    has copyright and responsibility for the material, courses like the one I just
                    outlined are exercises in guerilla pedagogy and the ownership of copyright is
                    not wholly clear.
            

                Copyright, Adjuncts, and Intellectual Property Policy
                In 2008, Douglas Kranch in The Quarterly Review of Distance
                        Education described the case of Harvard Law School’s Arthur Miller.
                    Miller created an online course (ironically, on civil procedure and intellectual
                    property rights) for an institution other than his home, Harvard Law School,
                    arguing that there was no difference in publishing his course in another
                    university’s online environment than the 
                        book publishing deals he had been
                            negotiating for many years
                        
                    . While Kranch notes that although there are several precedents in the
                    United States for universities or employers to hold copyright or patent rights
                    for research done by members of that institution, one of the only instances of
                    case law regarding a professor’s property rights over his course notes actually
                    found in favour of the professor. In that case, a professor Williams developed
                    material at UCLA and then moved universities. UCLA went on to publish Williams’
                    materials, arguing that 
                        Williams’ notes were work for hire
                            so that UCLA held the rights to the notes
                        
                    . The Supreme Court of California found for Williams, arguing that 
                        If UCLA owned the copyright, it
                            could prevent Williams from using the notes he created at the next post
                            and, by extension, would similarly block all faculty from using their
                            instructional material at any but the institutions at which they had
                            created them; and second, that UCLA had exerted little supervisory
                            control over Williams.
                        
                     This legal decision became the basis for the teacher exception to the
                    work for hire provisions of copyright protection under American law. There
                        has been no analogous test case in Canada, nor can I find a similar
                        statement of clear copyright protection for course notes in Australia or in
                        the European Union. The case is here cited for its exceptionality and for
                        the fact that the matter still does not seem to be settled, even in the
                        United States. Such a victory for individual intellectual property
                    rights has not been without dissenting voices however and it is the position of
                    The Association of American Universities that 
                        the university should own the
                            intellectual property that is created at the university by faculty,
                            research staff, and scientists with the substantial aid of its
                            facilities or financial support
                        
                    . Please note that although Kranch describes a case in California,
                        the point is that there is frustratingly little case law to guide
                        intellectual property at all in jurisdictions across North America.
                    Different universities will, likewise, claim different amounts of copyright
                    control over materials created for online use depending upon policies local to
                    institutions, faculties, and even departments, yet such claims are often
                    negotiated through the context of a legally binding contract between instructor
                    and institution . Courses like EN245,
                    however, render such statements and policies of university ownership all the
                    more problematic as the course was created entirely without university support,
                    substantial aid, facilities, or material. The course was blended and flipped,
                    not wholly online. It was partially hosted on YouTube, a publicly available
                    platform, as the proprietary software of the institution was seen as alien to
                    students’ experiences. Copyright for originally created videos uploaded to
                        YouTube is held by the creator (YouTube), yet copyright for a video created
                        by a professor used in a classroom setting can be governed by the
                        university’s local policies. This was one of the reasons why I created the
                        videos and uploaded them to YouTube and only then linked to them from the
                        course website. Indeed, whereas university administrations may argue
                    some claim to ownership over course notes if the institution provided necessary,
                    material support, the advent of free online tools are increasingly rendering
                    such support wholly unnecessary.
                Today, many of the tools that are sufficient for the creation of a successful
                    online or partially online course are freely available, while many of the
                    courses that teach instructors how to use those tools for pedagogical purposes
                    are either hidden behind institutional walls or enrollment can cost hundreds of
                    dollars. For example, the Digital Pedagogy Lab, while providing content that has
                    been praised by the Chronicle of Higher Education, has courses on teaching with Twitter
                    that cost US$400, (though a discount for contingent faculty is available).
                    Whether those tools are generalist — iTunesU, Zotero, YouTube — or specialist —
                    Google NGram, the Map of Early Modern London, Internet Shakespeare Editions —
                    these tools problematize the relationship between the instructor and the
                    university insofar as universities tend to use proprietary systems (e.g.
                    Desire2Learn) for everything, including data management, presentation,
                    communication, and gradebook integration with the registrar’s office.
                    Universities, in insisting on using these proprietary systems for every aspect
                    of course delivery from gradebook integration to content presentation, provide
                    adjunct or sessional instructors with a central set of educational technology
                    tools (thereby providing the material support that some might argue is the way
                    around the teacher exception to the work for hire provisions of copyright law).
                    These university mandated tools can be used again and again, thereby, in theory,
                    reducing the struggle adjuncts face in choosing what tools to use, which is a
                    common complaint among adjunct instructors. 
                Such limitations on choice as presented by the use of proprietary systems by
                    universities do not act as “walled gardens” or “safe havens” in a landscape
                    dominated by monopolistic social and traditional media corporations. It is
                    certainly true that some free tools, as opposed to the proprietary systems, are
                    extensions of large media corporations, such as Google, Apple, and Facebook,
                    whose commoditization of information is cause for suspicion. Nevertheless, many
                    universities are already working with these same corporations on exclusive
                    contracts to deliver email and other services. Thus, the distinction between
                    freely available tools and proprietary systems is beginning to blur. Even in
                    cases where the software systems used by universities are industry specific to
                    the academy rather than an outgrowth of large media corporations, the university
                    cannot be seen as a kind of walled garden. Corporations like Blackboard, 2U,
                    D2L, and TurnItIn, are either publicly traded companies or companies owned by
                    venture capital partnerships 
                    
                    
                    . Issues of privacy aside, these technologies
                    integrate the university into a corporate ecosystem that extends well beyond the
                    walls of the academy. Further, universities’ training and support for these
                    technologies can only be offered economically to those who can be reasonably
                    expected to use the technology again in the future; that is, tenure track and
                    longer term faculty, as outlined above.
                On the one hand, tenure track and longer term professors who wish to implement a
                    course with a heavy digital component are strongly encouraged to work within the
                    confines of the university’s own digital infrastructure to protect and justify
                    the university’s investment in that infrastructure and to tie the course
                    material to that university. This means heavily relying upon administration to
                    provide support, but such support also comes with a clear demarcation of the
                    rights and responsibilities of intellectual property. A university may house a
                    digital document created by a professor, but unless otherwise stated by written
                    policy of the institution or a contract between the institution and the
                    instructor, the university does not necessarily own that material. The digital
                    document may, in some ways, represent the university publicly and, as such, the
                    university may wish to have some say in the delivery of content or the content
                    itself. This last issue is a particular problem for any course that is remotely
                    politically “controversial” such as gender/race studies, environmental studies,
                    or even evolution, especially in a higher education funding environment where,
                    in Canada for instance we are still recovering from the ideologically bound
                    funding models of the Harper Conservative government . Similarly in the United States at the time of writing there seems
                        to be some government support to defund agencies like the National Endowment
                        for the Humanities. Tenure track and longer term professors who
                    reject this support are still incentivized to work with and learn the
                    proprietary knowledge mobilization and administration systems because they will
                    encounter these programs next semester and the one after that. A circumscribed
                    digital infrastructure, such as a university that uses D2L encourages at least
                    familiarity with D2L among its faculty. Moreover, as tenure track and longer
                    term professors have an ongoing relationship with the university in question,
                    the rules they establish with the university regarding intellectual property can
                    be revised on an ongoing basis. Both parties have institutionalized obligations
                    to each other and to the digital content that can be revised through mechanisms
                    within the institution. 
                On the other hand, sessional instructors who wish to implement a course with a
                    heavy digital component can choose to work within a given university’s digital
                    infrastructure yet we are disincentivized to do so on a number of different
                    levels. 
                
                    Access to the support required to become experts in these tools is limited
                        and taken on at the instructor’s cost; and,
                    Ownership of intellectual property created outside of institutional
                        software structures and administrative support is more likely to lay with
                        the instructor.
                
                Professional development opportunities are restricted university by university
                    and, although computer literacy is a fairly common skill, effectively
                    translating that skill into the creation of an active learning environment
                    requires training 
                    
                    . Whereas to become an expert in the use
                    of D2L one must first have access to a D2L course and, by then, it is already
                    too late because the course has to be put up. On the other hand, one can spend
                    the hours needed to become an expert on how to use YouTube or even the Map of
                    Early Modern London because of their accessibility, on your own time and in some
                    cases these tools further your research. Sessional instructors are
                    disincentivized to learn proprietary software systems because one semester we
                    could be working at one university that uses one system, and another semester we
                    could be working at another university with another content delivery system. Far
                    easier to use freely available tools that students feel comfortable with and fit
                    into their own experience of media than to learn new integrated systems over and
                    over and over again at new universities and never be paid for that labour. More
                    importantly, however, there is less fear that the course notes and materials
                    created through freeware and freely accessible systems will be claimed by the
                    university as their intellectual property. The one fear is that, with the
                    proliferation of digital course materials, students will cease to be as
                    interested in the course, skip more, and have less of a basis upon which to
                    judge the effectiveness of the instructor .
                In effect, the closed digital architecture of universities, combined with the
                    increasing reliance on sessional instructors to deliver course material, is
                    further reinforcing the divide between tenure-track and non-TT faculty. As
                    problematic as that effect may be, with its attendant class divide between the
                    two tiers of faculty, this is not intended to be a paper crying
                        Vanitas vanitatum. It is an important point; it is
                    further developing a painfully unjust system within the academy; but this paper
                    is trying to use inductive reasoning to illuminate the ways in which policy
                    governs the academy based on one particular experience. What I can observe is
                    that digital or partially digital courses created out of freely available tools
                    where the content of the course is based on canonical texts or, as the Ministry
                    of Education puts it, fundamentals … these courses are
                    incredibly portable. If the course is conservative in its approach to the canon
                    (whether that be the canon of English literature or the fundamentals of
                    algebra), the course can be put on in Calgary or Qatar, it doesn’t matter. This
                    isn’t itself surprising as it was the original insight behind the development of
                    MOOCs. I would like to suggest, however, what if the course notes and materials
                    are not tied to a university? What if the course is tied to the instructor, who
                    is unshackled from the digital infrastructure of any given university?
                Sessional instructors, in a case such as the one I have described, own their
                    material in a way that tenure-track colleagues do not. We own our materials in a
                    way that those who teach through MOOCs, EdX, Coursera or other large capitalist
                    experiments in education do not, as they are governed by contracts that echo the
                    terms of proprietary university contracts outlined above. We are not protected
                    by tenure from administrative over-reach, but we are not tied to an individual
                    administration’s digital infrastructure either. We can (and do) move from
                    university to university, selling our course as an educational product; a
                    product that has a proven track record at other universities; a product that has
                    clearly defined goals and deliverables; a single product that is cheaper than
                    maintaining a tenure-track professor, a videographer, an audio technician, an
                    office filled with experts in online learning.
                Of course, this doesn’t happen right now. A sessional instructor can create an
                    entire course using freely available online tools, at minimal cost and reaching
                    a tremendously large and diverse audience, yet cannot then market that course to
                    any given university as an educational product. It’s just not done because the
                    model of academic intellectual property for course delivery is predicated on the
                    relationship between the static tenure track or longer term professor and the
                    university, rather than the portable adjunct and multiple universities offering
                    similar courses. At the present moment, the sessional instructor and the course
                    are both subject to the curriculum of an individual university and department,
                    despite the fact that core canon courses tend towards portability,
                    interoperability, and modularity that renders such boundaries largely
                    incoherent. Though there are attempts to provide funding for courses that will
                    bridge interuniversity boundaries such as the $4.5 million put forward by the
                    Ontario Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities as a part of the eCampus
                    Ontario initiative, such funding models largely exclude the sessional
                    instructor, who cannot apply for funding as an “educational entrepreneur.” I
                    tried to apply for funding to develop this course further, using the portable
                    model I have suggested, but I was told that I had to work within the confines of
                    a university administration to develop a proposal. I approached WLU, yet what
                    they proposed instead was a course delivered concurrently at multiple
                    universities (where I would be paid the same amount as if I was at the one)
                    delivered entirely through the digital infrastructure that could be shared among
                    those universities, which rather misses the point.
                I worry that DH tends to get caught up in the discussion of new tools, new
                    gadgets, new theories, while there tends not to be the same concern for the
                    policy that flows out of and controls the implementation of these new tools. I
                    always tell my students when approaching a new text to ask yourself Cui
                        bono? (Who benefits?) because the answer is usually not what it seems
                    to be on the surface. Though for the past twenty years the digital revolution in
                    humanities studies has become increasingly entrenched in the academy with the
                    creation of journals, conferences and a number of tenure track and long term
                    professorships, the rise of free digital tools combined with the concretization
                    of the sessional instructor as a permanent caste within the academy,
                    recontextualizes the efficiency of pedagogical labour onto the sessional
                    instructor. If, as the rhetoric of entrepreneurship suggests, public policy in
                    higher education is moving towards a logical-positivist model based on
                    deliverables and efficiency, then I wonder if we are not actually liable to be
                    turning the clock back to the medieval system of itinerant scholars. This is not
                    necessarily a bad thing. Let’s not forget, Erasmus, Vives, Aquinas, Scotus,
                    Abelard, and many others great scholars were itinerants or went through a period
                    of employment induced mobility. The difference today is that whereas Abelard had
                    to be in the same room as you to teach you, geography no longer matters in the
                    same way to us. We, the itinerant scholars of today, can put together a course
                    on relatively conservative canonical material, and sell it to the highest bidder
                    as an educational product guaranteed to get certain results. By disentangling
                    the course from the digital architecture of a single university, student
                    experience and student education can be standardized across multiple
                    universities in a way that simply is not possible in a system that privileges
                    the institutional power of the university itself.
                I come at this problem as someone who both is and is not what Allington,
                    Brouilette and Golumbia called a 
                        builder and maker, [an] adept
                            at the management and visualization of data, and [one able] conceive of
                            the study of literature as now fundamentally about the promotion of new
                            technologies
                        
                    . As technologies and archives become increasingly available, scholars
                    like me, wandering from job to job, will become increasingly a part of the
                    university landscape. This decentralization of pedagogy, enabled through free
                    tools and the ubiquity of internet access, has fundamental repercussions for the
                    structure of the academy in terms of tenure and non-tenure academics, but also
                    has effects that reach out into the educational experience of undergraduates
                    around the world. Canonical disciplinary boundaries or
                        fundamentals can be reinforced around the world in ways
                    that would be unthinkable only a few generations ago, as multiple universities
                    on multiple continents can all hire the same instructor to deliver the same
                        fundamental material. I do not mean to suggest that
                    this re-entrenching of the canon and derogation of the independence of the
                    university should be a goal for educational policy makers. Rather, I wish to
                    note that the present conditions of the educational marketplace favouring the
                    use of sessionals, combined with the rise of free pedagogical tools, student
                    desire for more digital resources, and the logical-positivism that informs
                    government policy decisions may have certain unintended results that will
                    reshape the way universities operate in the coming decade.
                I have a course on English literature from the beginnings to 1660. It is an
                    educational product I’m willing to lease. Who wants to open the bidding? 
            

                Appendix
                Please note, the numbering system refers to the day of the class, such that
                    “10.04 Corpus Christi https://youtu.be/Q7ZaIiySFN4” refers to the 10th day of class, 4th
                    part of the lecture, which was on Corpus Christi.
                
                    2.02 Paganism https://youtu.be/JuFNG3MspuQ
                    2.03 Conversion to Christianity https://youtu.be/CUvivMXQ6Qc
                    2.04 The Unification of England https://youtu.be/JY4lmGQmUvU
                    
                    2.07 Bede the Venerable https://youtu.be/BTUWq4nFFLk
                    2.08 The Life of a Monk https://youtu.be/dqY9xZh1fWA
                    
                    2.13 Typology https://youtu.be/zB_BuPsRqrc
                    
                    2.16 The Conversion of the Northumbrians https://youtu.be/MkjMqvbAHe4
                    
                    4.07 Gender in Beowulf https://youtu.be/KipKhuV791w
                    
                    4.11 Women as Hostesses https://youtu.be/mujgiqWx-1A
                    
                    4.12 - FreoÞuwebbe https://youtu.be/2DICNKvM9g4
                    4.14 Grendel’s Mother and Irony https://youtu.be/geQBdn9cJQs
                    
                    4.16 Inversion of Heorot https://youtu.be/djrhAAhjgVg
                    
                    4.17 Sexuality and the Battle with Grendel’s Mother https://youtu.be/tzigf0HaB98
                    4.18 Hands and Grasping https://youtu.be/njDCT3EIk5g
                    
                    6.02 Drama from Rome to the Church Fathers https://youtu.be/kRM5E-bDYAQ
                    
                    6.06 Quem Quaeritis and Liturgical Drama https://youtu.be/XUOiI_E_L_8
                    
                    6.12 Style and Dramaturgy https://youtu.be/MAi6cdodltI
                    
                    6.15 Audience https://youtu.be/_tRxJQkcses
                    
                    6.16 Sexuality and Abraham https://youtu.be/drg-JNKSMrI
                    6.17 The Lewd and the Erotic https://youtu.be/e898rMjrGKM
                    
                    6.18 The Erotic Body and Salvation https://youtu.be/XZbbnd-Otbs
                    
                    6.11 - Hrotsvitha of Gandersheim https://youtu.be/d55XYOPmOio
                    
                    8.16 The Knight’s Choice https://youtu.be/0cAKRmmM1V8
                    
                    8.03 Chaucer Life https://youtu.be/q6Vyg4VkLmc
                    
                    8.06 Cecilia Chaumpaigne https://youtu.be/JwKaKOQHNpQ
                    8.10 Description of the Wife of Bath https://youtu.be/czreX2JArV0
                    
                    8.11 The Wife of Bath and Sexuality https://youtu.be/cSpC0VdG6EQ
                    
                    8.13 The Knight’s Quest https://youtu.be/YjkRuoyPVaA
                    
                    8.14 Alisoun’s Husbands https://youtu.be/QK_tgkOa1u0
                    
                    8.15 Paradox in the Wife of Bath’s Tale https://youtu.be/8Dr9kcEc5gs
                    
                    8.19 Gentleness and Action in the World https://youtu.be/gImG7QaKD8g
                    
                    10.02 What is a Mystery Cycle? https://youtu.be/WuwKilu2n2I
                    
                    10.03 Why Processional? https://youtu.be/Kb7DtplTksw
                    
                    10.04 Corpus Christi https://youtu.be/Q7ZaIiySFN4
                    10.06 Guilds https://youtu.be/YDnBsfXSf3U
                    
                    10.07 Amateurism https://youtu.be/5JBNZsUl6t0
                    
                    10.13 Social Order in The Second Shepherds’ Play https://youtu.be/yJv6bz7yito
                    
                    10.14 Bodies in The Second Shepherds’ Play https://youtu.be/DyoOVCeTMh8
                    
                    10.16 Genre and the Carnivalesque https://youtu.be/1BvTbrx9dEw
                    
                    10.15 Carnival https://youtu.be/xE7K6v5LtcQ
                    
                    10.18 The Grotesque Body https://youtu.be/_u5gyc55x0o
                    
                    12.04 Everyman and Death https://youtu.be/GeFv5jX-1So
                    
                    12.05 Everyman and Fellowship https://youtu.be/PngD51efYOY
                    
                    12.06 Everyman, Kindred and Cousin https://youtu.be/CrwsSoYMQn8
                    
                    12.09 Everyman and Confession https://youtu.be/FXiL7e9-4cw
                    
                    12.11 Knowledge and Five Wits https://youtu.be/Q1G4DtReOhk
                    12.14 Salvation and Epilogue https://youtu.be/H9eEZWxfjjo
                    12.15 Performance of Everyman https://youtu.be/QDylMuJNmDk
                    
                    12.17 What “The Renaissance” Means https://youtu.be/FrKe3g6L8QU
                    
                    14.03 Ten Tips for Reading Shakespeare https://youtu.be/80AiqahJ2-s
                    
                    14.04 Early Modern Theatre Outline https://youtu.be/L2N2AgYx30w
                    
                    14.05 Twelfth Night and Shakespeare’s Career https://youtu.be/2ePHP2uQBvQ
                    
                    14.06 Shakespeare’s Bawdy https://youtu.be/Py9Qhf5buJI
                    14.07 Galen and Sexual Difference https://youtu.be/yKtzlkzyEZE
                    
                    14.08 Discovery of the Clitoris https://youtu.be/dcVxjxH3-AM
                    
                    14.09 Antitheatricalism and the Representation of Sexual Difference https://youtu.be/pP9XRkpIlQ0
                    
                    14.10 Malvolio and Antitheatricalism https://youtu.be/my7Ie0ciTTk
                    
                    14.11 The Natural Order of Desire https://youtu.be/WcYvTFg05lM
                    
                    14.12 Clothing Makes the Man https://youtu.be/dTrCGmwxhUA
                    
                    14.14 Duelling and Masculinity https://youtu.be/PdFsjTXULlE
                    14.15 Sodomy and Same Sex Desire https://youtu.be/HnWAkoWj9HM
                    
                    16.02 Malvolio on Stage https://youtu.be/B8B9amSulP4
                    
                    16.03 Madness and Discipline https://youtu.be/r1jk_bhESyE
                    16.04 Comedy and Madness https://youtu.be/J0a41CTJzBI
                    
                    16.05 Performing Anxiety https://youtu.be/q6DRVHjNXaU
                    
                    16.06 Expectations of Realism https://youtu.be/VDR9OAh-hAw
                    18.02 Turn of the Century Protestantism https://youtu.be/oXicY5FIzMg
                    
                    18.03 Lanyer and Salve Deus Rex Judaeorum https://youtu.be/Ts3_9SG96Vk
                    
                    18.04 Description of Salve Deus Rex Judaeorum https://youtu.be/wAY0jtqHdZc
                    
                    18.05 To The Virtuous Reader Feminine Theology https://youtu.be/r0MEja9QCcs
                    18.06 The Invocation https://youtu.be/FtxmFDOAdzo
                    
                    18.07 Eve’s Apology I https://youtu.be/B1wh2Y0K64Y
                    
                    18.08 Eve’s Apology II https://youtu.be/3GhQtZpJWf8
                    
                    18.10 Introduction to George Herbert https://youtu.be/9ylIJV_BmVs
                    
                    18.11 The Metaphysical Poets and the Plain Style https://youtu.be/CE27aFdIjI8
                    
                    18.12 Physical Space and Psychic Space https://youtu.be/lsriBlt0E-c
                    18.13 Herbert’s Form https://youtu.be/WmVd6iUKHJ4
                    
                    18.14 Moderate Calvinism https://youtu.be/7QYAklm21v0
                    
                    18.15 Love (3) https://youtu.be/Vh6ZKq7cPmk
                    20.02 Terminology https://youtu.be/J2Uy9TZV0L0
                    20.03 The Golden Mean https://youtu.be/Hoiu3xbUkDg
                    
                    20.04 Octave and Sestet https://youtu.be/D4NV8n08pes
                    
                    20.05 Petrarch https://youtu.be/O6w7aMIGvlw
                    
                    20.07 The Sonnet Comes to England https://youtu.be/hvCRulf9-ro
                    20.08 Sir Philip Sidney https://youtu.be/fWzltuai5Tw
                    
                    20.09 Astrophil and Stella https://youtu.be/XSvrjHXbyOk
                    
                    20.11 Thematics of Astrophil and Stella https://youtu.be/jasmnbsUTro
                    
                    20.12 The Impact of Sidney https://youtu.be/d0i0KSDMZ1c
                    
                    20.13 Shakespeare’s Sonnets https://youtu.be/iLCjP3qlJ-U
                    
                    20.14 Sequencing the (Un)sequenced? Sonnets to the Young Man https://youtu.be/NqEcUaV0qhY
                    
                    20.15 The Dark Lady Sonnets https://youtu.be/MphbisJZAy4
                    
                    22.02 Jacobean Metaphor https://youtu.be/eupX9O-LzZs
                    
                    22.03 The New World https://youtu.be/jxdBOYDE2YU
                    22.04 The Old World https://youtu.be/ALSJH10263Y
                    22.05 The Conceit https://youtu.be/MrIaQRzSDCM
                    22.06 John Donne https://youtu.be/WhvbzSqIwuM
                    
                    22.07 Holy Sonnets https://youtu.be/ujJvkz1uns8
                    
                    22.08 Holy War https://youtu.be/_CWC9s8qRPI
                    22.10 Lady Mary Wroth and the Countess of Montgomery’s Urania https://youtu.be/_U2fIXQ5whc
                    
                    22.14 Inheritance and Gender https://youtu.be/YVhaFqkzEuc
                    24.01 Introduction to the Final Lesson https://youtu.be/clLM_SeSMIM
                    
                    24.02 The Civil Wars https://youtu.be/inzINksicFw
                    
                    24.03 Cavalier and Roundhead https://youtu.be/QpwcGYODVvM
                    24.04 Writing and the Civil War https://youtu.be/sWlbL4uYx4U
                    24.05 Katherine Philips https://youtu.be/XXPj2lcs2Xk
                    24.09 John Milton https://youtu.be/EASjW4TW754
                    24.14 1660 https://youtu.be/6YToNDgVbjs
                    
                    24.15 Conclusions https://youtu.be/12PKSsKC6Zc
                
            
