Title:  Digital Oulipo: Programming Potential Literature
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  3 October 2017
Abstract:  
                
                The formally constrained work of the Oulipo (l’Ouvroir de Littérature
                    Potentielle, loosely translated as Workshop of Potential Literature) lends
                    itself particularly well to digital studies, which was quickly recognized by the
                    members of the group. To facilitate its goal of avoiding chance in its literary
                    production, the group was naturally drawn to the determinism of computers, where
                    true chance is simply impossible. In its early years, therefore, the group used
                    algorithmic procedures as a starting point for various texts and also attempted
                    to program these texts on actual computers, creating some of the first
                    electronic literature and embarking on proto-digital humanities work as early as
                    the 1960s and 1970s, later abandoning these efforts and relegating all
                    subsequent activity to a subsidiary group.
                To understand the Oulipo's forays into computer science and more importantly, why
                    they abandoned them, I designed and carried out one of the inaugural projects of
                    the Princeton Center for Digital Humanities. The goal was twofold: first,
                    through exploratory programming, I intended to create interactive, digital
                    annexes to accompany my doctoral dissertation; more importantly, I hoped that by
                    attempting to reproduce the Oulipo's own algorithmic efforts, I would gain
                    similar insights into the nature of Potential Literature and be able to
                    understand why the group abandoned such efforts after the 1970s.
                This article describes the content, development, and results of my project. For
                    each of my three Python-based annexes, I offer a historical survey of the
                    Oulipian text or procedure discussed within and the Oulipo’s own proto-digital
                    humanities experiments; then, I will talk about my own experiences as a
                    coder-researcher, what learning Python has brought to my project, and how my
                    exploratory programming offered me a new kind of critical reflection.
                    Establishing these annexes forced me to learn to code, a type of work that does
                    not only produce digital texts, but also helped me to reflect on the notion of
                    chance in a more nuanced way. Finally, coding has allowed me to better
                    understand the Oulipian mentality concerning this sort of digital
                    experimentation. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                The Ouvroir de Litterature Potentielle (OuLiPo, loosely translated into English
                    as the Workshop for Potential Literature), an experimental writing group founded
                    in Paris in 1960, attempts to apply mathematical procedures to literature,
                    inventing procedures (known as constraints) to follow
                    during the composition of a text. One of the main goals of this strategy is to
                    reduce the role of chance, and it is therefore unsurprising that computers were
                    one of the first items on its early agenda. Computers are utterly incompatible
                    with the notion of chance, and in theory should have been a perfect, and rather
                    timely solution. Indeed, the founding of the Oulipo coincided with a critical
                    stage in the development of computers, and the group took full advantage
                    thereof, programming their texts and procedures through partnerships with Bull
                    Computers and the Centre Pompidou. Early computing put one in much closer
                    contact with the basic fabric of coding and the members quickly learned that
                    writing code requires one to divide a problem into its simplest, logical
                    components, very much like the elementary procedures they were inventing in the
                    group's formative years. However, by the 1970s, the group abandoned such
                    efforts, relegating all future algorithmic experimentation to a subsidiary. 
                In recent years, the field of digital humanities has been gaining popularity.
                    While far from nascent (the origins can be dated back to as early as the 1940s),
                    the discipline has failed to define itself, often preferring a broad scope that
                    situates its activity at the intersection of computing, technology, and
                    humanities scholarship. In theory, this sort of vague definition could be seen
                    as beneficial, encompassing a wide range of tools and techniques that can be
                    applied to humanistic work. In practice, while a great variety of scholarship
                    has been and is currently being undertaken that claims to use digital humanities
                    practices, a majority of this work seems to fall under the categories of textual
                    encoding, the creation of digital archives, and the use of ready-made tools to
                    run some type of analysis on a digital text or visualize data from it. The fact
                    that digital humanists do not seem to prioritize learning to program has been
                    lamented on several occasions by Nick Montfort, both in his own treatise on
                    exploratory programming for humanistic inquiry  and
                    also in A New Companion to Digital Humanities
                    . While not widespread, a knowledge of computing
                    languages and algorithmic procedures can indeed be productive in humanistic
                    research, as the Oulipo demonstrates through its aforementioned computer efforts
                    as well as through its non-algorithmic productions, which given the highly
                    intentional compositional methods, lend themselves well to computational methods
                    of inquiry. The Oulipo is not only a particularly good example of raw material
                    to be analyzed using digital methods, but is also present in many canonical
                    digital humanities criticisms, one of the best examples being Stephen Ramsay’s
                        Reading Machines
                    . 
                However, the goal of this article is not to give a critical overview of the use
                    of Oulipo studies for digital humanities. It is rather to demonstrate how I was
                    able to use exploratory programming to understand the Oulipo's forays into
                    computer science and more importantly, why the group abandoned such initiatives.
                    To this end, I designed and carried out one of the inaugural projects of the
                    Princeton Center for Digital Humanities under the guidance of Cliff
                        Wulfman I am greatly indebted to Cliff Wulfman, who is no longer at
                        the Center for Digital Humanities but who was a staff member during my
                        project. His advice was invaluable, his recommendations of beginner’s Python
                        courses were always useful, his technical expertise was unmatched. But most
                        importantly, I have gained immeasurable insights from our conversations
                        surrounding the creation of these annexes, which I will discuss in the
                        remainder of this paper.  as my technical lead. My project had two
                    main goals: first, through exploratory programming, I intended to create
                    interactive, digital annexes to accompany my doctoral dissertation; more
                    importantly, I hoped that by attempting to reproduce the Oulipo's own
                    algorithmic efforts, I would gain similar insights into the nature of
                        Potential Literature and be able to understand why the group
                    abandoned such efforts. My original intention was to create five digital annexes
                    (of which I only completed three that would constitute the final product)
                        I ultimately abandoned the idea of making an annex for my first chapter on
                        Set Theory, as none of the set theoretic constraints discussed in my chapter
                        would have been particularly engaging on a computer. Furthermore, the main
                        purpose of my first chapter was a historical analysis of the intellectual
                        inheritance of the mathematical field of set theory and not close readings
                        of Oulipian constraints. Additionally, in this paper I will not discuss my
                        fifth annex, which took the form of a Tinderbox hypertext, based on the
                        geometric representation of the table of contents of Italo Calvino’s Le città invisibili. While productive in its own
                        way, this annex is fundamentally different from the other three, given its
                        creation using outside software and its purpose as a research and
                        note-taking tool, rather than as an interactive, digital edition of the text
                        itself., each one to accompany a chapter in my dissertation. The
                    purpose and development of these annexes were intertwined: my preliminary
                    research on the Oulipo's computer efforts enriched my own understanding of the
                    task at hand; by learning to program, I was afforded a rare glimpse into the
                    mindset of the early Oulipo; finally, by manipulating the finished product, my
                    reader would better understand the underlying mathematical principles at work in
                    these texts.
                This article describes the content, development, and results of my project. For
                    each of my three Python-based annexes, I offer a historical survey of the
                    Oulipian text or procedure discussed within and the Oulipo’s own proto-digital
                    humanities experiments; then, I will talk about my own experiences as a
                    coder-researcher, what learning Python has brought to my project, and how my
                    exploratory programming offered me a new kind of critical reflection.
                    Establishing these annexes forced me to learn to code, a type of work that does
                    not only produce digital texts, but also helped me to reflect on the notion of
                    chance in a more nuanced way. Finally, coding has allowed me to better
                    understand the Oulipian mentality concerning this sort of digital
                    experimentation. Carrying out a digital humanities project on the Oulipo —
                    itself a quasi-academic research group that both analyzes and creates — resulted
                    in a hybrid experiment with multiple, varied results and insights, which helped
                    me both understand the history and development of Oulipian aesthetics as well as
                    understand their texts better. While unconventional given the nature of digital
                    humanities work today, the results of my research demonstrate a productive use
                    of programming as both a creative and analytic exercise that can undoubtedly
                    prove fruitful in future digital humanities work. 
            

                Part I: Combinatorial Poetry:
                
                    Cent mille milliards de poèmes
                    Published in 1961 by Oulipian cofounder Raymond Queneau and followed by a
                        critical essay by his fellow cofounder François Le Lionnais, the Cent mille milliards de poèmes (A Hundred Thousand Billion Poems) is generally
                        considered to be the first Oulipian text and therefore serves as an
                        illustration of the group’s initial goals and influences, one of the main
                        ones being computer science.
                    In the preface, unconventionally called a mode
                            d’emploi or user’s manual, Queneau explains how the text was
                            written, but discourages the reader by claiming that the
                        volume is impossible to read (it would take a very determined
                        reader 190,258,751 years to read all the poems, even devoting 24 hours a
                        day, 7 days a week ). To produce his
                        machine, Queneau wrote 10 base sonnets, each of which
                        is constrained by not only the rules of this famous fixed form (14 verses,
                        two quatrains and two tercets, a fixed rhyme scheme, the poetic meter of the
                        French alexandrine, etc.), but also by three additional rules : 
                    
                        Each rhyme in any of the original sonnets must rhyme with the
                            corresponding verse of any of the other sonnets. Queneau imposes the
                            additional constraint that the rhymes should not be too banal, rare, or
                            unique. 
                        Each sonnet must have a theme and
                                continuity, however the sonnets produced by the system do
                            not have that same charm.
                        Finally, the grammatical structure had to permit the substitution of
                            any individual verse with the corresponding verse from any of the other
                            nine sonnets. 
                    
                    With 10 sonnets of 14 lines each, adhering to these three simple rules,
                        Queneau’s system is capable of producing 1014
                        potential poems. The use of the word potential is a double entendre — potentiel in French is the adjectival form of the word
                            puissance, or exponential power. 
                    Before reaching the poems, the reader is faced with an epigraph by Alan
                        Turing: 
                            Only a machine can read a
                                sonnet written by another machine
                            
                        . Original French: Seule une
                                machine peut lire un sonnet écrit par une autre
                            machine. This approximate translation comes from Turing’s
                        famous Times interview: 
                            ...I do not see why it [a
                                computer] should not enter any one of the fields normally covered by
                                the human intellect, and eventually compete on equal terms. I do not
                                think you can even draw the line about sonnets, though the
                                comparison is perhaps a little bit unfair because a sonnet written
                                by a machine will be better appreciated by another machine
                            
                        .
                    Note the use of the passive voice in the original Turing citation. Queneau
                        (who understood English too well to make such a blatant translation error)
                        makes the machine the subject of his epigraph. The reader of his volume, he
                        claims while ventriloquizing Turing, is a computer. The physical conception
                        of the volume does indeed support this proposition: rather than taking
                        pleasure in reading an exponential number of sonnets (most of which are an
                        incoherent jumble of verses from prewritten sonnets, devoid of a theme and
                        written by no one), the reader must manipulate the verses of Queneau’s
                        original poems, cut into strips to produce a functional book-machine hybrid.
                        The Oulipo quickly turned to actual machines to reimagine this foundational
                        text, literally programming a combinatorial poetry collection that already
                        owed much to computers. 
                             Image depicting how the volume functions. Source: http://openset.nl/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/Prevert.jpg
                            
                            
                        
                    
                
            

                Oulipian Computer experiments
                Before designing my own digital editions, I needed to take into consideration
                    what the Oulipo had already attempted. The Cent mille
                        milliards de poèmes, in addition to being the first Oulipian text,
                    was also the one that had been most programmed by the group — three times, in
                    fact, in the 1960s, 1970s, and finally in 1999. The 1999 computing
                        initiative was less an experiment in exploratory programming than it was an
                        editorial and commercial enterprise, resulting in the sale of a CD-ROM.
                        While the nature of the programmed texts in the CD-ROM share certain
                        commonalities with the previous experiments, I will not include this in my
                        analysis. Evaluating these attempts, contextualizing them given the
                    historical capabilities of computers at the time, and understanding how the
                    group perception of this programming challenge changed with each new attempt
                    would not only enrich my dissertation, but would also help me in designing my
                    digital annex.
                After deciding at their second meeting to seek out computers to pursue various
                    types of analytic work, the founding members of the Oulipo came into contact
                    with Dmitri Starynkevitch, a French-born Russian immigrant, who was working for
                    Bull Computers at the time. He began Oulipian computer work on the CAB 500
                    computer that operated with the PAF language (Programmation Automatique des
                    Formules) . Collaboration with
                    Starynkevitch brought the Oulipo into direct contact with computing, but also
                    enabled Starynkevitch to apply the highly mathematical programming language to
                    creative endeavors, allowing both sides to gain insight into the potential of
                    this new technology. 
                
                     Image of a CAB 500 computer. Source: http://www.histoireinform.com/Histoire/+infos2/CAB_500.jpg
                    
                    
                
                In August 1961, Starynkevitch sent Queneau excerpts from the Cent mille milliards de poèmes produced on the computer. The
                    reaction of the Oulipians was less enthusiastic than might have been expected: 
                        We would like M. Starynkevitch to
                            detail the method he used: we hope that the choice of the verses was not
                            left to chance
                        
                    . Original French: On souhaita que
                            M. Starynkevitch nous précise la méthode utilisée ; on espéra que le
                            choix des vers ne fut pas laissé au hasard. This response
                    is key to understanding Oulipian aesthetics and what the early group wanted to
                    gain from this computer experiment. While there is a certain amount of chance in
                    the production of the poems, this chance lies entirely with the reader, who is
                    autonomous in producing what he or she wishes to read. While Queneau’s epigraph
                    indicates that the reader is a sort of machine, Starynkevitch’s literal machine
                    is too random for the group’s aesthetics. 
                After their collaboration with Starynkevitch, the Oulipo had one final group
                    effort in the 1970s, a project known as the Atelier de
                        Recherches et Techniques Avancées (A.R.T.A.) at the Centre Pompidou,
                    which Paul Fournel detailed first in a conference entitled Écrivain-ordinateur in June 1977 and subsequently in the Atlas de Littérature Potentielle of 1981. Directed by
                    Paul Braffort (a computer scientist and member of the second generation of
                    Oulipians coopted after the group’s founding), the goal of this project was to
                    create a foundation for 
                        a possible agreement between
                            computer science and literary creation
                        
                    . Original French: un possible
                            accord entre l’informatique et la création littéraire.
                    They worked primarily with preexisting texts that were already combinatorial or
                    algorithmic in nature. Their intent was to demonstrate that with such texts,
                    computers can assist in the reading process.
                The first experimental text was Queneau’s Cent mille
                        milliards de poèmes, of which Fournel admits: 
                        “The printed collection is very
                            nicely conceived but the manipulation of the strips on which each verse
                            is printed is sometimes delicate
                        
                    . Original French: Le recueil
                            imprimé est très joliment conçu mais la manipulation des languettes sur
                            lesquelles chaque vers est imprimé est parfois délicate.
                    The physical design of the collection is visually compelling and provides a more
                    intuitive understanding of the combinatorics that regulate the volume. However,
                    certain manipulations of the set of poems are cumbersome, for instance reading
                    Queneau’s original ten sonnets. In order for the computer to facilitate the
                    reading process, the A.R.T.A. program makes a selection from Queneau’s original
                    ten sonnets based on the length of the reader’s name and the time it takes the
                    reader to type it. This generates a magic number of
                    fourteen digits, each of which determines from which of the original ten sonnets
                    the corresponding verse is taken . 
                This method responds to the Oulipo’s earlier question about Starynkevitch’s
                    program regarding the method of choosing the verses. However, this new program
                    is still surprisingly restrictive. Mark Wolff acknowledges that this program has
                    more potential in the Oulipian sense
                    than the one produced with the help of Starynkevitch: 
                        Such a program has no potential in
                            the Oulipian sense because random numbers produce aleatory effects. The
                            original algorithm preserves an active role for the user, even if that
                            role requires the minimal engagement of typing one's name in order to
                            sustain the creative process
                        
                    . However, with the physical edition, the reader has the freedom to read
                    in different ways. This program, on the other hand, only produces a single poem
                    using a method that is never explicitly stated. While a reader could type
                    his/her name multiple times to produce new poetry to read, this is a
                    fundamentally less interesting task than manipulating the physical volume, where
                    the reader has more autonomy. Herein lies one of the great difficulties that I
                    would soon face in carrying out my project: since the active selection of poems
                    is what creates the illusion that the reader becomes the author, having a
                    computer replace the manipulation of verses deprives the reader of the pleasure
                    and creativity he or she would experience with the physical volume. 
                
                    My CMMP experiment
                    Given my understanding of the text and the Oulipo's multiple attempts to
                        program it, I began my project with the Cent mille
                            milliards de poèmes annex. Its status as the first Oulipian text
                        did not enter into this decision, but rather I hoped that this text would be
                        simple enough to serve as a practical introduction to programming in Python.
                        My goal of creating a digital edition of this text was not original. In
                        addition to the Oulipian editions I detailed above, there are other
                        excellent online editions Including (but not limited to): Bev Rowe’s
                            digital edition including original translations with excellent footnotes
                            (hhttps://www.bevrowe.info/Internet/Queneau/Queneau.html); and
                            Gordon Dow’s less impressive version (http://www.growndodo.com/wordplay/oulipo/10%5E14sonnets.html),
                            but with the additional feature of displaying the number of sonnets
                            generated at this site (currently far below the total 1014). of the Cent
                            mille milliards de poèmes. My aim was twofold: first, to use
                        this text as a practical introduction to computer programming, allowing me
                        to better understand the Oulipo’s struggle with this text and its computer
                        legacy; second, to use the creative enterprise of designing new methods to
                        produce pseudo-random sonnets in order to grapple with the Oulipian notion
                        of chance myself.
                    To transform Queneau’s work, I first had to visualize the original 10 sonnets
                        in computer science terms, as an array of arrays. In computer science, an array is a type of data structure consisting of a collection of
                        elements, each identified by at least one index or key. A sonnet, by
                        definition, is already an array of fourteen verses that can each be
                        attributed a numbered index. In order to make Queneau’s sonnets intelligible
                        to a computer program, I needed to rewrite them as an array of arrays: ten sonnets of fourteen
                        lines each. Once I had this data structure, I had to learn to write programs
                        that would pick a single verse from one of the original sonnets, building
                        upon that to design a program that would generate a pseudo-random sonnet
                        from a 14-character key (the digits of this key would each be between 0 and
                        9, indicating which of the original 10 sonnets to take the verse from).
                        Finally came the creative part: I had to decide how to produce
                            pseudo-random sonnets in a way that would remain faithful
                        to the Oulipian notion of chance. In the end, I came
                        up with three different ways
                            https://github.com/Princeton-CDH/digital-oulipo: 
                    
                        Age: The reader inputs his/her birthday and the
                            program uses the digits in the birthday to generate the key. The
                            calculations I subject the digits of the birthday to in order to produce
                            the key are invisible to the reader, and have nothing to do with the
                            reader’s age. My next goal is therefore to tweak it to calculate exactly
                            how old the reader is at the time the poem is generated so that every
                            minute the reader generates a poem, that poem is different from the
                            previous. 
                        Location: The reader is directed to a website
                            which gives him/her a latitude and longitude value which he/she then
                            inputs into my program. These numbers are then manipulated to create the
                            14-digit code to generate a sonnet. In this way, the reader can generate
                            sonnets from not only his or her current location, but any location. The
                            implications of this type of pseudo-random poem are certainly in the
                            spirit of the Oulipo, but once again, the actual calculations to which I
                            subject the data to generate a 14-digit string seems too divorced from
                            the method to be considered truly Oulipian. 
                        UUID: A UUID is generated from the user’s
                            computer, which will produce a new sonnet each time (given that the
                            particular UUID that was enough characters and only digits) is dependent
                            on the time. 
                    
                    Ultimately, my annex is less than satisfying. Not only does the reader of my
                        edition still have no freedom, but he/she is not even allowed into the
                        process. The only person who had any fun in this is me. That said, perhaps
                            programming this programmatic text is one viable way to
                        read it. Queneau claims at the outset that his little poetry volume is
                        utterly impossible to read in a human lifetime, but also claims that
                            only a computer can appreciate poems generated in this way.
                        Clearly, to have any chance at reading the volume, one
                        must read it as a machine. 
                    Through programming, I have gained a more thorough understanding of this text
                        and its implications, but I also understand how Queneau’s choice of
                        extremely specific subject matter for each of his original poems is the key
                        factor in the hilarity of the potential poems. Each verse of Queneau’s
                        original poems is essentially tagged with vocabulary linking it
                        to its specific subject. A verse from the first poem that is imbued with an
                        Argentinian vocabulary, for instance, cannot possibly be interchanged with a
                        verse about the leaning tower of Pisa without producing a destabilizing
                        effect. And while certain combinations of these verses may indeed be funnier
                        than others or produce unexpected effects, it is precisely the content of
                        the original poems (that is to say, what would be invisible to a computer
                        reading the text) that produces the surrealist effect of reading the
                        potential poems. While my methods for generating pseudo-random poetry given
                        Queneau’s originals may not be satisfying, I can use my program to analyze
                        the text further. I have even adapted my program, replacing Queneau’s poems
                        with Shakespearean sonnets that all have more or less the same theme. The
                        resulting combinations are far less jarring than Queneau's original,
                        precisely due to the lack of specific, tagging vocabulary. 
                    In a similar vein, this method can be adapted to interpret and analyze all
                        combinatorial poetry. Poetry, as the Oulipo was well aware, by its fixed
                        forms and propensity for patterns, can be inherently combinatorial. The
                        Oulipo was not the first in noting this property — the Grands Rhétoriqueurs,
                        for instance, were writing similarly expandable poetry as early as the
                        fifteenth century (Jean Molinet's Sept rondeaux sur un
                            rondeau
                         is an excellent example). Furthermore, the
                        Oulipo's work has inspired countless other examples of combinatorial poetry
                        generators that can be adapted as I have and subjected to statistical
                        analysis. Computers can help a digital humanist when faced with a volume of
                        combinatorial poetry of which the time to read exceeds a human lifetime,
                        allowing for a mathematical type of distant reading that is better
                        equipped to explicate such computer-inspired poetry. 
                
            

                Part II: Arborescent Narratives
                
                    Un conte à votre façon
                    Queneau’s Un conte à votre façon (A Tale in Your Own Way) is one of the earliest
                        examples of the choose-your-own-adventure genre, with the added distinction
                        that it was also inspired by computers: 
                            This text is inspired by the
                                presentation of instructions destined for computers or rather
                                programmed teaching. This is an analogous structure to tree
                                    literature proposed by F. Le Lionnais at the 79th meeting
                                [of the Oulipo]
                            
                        . Original French: Ce texte…s’inspire de la présentation des instructions destinées
                                aux ordinateurs ou bien encore de l’enseignement programmé. C’est
                                une structure analogue à la littérature « en arbre » proposée par F.
                                Le Lionnais à la 79e réunion. The importance of the
                            tree structure here owes to mathematics, and more
                        specifically to the field of graph theory that was
                        being developed at that time by fellow Oulipian, Claude Berge. Queneau’s
                        tale can, incidentally, be represented as a graph. 
                            Source: http://www.infolipo.org/ambroise/cours/immediat/images/queneau_cavf.pdf
                            
                         While the graph of this text can be represented in an infinite
                        number of ways, this particular one (created by Queneau) is particularly
                        aesthetic considering the choices he makes: the nodes 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, and 21
                        frame the rest, as these determine only expository elements, but not the
                        action of the story; node 20 and not its double, 21 (both of which terminate
                        the program) seems to be Queneau's preferred ending judging from its place
                        within the graph, and not outside the story; in short, Queneau's artistic
                        choices speak volumes about Queneau's own interpretation of his text. 
                    Queneau’s story initially gives this reader a choice between the story of
                        three little peas, three big skinny beanpoles, or three average mediocre
                        bushes. The choices are all binary, and mostly stark oppositions. For
                        instance, either the reader chooses to read the tale of the three peas or he
                        or she does not. Should the reader prefer not to read this first option, he
                        or she will find that the two alternatives offer meager results. Refusing
                        all three terminates the program almost immediately. If the reader chooses
                        the proper beginning and advances in the tale, the first few choices of the
                        story allow the reader to have a say in descriptive aspects of the story —
                        whether or not the peas dream, what color gloves they wear as they sleep in
                        their pod, and whether or not they roll around on a highway first. In many
                        cases, pointless alternatives are either offered to the reader in an effort
                        to convince him or her of his or her autonomy (the alternative descriptions)
                        or as unsatisfying dead ends (the false beginnings). Regardless of the path
                        the reader takes, there is only one real story. There
                        are even two choices that are not choices at all: node 13 asks the reader if
                        he or she wishes to know since when the one little pea has been analyzing
                        dreams, but the alternative takes the reader to the same node, since the
                        answer will not be provided in any case . The following node similarly promises the analysis of the dream, but the
                        alternative proposition affirms that: 
                            If not, go to 15 anyway,
                                because you won’t see anything
                            
                        . Original French: si non,
                                passez également à 15, car vous ne verrez rien.
                    
                    In short, this conte is not at all à notre façon. The reader must read a certain
                        subsection of the story as Queneau wrote it, and his/her involvement is
                        superficial. While the story and its various itineraries can be visualized
                        as a flow chart, the text leaves very little freedom to the reader. What I
                        have identified as potential glitches could
                        alternatively describe the true nature of this programmatic text. The reader
                        is a computer who, once committed to participation in this program, has no
                        real freedom. The true pleasure comes from the realization that the system,
                        while possible to program on a computer, is fundamentally incompatible with
                        such a design. The illusion of freedom is the defining feature of the text,
                        problematizing the nature of the genre itself. 
                
                
                    Oulipo computer experiments
                    Starynkevitch never had the opportunity to program Un
                            conte à votre façon, as he worked with the Oulipo several years
                        before its genesis. However, through the A.R.T.A. project at Pompidou, the
                        Oulipo produced a computer program of Queneau’s flowchart text programmed in
                        APL (A Programming Language) by Dominique Bourguet. The goal was simple:
                        take a text that was designed with computers in mind and literally put it on
                        a computer in order to facilitate reading. Bourguet’s program functioned as
                        follows: 
                            First, the computer
                                    dialogues with the reader by proposing the
                                different choices, then edits and cleans up the chosen text without
                                the questions. The pleasure of playing and the pleasure of reading
                                are therefore combined
                            
                        . Original French: L’ordinateur, dans un premier temps, dialogue
                                avec le lecteur en lui proposant les divers choix, puis dans un
                                second temps, édite ‘au propre’ et sans les questions, le texte
                                choisi. Le plaisir de jouer et le plaisir de lire se trouvent donc
                                combinés.
                    The computer is reductive in terms of reader interaction. While Paul Braffort
                        published one such conte produced using
                        this machine in an essay entitled Prose et
                            Combinatoire
                        , he conveniently selects the
                        option allowing the peas to dream and the machine has carefully edited out
                        any confusion. Unfortunately, their original program is no longer available,
                        but I would have liked to see how Bourguet chose to clean
                            up the discrepancies in the text itself once the reader’s
                        tale is produced. Indeed, the genius of Queneau’s text lies in the
                            simultaneous display of all possible paths, which can then
                        be represented graphically. Should the reader read linearly rather than
                        follow the proposed algorithm, he would note the contradictory nature of
                        much of the short tale. By allowing the reader to see only one step at a
                        time, the mechanics of the system are masked and the reader remains unaware
                        of the mathematical potential of the whole story.
                
                
                    My Program
                    At this point in the project, the Cent mille milliards
                            de poèmes annex had taught me some programming basics, but Cliff
                        suggested that I try to find a way to become better initiated with
                        programming. I worked independently through Learn
                            Python the Hard Way Zed Shaw, Learn
                                Python the Hard Way. (http://learnpythonthehardway.org), a free, online,
                        practical introduction to autonomous programming that I highly recommend.
                        Beginning with basic information about how to use the terminal, followed by
                        a practical introduction to programming, the lessons gradually built upon
                        one another to allow the reader to undertake his/her own projects by the end
                        of the book. 
                    At the end of the program, the author had an example where the user could
                        make a program that allowed a reader to move through a
                            Map with a pre-established number of scenes. For my
                        first semi-autonomous programming, I adapted that program to make my own
                        interactive edition of Un conte à votre façon.
                        Aside from a few basic errors in indentations and spacing, my program was
                        functional (if not particularly elegant), allowing a reader to read through
                        this interactive edition of the text, making choices about which path to
                        follow. As far as the reading experience was concerned, however, the program
                        was unsatisfying. My goal was to add the graphical representation and have
                        it interact with the program somehow. 
                    Cliff introduced me to graphviz, an open source graph
                        (network) visualization project that is freely available for Python. Given
                        my background in mathematics and my research on graph
                            theory, I felt immediately at ease with the way this program
                        operates. In graph theory, a graph is defined as a plot of nodes and edges. In graphviz as
                        well, in order to make a graph, I had to define all
                        requisite nodes and edges. The program then generates a visualization of the
                        graph that is spatially efficient. As an exercise, I made a graph of the famous graph
                            theory problem of the Bridges of Königsberg
                            The seven bridges of Königsberg is a famous
                            historical problem in mathematics and simple introduction to the basics
                            of graph theory. Let us say you are a tourist in the Prussian city of
                            Königsberg (now Kaliningrad, Russia) and want to see the whole city,
                            which is intersected by the Pregel River, containing two large islands.
                            Seven bridges connect these various positions: two leading from the left
                            bank to the first island, two more leading from the first island to the
                            right bank, one between the two islands, and one each between the second
                            island and each of the banks. Is it possible to devise a walk through
                            the city that crosses each bridge once and only once? Leonhard Euler
                            solved the problem in 1736, laying the foundations of graph theory in
                            the process..
                    With this graph theoretical program in my Python
                        arsenal, I was able to make my own graph of Un conte à votre façon. See next image. Note
                            that in my graph, a path has been highlighted in green. This is one
                            possible path through the story, highlighted on the graph by the program
                            at the close. In fact, this path is the lazy one,
                            in which the reader refuses to read the story of the three little peas,
                            the tall skinny bean poles, and the average mediocre bushes.
                        Still not enough, I aimed to integrate the two programs, and Cliff and I
                        decided to give my original program the structure of a graph so that it would be able to generate a graph with graphviz
                        at the end. My program now has nodes and edges that correspond with
                        Queneau’s prompts and choices. With this structure, I was able to write a
                        program that enters the graph at the first node and,
                        depending on the choice of the user, proceeds through the story, printing
                        out the selected nodes and the corresponding edges. The program records the
                        path the reader takes and at the end, prints out a graph with the reader’s path filled in green, to represent the
                        little peas. While my little program does not take into account the full
                        potential of the intersection of graph theory and
                        literature as proposed by Queneau’s text, I am very pleased with how it
                        functions. For instance, I can leave to the reader the mathematical exercise
                        of finding the minimum number of read-throughs required to hit every node.
                        While there is still more that can be done, the graph my program generates
                        is itself informative — side by side with the text, the reader can learn
                        more about the potential of this three little peas story. 
                    Unlike Queneau's original graph, mine does not depend on my own aesthetic
                        preferences or interpretation of the text. The vertical layout, determined
                        by graphviz's spatial constraints, seems to have — without any knowledge of
                        the content of the nodes — understood something fundamental about the
                        structure of Queneau's tale. This representation of the graph clearly
                        demonstrates that there is only one true story, with a
                        few minor diversions that do not change the final outcome. The left-hand
                        side of the graph (nodes 2, 3, and so on) demonstrates a refusal to read the
                        primary tale. 
                    This is an odd, almost disconcerting outcome of my project that seems to
                        confirm many criticisms of digital humanities scholarship. If reading the
                        text is unnecessary to its interpretation, then is this not an abject
                        refusal of traditional humanities work? I would argue that this method does
                        not necessarily supersede a traditional close reading, but rather provides a
                        legible visualization of the potential of similar graph theoretical texts.
                        Any choose-your-own-adventure story is composed of nodes and edges which can
                        be programmed — as I have done — using graphviz. Indeed, my program can be
                        adapted very easily to create an interactive edition and graph of any such
                        story. I would encourage digital humanists who wish to try their hand at
                        exploratory programming to apply this method to more complex works of which
                        a traditional close reading might be obscured by the number of nodes and
                        edges. 
                    
                        
                    
                
            

                Part III: Algorithmic Substitutions
                
                    Jean Lescure’s S+7
                    The S+7 method was invented by Jean Lescure and
                        immediately gained popularity in the early Oulipo, most likely due to its
                        precise definition, simplicity of execution, and quick and often hilarious
                        results. Proposed on one of the first Oulipo meetings on 13 February 1961,
                        it enjoys a privileged position as one of the group’s first official
                        constraints . A simple algorithmic procedure,
                        the S+7 begins with a preexisting text, locates all
                        the nouns (S stands for substantif, or noun) and replaces them with the noun
                        that comes seven entries later in a dictionary of the author’s choosing.
                        Early Oulipian publications such as the first collected volume, La Littérature Potentielle, experimented with many
                        different types of texts to get some sense of the results. 
                    Lescure’s article detailing the method claims that since the S+7 operator is a purely mechanical function, the
                        results also depend upon the chosen text and dictionary used . While not immediately humorous on its
                        own, the S+7 owes its entire effect to the structure
                        of the original text and the nature of the dictionary and it is therefore
                        recognizable syntactic structures that become the most humorous when nouns
                        have been swapped out with others that are alphabetically not too far away.
                        For instance, here are some English-language S+7
                        exercises produced by an online generator Source: http://www.spoonbill.org/n+7/. These examples exhibit simple
                            flaws caused by imperfect parts of speech tagging.:
                    
                        In the bench Governor created the help and the economist. And the
                            economist was without forum, and void; and day was upon the failure of
                            the deep. And the Spring of Governor moved upon the failure of the
                            weddings. And Governor said, Let there be link: and there was link.
                                (Genesis from the Bible)
                        Lolita, light-year of my lifetime, firecracker of my longings. My
                            single-decker, my south. Lo-left-winger-ta: the tirade of the toot
                            taking a triumph of three stepparents dowse the pallet to tar, at three,
                            on the teeth. Lo. Left-winger. Ta. (Lolita,
                            Vladimir Nabokov)
                        It was the best of tinctures, it was the worst of tinctures, it was
                            the agitator of witch, it was the agitator of foolishness, it was the
                            equivalent of bellow, it was the equivalent of incredulity, it was the
                            secondary of Lilac, it was the secondary of Darkness… (A Tale of Two Cities, Charles Dickens)
                    
                    These are funny precisely because the original texts are so recognizable. The
                        syntactic structure coupled with a few surprising substitutions in
                        vocabulary derail the reading experience and help us understand that nothing
                        is sacred — not even great literary classics or the Bible. 
                    The Oulipo’s further work on the S+7 dealt more with
                        variations on the genre. Mathematically speaking, Le Lionnais pointed out
                        that the S+7 is a more specific version of M±n, in which M represents any taggable part of
                        speech and n represents any integer value . Queneau’s La cimaise et la
                            fraction is an excellent example of an M+7 in which adjectives, nouns, and verbs of La Fontaine’s
                        timeless fable La cigale et la fourmi are
                        substituted accordingly . Homomorphisms came next, fixing a specific facet of a
                        preexisting structure and changing everything else. For instance, homosyntaxismes reproduce the syntactic structure of
                        a work with a new vocabulary; homovocalismes
                        reproduce the same vowels, but change all the consonants; similarly, homoconsonantismes freeze the consonants while
                        changing the vowels .
                
                
                    Oulipo Computer Experiments
                    The Oulipo did experiment with some recognizable texts early on, once again
                        in the context of their collaboration with Starynkevitch. In January 1963,
                        Dmitri Starynkevitch was an invited guest at a meeting. Lescure insisted
                        that he make a program for producing S+7’s on the CAB
                        500, and Starynkevitch spoke of the difficulties that arise when programming
                            S+7 given the lack of a dictionary. For a human
                        author, applying the S+7 method is tedious. For a
                        computer of the 1960’s, it was virtually impossible. Starynkevitch explains
                        such difficulties: 
                            All the difficulty obviously
                                comes from the amount of material you need — that is, to introduce
                                into the machine. It is currently possible for us to work with a few
                                sonnets of pages of text. (That is what we did for the Cent mille milliards de poèmes.) But if we
                                need to perforate an entire dictionary (which is the case of the S+7), that is currently impossible.
                            
                         Original French: Toute la
                                difficulté vient, évidemment, de la quantité de matériau dont vous
                                avez besoin — donc : à introduire en machine. Il nous est possible
                                de travailler sur quelques sonnets ou quelques pages de texte.
                                (C’est ce que nous avons fait pour les Cent
                                    mille milliards de poèmes.) Mais s’il faut perforer tout
                                un dictionnaire (c’est le cas des S + 7), cela nous est actuellement
                                impossible.
                    Eventually, they proposed to correct various issues by hand. By the following
                        meeting, Starynkevitch had programmed the S+7 method
                        and sent Queneau examples of the program applied to the Exercices de style, Genesis (they
                        found that God was particularly potential), Shakespeare, and Hugo. In
                        addressing these questions, Starynkevitch had to do a great deal of work by
                        hand. He first had to generate his own small dictionary of nouns (which he
                        chose at random, according to his letter), separate it into masculine and
                        feminine nouns, and then apply the procedure to both genders separately.
                        With issues of plural, he had to make corrections by hand, as well as with
                        exceptions to the grammar rules he had taught to the machine.
                    These early examples were never published, and the S+7
                        computer experiments were never mentioned in any publications. My suspicion
                        is that they were displeased with the S+7 computer
                        program for two main reasons, despite the fact that the procedure itself is
                        ostensibly purely algorithmic and easily applicable to literal computers.
                        First, while early computing was able to produce S+7’s, so much was done by hand that the Oulipo very quickly abandoned
                        the idea of using computers to do S+7’s. What is the
                        point of automating a procedure if such an automation requires the creation
                        and perforation of a noun dictionary that has no other purpose?
                        Additionally, correcting gender discrepancies that the computer could not
                        understand was likely just as time-consuming as doing the entire thing by
                        hand in the first place. 
                     While the A.R.T.A. project focused more on strictly combinatorial
                        productions (where there were a fixed number of elements that could be
                        recombined as the user wished, as in the case of Marcel Bénabou’s aphorisms
                        , there would eventually be an amusing
                        computer program produced that functioned along the same lines as the S+7. In July 1981, a conversation between Paul
                        Braffort and Jacques Roubaud (a mathematician and poet, another member of
                        the second generation of Oulipians) saw the birth of the
                            ALAMO (Atelier de Littérature Assistée par la
                            Mathématique et les Ordinateurs) . One
                        of the group's most successful programs consists of
                            emptying Rimbaud’s Le dormeur
                            du val of its meaningful words (nouns, adjectives, verbs), and
                        replacing them with common words from Baudelaire’s lexical vocabulary . As Le dormeur du val is
                        one of the most famous French-language poems and has a particularly
                        recognizable syntactic structure, even ordinary people who have been through
                        the French school system would find a hybrid poem humorous. 
                
                
                    My program
                    My last digital annex is much more modest in scope, consisting only of an S+7 generator. Since this is such a canonical
                        Oulipian technique that is often mentioned but very rarely analyzed, my hope
                        was to provide the reader of my chapter 2 with a program to generate his/her
                        own S+7’s. In this way, when I claim that well-known
                        texts produce more comedic effects, the reader can generate an S+7 of a well-known text and a lesser-known one in
                        order to enrich my analysis with more examples. I had also hoped that such a
                        program might be able to provide multiple dictionaries so that the reader
                        can experiment with the effect of different types of dictionaries on the
                        procedure and resulting texts. A final outcome was supposed to be the
                        ability to subtract 7 from previously written S+7’s,
                        allowing the reader to confirm whether or not an Oulipian had faithfully
                        produced an S+7 without cheating. While my chapter 2
                        includes a diverse and varied selection of texts and procedures, only some
                        of which are substitution-based such as the S+7, my
                        annex would aim to provide one small, interactive example of the type of
                        potential literature the early Oulipo was examining. 
                    Since my other annexes dealt exclusively with original texts written in
                        French (Queneau’s Cent mille milliards de
                            poèmes and Un conte à votre façon),
                        I programmed them using the original French texts, though I could have
                        easily provided a translated version. Given that the S+7 is a procedure, however, and that my dissertation committee
                        consists entirely of native English speakers, I allowed myself to circumvent
                        the difficulty of gendered nouns by designing my program in English rather
                        than in French. My next preliminary choice dealt with the texts I wanted to
                        provide to the reader. I chose a set of very canonical English writings:
                            The Declaration of Independence, Genesis, The Raven,
                            A Tale of Two Cities, and Moby Dick. My final step was to decide which
                        excerpts of each text to include. I decided on the most recognizable parts
                        (generally the incipits) given what I explained above about the S+7 method. 
                    This annex provided an excellent excuse to acquaint myself with Natural Language Processing using the NLTK’s textbook
                        and programs (https://enaming.com/exclusive/domain/nltk.com/). While I could
                        easily tag the nouns in my chosen texts manually, such laborious work would
                        inevitably produce the same dissatisfaction as early Oulipian computer
                        experiments with Starynkevitch. Nevertheless, my first step had to be to
                        create dictionaries of nouns using nltk. Theoretically, what Cliff and I
                        have envisioned allows the reader to produce dictionaries with specific
                        vocabularies which makes for more interesting S+7 variants. The first noun
                        dictionary I produced came from an online edition of Edgar Allan Poe’s
                        complete works. An S+7 of the Declaration of
                            Independence that uses a dictionary of Poe nouns to produce the
                        substitutions will not only be amusing in terms of diction, but will also
                        serve an analytic purpose. The S+7 can be best
                        understood as a commentary on an original text rather than an original piece
                        of constrained writing. While applying this method to a pre-existing text
                        does indeed produce a new document immediately, the larger implications of
                        the method imply that any text is the S+7 of another.
                        In other words, all literature is potential. 
                    Devising this program has forced me to consider the S+7 from a critical perspective, rather than a purely inventorial
                        one. While I had initially included the S+7 as a
                        basic example of an arithmetical Oulipian technique, I now see it as a first
                        attempt in a long line of Oulipian research on productive substitutions.
                        These valuable insights, while not necessarily unique to digital humanities
                        work, were facilitated and brought to light as a direct result of this
                        project. The collaborative nature of the project is one reason: discussions
                        with Cliff Wulfman who is not only a literary scholar, but also a computer
                        programmer, enabled both of us to understand this procedure simultaneously
                        as inspired by early computers and algorithmic methods. 
                    Studying and implementing natural language processing with nltk allowed me to
                        better understand the Oulipian mindset that spawned these early procedures,
                        elucidating the historical context of why the group ultimately abandoned
                        these efforts. The early Oulipo, inspired by the potential of computer
                        programming, demonstrated an algorithmic approach to literature in the early
                        constraints the members produced. My programming experiences helped me to
                        understand the essential difference between these types of algorithmic
                        procedures and the work that the group eventually settled on following the
                        members' dissatisfied responses to the computer experiments of the 1960s and
                        1970s, a clear preference for abstract mathematical thought — patterns and
                        structure — rather than the procedural tendencies of applied
                        mathematics.
                    Finally, the creativity required to carry out such a project brings a new
                        freshness to my research and analysis that I hope will enable it to say
                        something truly new and interesting about what appears to be a trivial,
                        superficial method meant to produce one-off silly results. While in this
                        case, my code is likely not adaptable for other digital humanities projects,
                        I do believe that future scholars can benefit from a greater understanding
                        of nltk in order to learn more about other algorithmic production that
                        coincided with the development of computational linguistics and early
                        humanities computing in the 1960s and 1970s. An understanding of nltk has
                        the additional benefit of promoting a certain kind of Oulipian creativity in
                        literary analysis, allowing a digital humanities scholar to invent a code
                        that can analyze texts, completing this fascinating loop of research and
                        invention. 
                
            

                Conclusions
                While the official goal of this project had to be to produce a product, the
                        real product has been the important insights I have gained from
                    the experience. In a sense, the product was a pretext in order to take the idea
                    of the Oulipo and in a quasi-Oulipian fashion, think about formalizing it on
                    computers. From learning to program in Python (even though Python is not the
                    language early Oulipians used in their computer endeavors), I have gained a
                    greater understanding of early Oulipian techniques and why the Oulipo abandoned
                    computer programming relatively quickly and relegated this sort of activity to
                    the ALAMO. I also have a greater appreciation for how exactly to
                    use digital humanities tools to explore new avenues in these texts that were
                    created with algorithmic procedures in mind. 
                That said, as with Oulipian computer-texts that lost their interest when
                    programmed onto a computer, digital tools are best when properly understood and
                    critically implemented, at least with regards to Oulipian work. Creating a
                    computer program of Queneau’s Un conte à votre
                        façon alone is not necessarily a critical act, as it tends to
                    obscure the potential of the constraint from the user of the program. However,
                    using a computer to find more substantial intersections between the graphical
                    representation of Un conte à votre façon and the
                    text itself is an Oulipian endeavor. Being an Oulipian reader means playing a
                    game set up by an Oulipian author, and they’re a clever bunch. If you don’t want
                    to be trapped forever in the labyrinth they created, then you need to think like
                    they do. For computer texts, that means learning to think like a computer, and
                    understanding wherein lies the potential. 
                Beyond the narrow use of digital humanities methods in Oulipo studies, this
                    experience has convinced me that the broad nature of the digital humanities and
                    how the field defines itself is productive. Indeed, the nebulous nature of
                    definitions of the digital humanities allows for a great variety in approaches
                    and can foster creativity. Especially for literary studies, such creative
                    approaches are perhaps most appropriate.
            
