Title:  Open Access and the Theological
                    Imagination
Volume:  011
Issue:  4
Date:  22 December 2017
Abstract:  
                
                The past twenty years have witnessed a mounting crisis in academic publishing.
                    Companies such as Reed-Elsevier, Wiley-Blackwell, and Taylor and Francis have
                    earned unprecedented profits by controlling more and more scholarly output while
                    increasing subscription rates to academic journals. Thus publishers have
                    consolidated their influence despite widespread hopes that digital platforms
                    would disperse control over knowledge production. Open access initiatives dating
                    back to the mid-1990s evidence a religious zeal for overcoming corporate
                    interests in academic publishing, with key advocates branding their efforts as
                        archivangelism. Little attention has been given to the legacy
                    or implications of religious rhetoric in open access debates despite its
                    increasing pitch in recent years. This essay shows how the Protestant imaginary
                    reconciles–rather than opposes–open access initiatives with market economics by
                    tracing the rhetoric of openness to free-market liberalism. Working against the
                    tendency to accept the Reformation as an analogy for the relationship between
                    knowledge production, publishers, and academics, we read Protestantism as a
                    counterproductive element of the archivangelist inheritance.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Another Reformation?
                 The past twenty years have witnessed a mounting crisis in academic publishing.
                    Companies such as Reed-Elsevier, Wiley-Blackwell, and Taylor and Francis have
                    earned unprecedented profits by controlling more and more scholarly output while
                    increasing subscription rates to academic journals. Harvard’s Faculty Advisory
                    Council signaled the severity of the problem in 2012 when it announced that the
                    university’s library could no longer afford the rising cost of journal
                    subscriptions. Prices for online content from two providers have increased by
                        about 145% over the past six years, the Council memo reported, which
                        far exceeds not only the consumer price index, but also the higher education
                        and the library price indices. The memo goes on to cite publisher profit
                    margins of 35% as one consideration leading to the Council’s conclusion: 
                        Costs are now prohibitive
                        
                    . The announcement marked a key moment in debates about scholarly
                    publishing not only because Harvard Library has one of the largest library
                    budgets in the world but also because the story elicited attention from the
                    popular press. As the Guardian reported, 
                        The extraordinary move thrusts one of the world’s
                            wealthiest and most prestigious institutions into the centre of an
                            increasingly fraught debate over access to the results of academic
                            research
                        
                    . An issue once confined to library budgets suddenly appeared to threaten
                    agendas in scientific research, to encroach upon monograph budgets for
                    humanities acquisitions, even to jeopardize public interests. 
                 In their memo, Harvard’s Faculty Advisory Council encouraged faculty to consider
                    open access publishing as one means of alleviating the high cost of journal
                        subscriptions. Other suggestions included publishing in journals with
                        sustainable subscription costs, moving journals to sustainable pay-per-use
                        systems, unbundling subscriptions, and encouraging professional
                        organizations to take control of scholarly literature . In the context offered by The
                        Guardian report, however, open access surfaces as the only solution.
                    And as the news began circulating around the academic blogosphere, open access
                    grew from a single part of Harvard’s strategy for combating inflated journal
                    prices to become, in the words of one advocate, an economic imperative
                    and a 
                        moral imperative
                        
                    . The dramatic incline of rhetorical pitch is symptomatic of a pervasive
                    feeling that corporate publishers systematically exploit academic labor. The
                    feeling is understandable. Corporate publishing companies profit from
                    state-sponsored research and the work of university-supported researchers using
                    the neoliberal economic model of public-private partnerships. Public
                    institutions assume the risk and much of the labor while private interests
                    pursue strong market position and high returns. Even if they do not use the term
                        neoliberal, critiques of for-profit academic publishers assume
                    what political theorist Wendy Brown describes as one of the key arguments
                    against neoliberalism, the claim 
                        that marketization contributes to human exploitation or
                            degradation… because it limits or stratifies access to what ought to be
                            broadly accessible and shared
                        
                    . Advocates of open access publishing raise it as an ethical alternative
                    to a neoliberal tendency toward unprincipled commercialization of public goods. 
                We argue, in part, that open access has served less as an alternative to
                    commercialized academic research than as a moral cover for increasingly
                    neoliberal policies. Brown’s analysis of neoliberalism is especially helpful
                    because, beyond identifying new forms of exploitation, she outlines an order
                        of normative reason that organizes progressive solutions to the
                    injustices of capitalism just as much as the economic policies aggravating those
                    injustices . That normative reason comes into
                    view when Elsevier reports ending 2015 as the fourth largest open access
                    publisher–the same year one of its major divisions reported 37% profit margins
                        
                    . Far from a moral force for counteracting the
                    avarice of corporate publishers, open access initiatives have exposed new
                    strategies for raising revenue, such as collecting author-paid Article
                    Publishing Charges (APCs) that range from $500 to $5,000 USD [Elsevier OA]. The ability of corporate publishers to easily
                    assimilate open access into their profit model merits more attention, especially
                    as open access moves to occupy a dominant position among scholarly
                    communications in digital media. That move manifested in 2013 when the Research
                    Councils UK (RCUK) mandated an implementation policy to make all
                    government-supported research in the United Kingdom freely available online . Canada’s three major research agencies mandated a
                    similar open access requirement in 2015 . In 2016,
                    the European Union Competitive Council followed suit . We want to make clear here that we do not oppose all open access
                        mandates. While critics such as Jeffrey Beall make generalizations against
                        open access initiatives, we mention them here only as an index of the
                        growing importance of open access. We do, however, argue that the growing
                        prominence of open access publishing requires more attention to the details
                        of policy and more skepticism in the face of idealistic rhetoric, whether
                        that rhetoric expresses a pro- or anti-open access position.
                 These policies arrive after nearly two decades’ worth of work to imagine and
                    create digital communications systems that would disperse control over knowledge
                    production. Each mandate has its strengths and its limitations. But none of them
                    quite fulfills the desire for non-commercial research and less restrictive
                    publishing contracts that motivated many open access advocates. As Daniel
                    Allington, a long-time advocate in the United Kingdom, wrote after the Research
                    Councils mandate, 
                        I feel like a man with a beard in a country where
                            shaving has just been banned
                        
                    . His oblique reference to biblical law hints at the fervent rhetoric
                    framing open access issues. Since the mid-1990s, when cognitive scientist Stevan
                    Harnad coined the term archavengelism to describe his work to
                    promote open scholarship, the open access movement has incorporated religious
                    rhetoric to organize the terms of debate over how and where academics publish.
                    Evangelical strains of open access advocacy follow the trend of situating open
                    scholarship in opposition to the rapacious excesses of commercial publishers. In
                    this formulation, open access publishing carries the power to reform scholarly
                    communications along the same lines that the Protestant Reformation intervened
                    in papal control over salvation. The analogy likens the institutionalized
                    gatekeeping that allowed the church to sell indulgences to the institutionalized
                    gatekeeping that allows publishers to grossly inflate the cost of producing
                    scholarly journals. The Internet, unsurprisingly, stands in as a technological
                    equivalent of the printing press because it allows for the relatively
                    inexpensive reproduction of text . Assuming a moral
                    universe, the story ends with a social revolution that curtails the corporate
                    monopoly on knowledge production much as the Reformation ended the papal
                    monopoly on God’s forgiveness. That conclusion, at least, would fulfill the
                    non-commercial aspirations archivangelism claims for open access publishing.
                 Unfortunately, our capitalist world appears more ascendant than a moral
                    universe. We must take stock of our current situation even as many academics
                    continue to work for viable not-for-profit publishing models against the grain
                    of corporate profiteering. How did an apparently anti-corporate project to make
                    scholarship freer coincide with corporate innovations for extracting wealth from
                    scholarly communication systems? Part of the answer lies in how different types
                    of open access achieve the end result of free, online content. While
                    archivangelists such as Harnad promoted open access delivered by voluntary
                    repositories–designated as green OA–companies such as Elsevier
                    created versions of open access delivered by journals–designated as gold
                        OA. In some cases gold OA takes a form similar to Digital Humanities Quarterly, which uses Creative
                    Commons licensing that leaves authors with permanent ownership of their work and
                    lets them reprint that work without seeking permission or paying fees. In other
                    cases, gold OA takes a form more like Ampersand: An
                        International Journal of General and Applied Linguistics, which
                    requires authors to license exclusive rights to Elsevier and charges $1,000 USD
                    to publish articles ($250 USD for book reviews) . With the advent of processing fees, some publishers now offer something
                    designated as hybrid OA, which lets authors comply with open access
                    mandates (by paying a fee) while publishing in subscription journals. Many
                    authors choose this option when subscription journals hold a prominent place in
                    their field. Thus publishers can advertise hybrid OA as an option that gives
                    authors more freedom to publish where they want while collecting processing fees
                    for material that appears in journals already paid for by institutional
                    subscriptions–a phenomenon Research Libraries UK calls double dipping .
                Unscrupulous uses of hybrid OA manifest a particular problem linked to the more
                    general problem of academic institutions ceding control over scholarly
                    communications to corporate interests. Recent controversies involving companies
                    such as Academia.edu, ResearchGate, and Mendeley point to a scenario where free
                    online distribution of scholarship consolidates rather than displaces corporate
                    control over academic publishing . As David
                    Golumbia argues in a recent article, open access mandates not only fail to
                    resist for-profit publishing but tend to provide more control to the
                    corporations that own search platforms and databases so central to contemporary
                    academic research. OA as it is currently formulated, writes Golumbia, 
                        works to hand more power and profit to these corporate
                            interests while systematically denying individual producers the right to
                            much more modest ownership interests in their own work product
                        
                    . The central issue missing from the open access debates, according to
                    Golumbia, is academic labor. He points to the dismissive rhetoric marshalled by
                    many open access advocates against so-called gatekeepers as evidence of a
                    pervasive ideology at odds with the vested interests of researchers, non-profit
                    publishers, and libraries. Similarly, in the seminal Open
                        Access and the Humanities, Martin Eve cautions against rhetoric that
                    dismisses the necessary labour provided by editors,
                    reviewers, and publishers . Building on these
                    critiques, we intend to show how, in addition to lending neoliberal policy the
                    weight of morality, religiously inflected rhetoric has enabled open access
                    debates to imagine a world of free information somehow unfettered by the
                    institutions that produce and organize research. 
                The model of the Reformation, in particular, dovetails with neoliberal logic by
                    reimagining institutionally granted access to research materials as an obstacle
                    to individual participation in a global marketplace of ideas. The religious
                    imaginary lending credence to anti-institutional sentiment draws on the
                    theological innovation known as a priesthood of all believers. Martin Luther
                    placed at the foundation of Protestant reform the idea that all Christians are
                    priests. While the Catholic Church insisted that the laity needed ordained
                    priests to mediate their relationship to God, Luther argued that clergy merely
                    minister to the laity by facilitating access to religious rites. As he put it,
                    if any clergy 
                        wrest this right from the laity and forcibly withhold
                            it, they are tyrants
                        
                    . The grounding belief that faith alone grants laity a right to practice
                    the sacraments–putting all Christians in direct relationship to God–had
                    far-reaching consequences for Protestantism. It inspired unsanctioned vernacular
                    translations of the Bible and produced a scathing view of indulgences.
                    Ultimately, many scholars connect Reformation theology to the rise of liberal
                    democracy and laissez-faire economics. Most famously, Max Weber (2001)
                        argued that Protestant ethics spurred the development of capitalism. For
                        more recent examples see: 
                        
                        . The affinity linking the Protestant
                        Reformation, liberal democracy, and capitalism need not be understood as
                        natural to be understood as a defining condition of modernity. That
                        historical condition is important to understanding why the seeming
                        anti-corporate rhetoric of religious reform tends nonetheless to reconcile
                        capitalist goals with open access.
                
                When academics draw on this tradition to frame open access as a moral and
                    political issue, they do so rhetorically, without methodically addressing
                    substantive historical connections or analogical correspondences. For that
                    reason, we identify a theological imaginary operating in open access discourse
                    rather than a proper theology. There are exceptions. For instance, Gee
                        (2010) does attempt to bring theological analysis to bear on deciding where
                        to publish academic articles when he asks, without irony, Where Would
                            Jesus Publish?
                        . Harnad does not offer a Christian
                    perspective on corporate publishing so much as mobilize the memory of Luther’s
                    critical theology when he describes his own Subversive
                        Proposal for green open access as part of a prophetic
                        vision. Framed in those religious terms, open access resonates
                    unmistakably with the priesthood of all believers when Harnad references the
                    Catholic Church’s imprimatur system for ratifying print, predicting scholars 
                        will surely realize that it is they, not the publishers
                            who merely give it the imprimatur, who are the controllers of the
                            quality of the scholarly literature through peer review
                        
                    . For Harnad’s Subversive Proposal see . As Luther insisted Christians need not
                    ask the Catholic Church for license to publish religious texts, so Harnad
                    insists academics need not ask publishers for permission to share their own
                    writing online. The analogy fails to recognize how publishers enable particular
                    kinds of complex knowledge production — from assigning DOIs and promoting
                    circulation to organizing peer review and providing editorial feedback — because
                    it reduces them to an illegitimate supervisory role.
                 Given the fraught debates surrounding open access publishing, we want to make
                    clear that we too think academics should have the right to share their work
                    online if they so desire. Our contention aims to clarify the mystification at
                    work when a theological imaginary imbues open access rhetoric with an ethos of
                    freedom that actual open access policies do not warrant. We focus here on the
                    religious rhetoric coloring open access advocacy because it has attracted little
                    critical attention even as the mandates continue to inspire discussions
                    saturated with religious rhetoric. Those rhetorical transactions perform what
                    philosopher Hans Blumenberg describes as a reoccupation of
                    historical concerns no longer consistent with present circumstances. For
                        an introduction to the concept of reoccupation, see . For an explanation of how reoccupation
                        necessarily involves a rhetorical transaction, see . When open access advocates position
                    their cause as a secularized continuation of religious reform, they attempt to
                    reoccupy a historical moment when new publishing technologies catalyzed the
                    democratization of knowledge. Such metaphorical comparisons linking Reformation
                    ideals with the open access movement show how the normative logic of
                    neoliberalism works beyond policy at the level of rhetorical appeal, doing more
                    to fit open access publishing for the intellectual marketplace than to clarify
                    the socioeconomic consequences of free online distribution for
                        scholarship. Graham (2016) makes a similar point about the rhetorical
                        value of the printing press as a metaphor for understanding the Internet
                            . Blumenberg diagnoses this sleight of
                    historical rhetoric when he writes, 
                        A certain specific content is explained by another one
                            preceding it, and indeed in such a way that the asserted transformation
                            of the one into the other is neither an intensification nor a
                            clarification but rather an alienation from its original meaning and
                            function
                        
                    . When the content of open access gets explained in terms of the
                    Reformation, we begin to feel how acute is the need for reform in the field of
                    academic publishing even as the specific politics of reform grow faint. 
                Advocates have every reason to want open access to instigate change. However, the
                    theological imaginary informing expectations for open access moves in exactly
                    the wrong direction; it accommodates scholarly communications to techniques of
                    wealth extraction rather than insulating research from market economics.
                    Legitimizing open access as an evangelical cause forces open idealism to
                    reoccupy the impossible theological position of our one true salvation in
                    academic publishing. Blumenberg’s theory of reoccupation pushes us to explicate
                    unnecessary–and ultimately unhelpful–metaphorical conflations in open access
                    rhetoric. His view of rhetoric as not merely deceptive but productive of
                    theoretical thought also encourages us to recognize in rhetorical uses of
                    metaphor the opportunity to reoccupy worthwhile positions seemingly foreclosed
                    by the current field of debate, thus reanimating marginalized traditions of
                    information sharing for our present circumstances. The open concept as derived
                    from commercial imperatives, rather than moral or intellectual imperatives, has
                    been assimilated by the rhetoric of open access. Yet we nonetheless see an
                    opportunity to find a different inheritance in access to libraries. As
                    institutions designed to support publics rather than markets, libraries can
                    affirm a need for communities to control their own cultural heritage and
                    knowledge production. Our hope is that the stewards of knowledge in a digital
                    age might regain scholarly communications as a public good dependent on public
                    institutions. 
            

                The Evil Empire and Protestant Ethics
                One of the easiest ways to see how open access advocates edge toward
                    evangelism–even when using different terms–is to note the Manichean thinking
                    that animates the field of debate. Manichaeism, for instance, has transformed
                    the historic Elsevier logo into a mythological symbol. Subject to derision among
                    communities that see it as diametrically opposed to the company’s actual
                    publishing practices, that artifact of print history now illustrates the
                    alienated meaning that Blumenberg describes as the result of reoccupation. Isaac
                    Elzevir first introduced the icon used today in 1620 to represent the
                    interdependent relationship between publishers and scholars . It features a tree entwined in grape vines providing
                    fruit and shade to an old man, with a banner hanging near the bottom branches
                    inscribed non solus (not alone). Four hundred years later, the
                    company’s critics have begun to reimagine the icon to convey other meanings
                    entirely. Alexandra Elbakyan, founder of the pirate site Sci-Hub, has compared
                    Elsevier’s icon to the tree of knowledge in the Garden of Eden. By her
                    reckoning, Elsevier forbids access to scholarly knowledge much as God forbade
                    Adam and Eve from partaking in the fruit of knowledge [Elbakyan 2016]. The
                    historical and still necessary partnership between publishers and writers gets
                    sidelined as Elbakyan raises Elsevier to the status of universal creator. She
                    proceeds to refashion God as a tyrant, giving us a story of good and evil that
                    suggests publishers somehow prohibit knowledge production. 
                
                    Official Elsevier logo (Elsevier 1620) Elsevier, I. Logo des Verlags Elsevier, image (1620).
                            Available at https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AElsevier.svg. [11
                            April 2017].
                    
                
                
                    Elsevier logo used by Alexandra Elbakyan in her presentation at the
                        Library Publishing Coalition conference in 2016 (Elbakyan 2016)
                            Elbakyan, A. Why Science Is Better with Communism?
                                The Case of Sci-Hub, presentation slide (2016). Available at
                                https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc850001. [11
                            April 2017].
                    
                
                Like many others in academia, Elbakyan blames Elsevier for restricting access to
                    scholarly literature by setting exorbitant prices. Certainly the exorbitant
                    prices deserve criticism. However, her disdain for academic publishing at large
                    exploits a Christian framework that leads to the untenable position of pitting
                    researchers and publishers against one another. Elbakyan appropriated the Eden
                    metaphor to suggest in a crude way that science, or academia more generally,
                    should take control of the means of production. Under the right circumstances
                    open access could help fulfill that goal, but Sci-Hub comes up short because it
                    relies on the system of institutional subscriptions Elbakyan would see crumble.
                    Thumbing one’s nose at publishers and research services–even exploitative
                    ones–hardly displaces the structure of power organized by international
                    copyright law and academic research. Others have made more plausible suggestions
                    for undermining Elsevier’s near-monopoly on scientific publishing, but fall into
                    the same rhetorical trap of equating commercial publishing with a prohibition on
                    knowledge. British mathematician Timothy Gowers, for instance, organized an
                    ongoing boycott against Elsevier in 2012 under the name The Cost of Knowledge
                        . He encouraged academics to take a
                        bottom-up approach to the publishing problem by
                    refusing to write for Elsevier, review the company’s articles, or serve on its
                    editorial boards . Although imperfect for academics
                    who need to publish in those journals, Gowers’s solution has the benefit of
                    acknowledging the academic labor of 16,000 researchers as something worth
                    leveraging. Like Elbakyan, however, the boycott falls into disingenuous rhetoric
                    when it suggests Elsevier prevents research, as it does with the viral image of
                    Elsevier’s logo redrawn with locks and chains on the tree of knowledge where
                    fruit should hang 
                    . For more on @FakeElsevier and the serious
                        concerns motivating the parody account, see .
                
                    Adapted Elsevier logo encouraging Elsevier boycott (Forsythe, 2012)
                            Forsythe, G. Boycott Elsevier, logo (2012).
                            Available at https://www.flickr.com/photos/gforsythe/6799831691. [11 April
                            2017].
                    
                
                In reality, of course, Elsevier creates outlets for distributing scholarship
                    according to institutional and economic privilege. The company has created
                    serious problems for academic publishing, but those problems cannot resolve in
                    the current rhetorical tendency to use the company’s name as shorthand for evil.
                    Invectives against Elsevier are all too common amongst proponents of open access
                    publishing, if only because mythologizing the company inevitably caricatures the
                    immoral power structures as dualistic. That quasi-religious dualism emerges when
                    open access advocates name Elsevier as the Galactic Empire, the big bad wolf,
                    Halliburton, the Borg, Sauron, Scrooge, Goliath, a parasite, a snake, and
                        sort of the Death Star of academic publishing
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    . Critics have reason to worry about corporate
                    publishers that create fake journals or support international arms tradeshows
                        . Couching criticism in dualistic terms, however,
                    means those same critics end up in the role of open access prophets, publishing
                    reformers, martyrs, or missionaries with a higher moral calling. These chosen
                    few, the rhetoric suggests, will oust corporate publishers in favor of
                    publishing tactics that exemplify egalitarianism, transparency, and access–that
                    is, openness. 
                Advocates of open access draw on a range of mythological references to critique
                    corporate publishers. Popular examples such as The Lord of
                        the Rings and Star Wars easily mix with
                    biblical examples such as Goliath and Eden. The combination of secular and
                    religious dualisms finds a common thread in the Protestant ethic of universal
                    priesthood. By metaphorically opposing publishers and researchers, they suggest
                    the entire world can have access to knowledge if only we circumvent
                    publisher-controlled databases in favor of supposedly unmediated online access.
                    They propose a polarizing narrative–either support authoritarian publishers or
                    oppose them, join or delete, buy in or boycott. Those who flirt with evil
                    provide a cautionary tale inspiring further protests, campaigns, and boycotts.
                    These narratives suggest that even if formerly independent services like
                    Mendeley and Social Science Research Network cannot resist the allure of
                    corporate money, Elsevier users can nonetheless redeem themselves by deleting
                    their accounts and pledging themselves to open access publishing. Open access
                    evangelism thus reenacts the old call for repentance and conversion, inviting
                    academics to set aside their former love for corrupt companies in favor of
                    intellectual morality. 
                A few high-profile advocates for open access in particular rely on the language
                    of morality to make their case. Mike Taylor demonstrates this style of
                    evangelical rhetoric when he testifies in the Guardian article, Hiding Your Research Behind
                        a Paywall Is Immoral. Taylor portrays himself as a convert to open
                    access. He is a sinner who has repented rather than a righteous man
                        speaking to sinners. Beginning with a confession about having once
                    published in toll-access journals, he treats readers to a first-person account
                    of his transformation. He links to his early closed-access articles as evidence
                    of his sins, writing, 
                        I heartily wish I’d never done it, and I won’t do it
                            again
                        
                    . Taylor uses the language of transgression and repentance to set the
                    stakes of discussions about open access, with salvation or damnation as the
                    implied consequences of one’s decisions to embrace or reject openness. This
                    language recalls religious testimonies wherein the sinner publicly confesses his
                    wrongdoing while affirming the theology held in common by the congregation. The
                    testimony leverages guilt and community identity to encourage others to follow
                    the path of the testimony-giver . Like a pastor
                    making an altar call, Taylor exhorts other researchers to emulate him in
                    rejecting priestly authority to publish in more democratic, open access venues. 
                Mike Taylor is not alone in calling researchers to faith as an open access
                    evangelist. Michael Eisen–co-founder of the Public Library of Science
                    (PLOS)–likewise plays on religious tropes to support his ideas about scholarly
                    publishing. In 2014, he satirically portrayed himself as a disappointed convert
                    to open access in Why I, a Founder of PLOS, Am Forsaking
                        Open Access. In this April Fools post, Eisen acts as a former
                    adherent to the religion of open access, which he once led
                    as a personal crusade while wearing a gaudy Where
                        Would Jesus Publish? t-shirt to stir up attention . Eisen sells Where Would Jesus
                            Publish? t-shirts on Zazzle for $18.95. Available at:
                            http://www.zazzle.com/mbeisen. [11 April 2017]. Eisen uses
                    his personal account–an anti-conversion narrative–to satirize opposition to open
                    access and declare his continued adherence to open access principles. While he
                    references his Where Would Jesus Publish? t-shirt
                    self-deprecatingly in the April Fools post, Eisen has used the slogan with
                    consistent conviction, if also flippant humor, since 2008 when he first debuted
                    his WWJP? graphic in a blog post . The apparent irony
                    of using religious messaging to proselytize for scientific publishing dissipates
                    when he explains his career-long mission to harness the Internet’s power
                    to make scientific research more widely available by using a different
                        business model than scientific society journals . Circumventing hallowed institutional control over publishing resonates
                    clearly with a Protestant ethics of reform.
                
                    “Where Would Jesus Publish?” icon developed by Michael Eisen (Eisen,
                            2008) Eisen, Michael. Where Would Jesus
                                Publish? image. it is NOT junk
                            (9 October 2008). Available at http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=64. [11 April
                            2017].
                    
                
                Moving in a similar but more devout direction, some scholarly communications
                    professionals have earnestly solicited Jesus’s guidance in sorting out the
                    ethics of academic publishing. Librarian C. William Gee poses Eisen’s question
                    in the title of his 2010 article, WWJP?, suggesting
                    Jesus likely would oppose traditional publishers in the same way he opposed the
                    power structures of his day–namely cheaters and thieves in the form of the
                    Sadducees and Pharisees. Gee argues further that Christ would have favored
                    non-traditional, seemingly unmediated forms of communication, like podcasts . Another librarian, Malina Thiede, likewise compares
                    open access to an upstart religion in the short article, On
                        Open Access Evangelism. As a librarian and open access supporter,
                    she recommends converting faculty members and students to open access by
                    distributing petitions and pamphlets or by sponsoring public speaking
                    engagements on university campuses. She continues by cautioning organizers to
                    select speakers carefully to avoid preaching to the choir.
                    Undergraduates, she explains, are particularly fertile ground for the
                        message because most are idealistic and not jaded by the publishing
                        system. Continuing with the metaphor, she names institutional open
                    access mandates as the holy grail of campus outreach
                    efforts . While Taylor, Eisen, Gee, and
                    Thiede create their own religious imaginaries for their own contexts, each
                    suggests academia should regard open access as a moral issue. The language of
                    reformation, conversion, and evangelism lets advocates perform an ethics of
                    religious reform that invites audiences to set aside old loyalties to the
                    authoritarian publishing priesthood and enter into a purer, less hindered
                    relationship with the products of academic research.
                In keeping with its evocation of religious ideals, the open access movement has
                    coupled stories of conversion and redemption with examples of asceticism and
                    sacrifice. No figure exemplifies that role better than Aaron Swartz, who appears
                    in open access discourse as a martyr for having suffered dearly in his fight for
                    the cause. Swartz was a programmer and Internet activist who, in 2010,
                    downloaded some 4.8 million articles from JSTOR. Federal prosecutors indicted
                    him under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 for the potential infraction.
                    While still facing thirteen felony charges, Swartz committed suicide on January
                    11, 2013. Charges against Swartz included breaking and entering, wire
                        fraud, computer fraud, unlawfully obtaining information from a protected
                        computer, and recklessly damaging a protected computer. See .  The headlines following his death
                    formed a public consensus: Freedom’s Martyr: The Story of
                        Aaron Swartz
                    , read one, while another contemplated Aaron Swartz and 21st-Century Martyrdom
                    . For further examples of the tendency to
                        beatify Swartz, see  and . The tragedy of Swartz’s death makes the outpouring of praise for
                    his work both understandable and sympathetic. Yet the hagiographic terms of that
                    praise contribute to misplaced contempt for the so-called gatekeepers of
                    knowledge by situating researchers against any research tool that charges a
                    subscription fee. As Golumbia puts it, 
                        The contempt looks as if it is directed at a for-profit
                            publisher that gouges authors and customers alike, yet without
                            difficulty it turns into an attack on an entity whose purpose is to
                            support, not profit from, academic work
                        
                    . The universalizing ethics of open access–befitting the universal ethics
                    of Protestantism–fail to recognize important distinctions between JSTOR and
                    Elsevier. Elsevier owns and publishes journals, while JSTOR merely digitizes and
                    distributes them; Elsevier is a corporation, while JSTOR is a nonprofit;
                    Elsevier charges exorbitant prices, while JSTOR provides its services for
                    relatively low costs. 
                
                    Aaron Swartz dedication inviting viewers to “Be Free” (Newby, 2013)
                            Newby, K. Aaron Swartz Graphic, image
                            (2013). Available at https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aaron_Swartz_Graphic.png.
                            [11 April 2017].
                    
                
                The rough comparison makes clear how JSTOR can achieve a symbiotic rather than
                    parasitic relationship to academic publishing, although we would hesitate to
                    raise it as a paragon. Rather, we want to suggest how dualistic constructions,
                    putting subscription tools on one side of a conflict against open access
                    initiatives, fail to appreciate the complex field of research services. Further,
                    by lumping together companies like Elsevier and JSTOR, the animus against
                    toll-access resources fallaciously implies we might secure access to research
                    materials without the institutions responsible for producing and disseminating
                    them. Evidence of Swartz’s anti-institutional sentiments appear in a Guerilla Open Access Manifesto that he published
                    online in 2008. A representative passage captures the style and message of the
                    manifesto: 
                        We need to take information, wherever it is stored, make
                            our copies and share them with the world….We need to download scientific
                            journals and upload them to file sharing networks. We need to fight for
                            Guerilla Open Access. With enough of us, around the world, we’ll not
                            just send a strong message opposing the privatization of knowledge —
                            we’ll make it a thing of the past.
                        
                    
                
                Prosecuting attorneys viewed these statements as evidence of Swartz’ intentions
                    to open access forcibly and illegally to copyrighted information. The charges
                    they brought against him, had they been carried out, could have sent him to
                    prison for over 50 years . The aggressive–indeed,
                    excessive–prosecution contributes to the martyrdom narrative by embattling
                    law-and-order copyright against open access. Swartz’s Manifesto participates by
                    setting its own bellicose terms for circulating scholarship online as part of a
                    crusade. Accepting those terms perpetuates the idea that sharing journal
                    articles outside of toll-access databases can somehow sidestep the difficult
                    problems facing academic publishing simply by making intellectual property
                    rights and publishers a thing of the past.
                
                The idea of relegating copyright to the past invites the mistaken presumption
                    that we no longer need the institutions designed to share copyrighted materials.
                    Libraries in particular can appear as just so many obstacles along the path
                    toward unlimited access. To question that view of research institutions,
                    however, one need only point to the file sharing networks that let academics
                    circulate research outside the legal structure of copyright. Those networks
                    inevitably remind us that protest piracy relies on the very systems it hopes to
                    end, as in the case of Sci-Hub, or on private companies that have no
                    responsibility to academics. An example of the latter circumstance emerged in
                    response to Swartz’s death when Micah Taylor, Eva Vivalt, and Jessica Richman
                    created #pdftribute to honor his legacy. The hashtag invited Twitter users to
                    post full-text copies of articles in memory of Swartz, thus opening access to
                    that work for public use. By January 13, 2013, the hashtag had garnered some
                    15,000 tweets and 40 million impressions . Although a
                    heartening tribute, Twitter links to articles hosted at Academia.edu hardly
                    offer a sound alternative to the organized collections and discovery tools that
                    libraries make available to researchers. Trading the library catalog for several
                    thousand tweets would spell disaster for access. That fact seems surprisingly
                    counterintuitive in a rhetorical situation that celebrates open access by
                    imagining Swartz will 
                        live on, a glorious son
                        
                    .
                
                    Tweets from the #PDFTribute honoring Aaron Swartz (Anderson, 2016).
                            Postsoftware. Aaron Swartz Memorial, image
                            (2013). Available at http://postsoftware.org/2013/01/25/aaron-swartz-memorial. [11
                            April 2017].
                    
                
                
                    Aaron Swartz memorial (postsoftware, 2013) Weinstein, P. Saint IGNUcius of the Church of Emacs, image
                            (2002). Available at https://www.flickr.com/photos/pdweinstein/16857951635. [11
                            April 2017].
                    
                
            

                From Free to Open
                One reason Swartz presents such a compelling figure for so many different
                    constituencies is because he worked comfortably between the world of hackers and
                    the world of researchers. Swartz’s facility in different intellectual spheres
                    contributed to his tremendous impact as an activist. At the same time, that
                    capacity makes him a clear vector for tracing the flow of ideas about open
                    access between hacker communities, popular pundits, and academics. Here Timothy
                    Brennan’s notion of flow elucidates the circulation of ideas as
                    more than mere influence. In Brennan’s words, flow 
                        suggests a market-generated excitement for concepts
                            where the borrowing of ideas is concealed in order to enact an
                            individualized rediscovery of a dominant cliché
                        
                    . The cultural clichés Brennan questions have to do with globalization and
                    many of the same neoliberal policies propelling open access mandates. For our
                    purposes, dominant ideas about the Internet as a global force for opening
                    knowledge flow between different intellectual communities, each with its own
                    motivations yet all trading on the generally positive and far-ranging
                    connotations of open as unregulated, clear, free, accessible,
                    candid, public, and transparent. Different affiliations to openness coalesce in
                    the term’s vague sanguinity and manifest in the rhetorical move to reoccupy an
                    oppositional stance to corrupt institutions, imagined most dramatically as a new
                    Reformation. Tracing the flow of open advocacy not just through academic debates
                    but through a broader appeal to openness in popular discourses will clarify how,
                    rather than insulating scholarly publishing from market forces, open access
                    squares with commercial interests.
                 To appreciate how market-generated excitement can energize a theological
                    imaginary around open access, it helps to recall that we experience the Internet
                    differently today than we did in the late 1990s. Those of us who lived through
                    it probably do not need any reminder of dial-up modems, AOL chat rooms,
                    Angelfire and GeoCities websites, or the novelty of sharing MP3 files. However,
                    even folks who feel a twinge of nostalgia at reading those names might need to
                    check Wikipedia–first launched in 2001–to recall that Wi-Fi was the name of a
                    brand new trade alliance in 1999 or that the ubiquity of touchscreen technology
                    was about a decade off yet. The rapid naturalization of such brand names and the
                    digital technologies they commercialize can complicate the work of recapturing
                    the heady days of early Internet culture. Yet that historical moment bears some
                    consideration for understanding debates about open access publishing.
                    Best-selling titles like The Cluetrain
                    Manifesto–featuring the popular 95 Theses–and, more recently, Douglas
                    Rushkoff’s Ten Commandments for a Digital Age make
                    clear how the turn of the millennium laid the foundation for exploring digital
                    publishing models in academia according to religious metaphors. With regard to
                    rhetorical strategy, many of the negotiations over open access publishing replay
                    in an academic context the contentious debates over open source software in the
                    1990s.
                The most notorious of those debates produced the term open source.
                    The idea of open source software, much like the idea of open access publishing
                    that it inspired, took shape in response to increasing corporate monopoly.
                    Hackers and archivangelists both saw the Internet as a way around
                    corporate-controlled information access. For hacker communities, the web
                    provided a means of mass collaboration and distribution that could circumvent
                    regular software markets. Corporate attempts to control Internet access
                    threatened to stifle that realm of non-commercial exchange and Microsoft came to
                    represent the worst of corporate overreach when it cornered the browser market
                    with Internet Explorer. The United States brought an anti-trust suit
                        against Microsoft in May 1998. The decision, handed down in an appellate
                        court three years later, found Microsoft in violation of the Antitrust Act.
                        For a full analysis of the case, see .
                    Microsoft’s biggest competitor, Netscape, lost most of its customer base to
                    Internet Explorer in what is now known as the first browser war. In January
                    1998, as a last-ditch effort to recoup favor among hackers, Netscape announced
                    plans to release all future versions of their web browser for free and to
                    license their base code for public use. The idea cut against the grain of
                    commercial software models by drawing inspiration from the free software
                    movement, which championed the idea of giving users access to the source code
                    and distribution rights to encourage people to hack–that is, tinker with an
                    application’s functionality .
                The plan did not gain traction fast enough to save Netscape. It did, however,
                    create a rift among hackers and proponents of free software. Netscape’s
                    announcement inspired a contingent of the free software movement to pursue, as
                    influential hacker Eric S. Raymond put it, 
                        the serious push to get ‘free software’ accepted in the
                            mainstream corporate world
                        
                    . Before Netscape’s decision to pursue a free software model, Raymond
                    assumed the emphasis on free and the unabashedly left-leaning
                    tradition of copyleft activism unnecessarily kept commercial
                    enterprises at arm’s length. Hackers took pains to clarify how free software
                    might be compatible with for-profit business models. The founder of the Free
                    Software Foundation, Richard Stallman, famously encouraged people 
                        to think free as in free speech, not free beer
                        
                    . When Netscape invited more mainstream interest, however, Raymond decided
                    the free software movement needed a makeover that would neutralize its
                    anti-commercial rhetoric. He started the Open Source Initiative with
                    business-minded supporters and began the work of rebranding free
                        software as open source, laying the rhetorical ground
                    for open access publishing.
                Definitions of open source software resonate with the aims of early open access
                    initiatives and look nearly identical to standard criteria for free software. In
                    general, open source licensing allowed users to access, edit, and distribute
                    software without restrictions. The Open Source Initiative aimed at reforming the
                    cultural politics of free software, not the engineering practices it enabled.
                    Stallman articulated the critical difference between free and
                        open software precisely when he expressed concern that 
                        the rhetoric of ‘Open Source’ focuses on the potential
                            to make high quality, powerful software, but shuns the ideas of freedom,
                            community, and principle
                        
                    . Where Stallman championed a philosophy of users’ rights, Raymond
                    championed pragmatism geared toward developing better software. The different
                    motivating philosophies caused a schism that marginalized free software and
                    aligned open source with corporate interests. Raymond explained that goal with a
                    short call-to-arms published in the weeks after Netscape announced its historic
                    plans. There he described the idea of free software as inimical to marketing: 
                        The term makes a lot of corporate types nervous
                        
                    . Later he clarified his view that the Free Software Foundation failed
                    because 
                        its evangelism had backfired
                        
                    . He suggested by contrast that the Open Source Initiative should be
                        evangelizing top-down to convert 
                        CEO/CTO/CIO types
                        
                    . In important ways, the battle over terminology occurred at the
                    rhetorical level of publicity. As popular Internet skeptic Evgeny Morozov put
                    it, the open source camp won with better PR, not better ideas . 
                The narrative carried forward by the Open Source Initiative allowed its vision of
                    free labor, faster innovation, and better software to flow from a relatively
                    marginal hacker community into the mainstream tech industry on its way toward
                    the business world. Raymond’s most influential writings, collected in The Cathedral and the Bazaar, argued for alternatives
                    to proprietary software development by appealing to readers frustrated with
                    Microsoft’s dominance. With Microsoft playing the role of corporate giant,
                    Raymond used language strikingly close to Harnad’s to cast himself as an
                        accidental revolutionary and the open source operating
                    system Linux as subversive of slow, centralized development
                        . The claim that Linux is
                            subversive serves as the opening line of Raymond’s original essay,
                            The Cathedral and the Bazaar
                        , and survives in the book editions. 
                    That move fitted his critique for commercial assimilation even as it also
                    painted him as an iconoclast disruptive of sacred idols. His signature piece,
                    the title essay in The Cathedral and the Bazaar,
                    established the dichotomy that convinced decision-makers in the business world
                    that open source could structure 
                        a succession of miracles
                        
                    . Raymond’s parable characterizes proprietary software like Windows as 
                        cathedrals, carefully crafted by individual wizards or
                            small bands of mages working in splendid isolation
                        
                    . In contrast to those quiet, reverent cathedrals, he explains,
                    open source communities 
                        resemble a great babbling bazaar
                        
                    . That Raymond champions bazaars–marketplaces–announces his difference
                    from the Free Software movement while also positioning him as critical of big
                    software corporations. His iconoclasm adopts particularly Protestant
                    characteristics by objecting to symbols of Catholic hierarchy while arguing for
                    direct input from autonomous individuals who determine their own mode of
                    participation.
                
                    Visual notes created at the Open Education Conference in 2012,
                        illustrating Raymond’s The Cathedral and the
                            Bazaar (Forsythe, 2012) Forsythe, G. The Cathedral and the Bazaar, visual notes (2012).
                            Available at https://www.flickr.com/photos/gforsythe/7985992388. [11 April
                            2017].
                    
                
                Raymond’s deprecation of a quintessentially Catholic symbol linked his essay to a
                    late-90s zeitgeist of tech writing. That body of literature took the Protestant
                    Reformation as a model for understanding how the Open Source Initiative engaged
                    government and corporate powers. Popular publications such as Salon chronicled the open source saga with titles like
                        The Saint of Free Software and Let My Software Go!
                    . Thomas Scoville offered one of the more systematic
                    analogies in his Salon article, Martin Luther, Meet Linus Torvalds. Torvalds, sponsor
                    of Linux, not only meets Luther in Scoville’s account but also becomes Luther
                    for the digital age. Luther’s challenge to papal authority sets the stage for an
                    elaborate analogy situating the Open Source Initiative as heir to the Protestant
                    Reformation. Why? Because Torvalds wants to shift power back in your
                        direction, Scoville writes. Because Torvalds’ God, like Luther’s,
                        wants you to know Him on a first-name basis. He goes on to explain why 
                        the Microsoft papacy is not amused
                        
                    . Linux users, the idea goes, had a unique opportunity to reform the tech
                    industry and individual users’ relationship to personal computing. 
                The great, insular tech companies stood between users and their computers,
                    according to this analogy. And worse, they created institutional barriers
                    between computing platforms that need not exist. The computing reformation led
                    by open source evangelists promoted self-organized hacker communities that
                    seemed to operate without such institutional barriers. Nobody was more emphatic
                    over the Internet’s apparent ability to make corporate institutions obsolete
                    than David Weinberger in The Cluetrain Manifesto.
                    He expressed the zeitgeist when he wrote, 
                        The spiritual lure of the Web is the promise of the
                            return of voice
                        
                    . In the Cluetrain’s 95 Theses, we see a crystallization of Protestant
                    ethics aligned with the spirit of capitalism in the celebration of individual
                    access to markets unimpeded by corporations. Extending the logic forwarded by
                    the Open Source Initiative, Weinberger characterized all corporations as
                    cathedrals working to control rather than enable market transactions.
                With help from tech journalism, the Open Source Initiative planted the seed for
                    what has since become a universalizing call for open source
                        everything. For further evidence of this trend, see a
                        series of TED talks from 2005: 
                        
                        
                        . One leader of that call, Robert David
                    Steele, makes plain the high stakes advocates place on open source information
                    technology. His 2012 book titled The Open-Source Everything
                        Manifesto proclaims the belief that 
                        a public able to access all information all the time”
                            can build “a prosperous world at peace
                        
                    . Extending his vision of open everything beyond the material world, he
                    goes on to suggest that universal access to information will let humans 
                        become One with God through transparency, truth, and
                            trust
                        
                    . Steele’s mysticism takes mass collaboration as the cultural
                    practice leading to transcendent forms of knowledge unavailable under current
                    conditions. With a background in government and military intelligence, Steele
                    bends his suggestions toward better solutions for informing public officials,
                    such as an open source intelligence agency separate and independent from the
                    CIA. How mass collaboration would work in such a context remains vague, yet
                    Steele’s religious conviction in the efficacy of mass collaboration determines
                    his account of openness as not just a method for sharing computer code but also
                    a fundamental value for modifying, to his mind, literally everything. Its
                    tendency toward universalist formulations of open access makes this manifesto a
                    utopian example of the genre. As implausible as Steele’s political vision
                    appears, however, the spirit of openness informing it has given shape to new
                    experiments in state governance, such as Barack Obama’s Open Government
                    Initiative and the Public Data Group in the United Kingdom. 
                Open initiatives have entered the political sphere. Yet no single movement or
                    coherent politics organizes under the sign open. If the initial
                    rift among hackers implied divergent positions on open source as a concept for
                    organizing economic resources and social relations, the more recent trend toward
                    open everything implies an even more diverse field of investment in the term.
                    That is one reason publishing companies like Elsevier can market themselves as
                        unleashing the power of sharing at the same time they sue university
                    libraries for disclosing subscription rates . For
                        more on Elsevier’s lawsuit see: . 
                    Accusations of so-called openwashing suggest such claims amount to empty
                    branding. As Nathaniel Tkacz has argued, however, the problem of emptiness may
                    run deeper than Elsevier’s intentions. He calls open an empty
                    signifier, 
                        one whose very function and appeal rests precisely on
                            its ultimate vacuity
                        
                    . The vacuity, or at least the pliability, of openness as an intellectual
                    or political ideal helps account for its traction in spheres as diverse as
                    software development, government policy, and academic publishing. As sociologist
                    Christopher Kelty observes, 
                        While free tends toward ambiguity...
                                open tends toward obfuscation
                        
                    . By pointing to strategic obfuscation, Kelty reminds cultural critics
                    that the rhetoric of open access exceeds the problem of signification to
                    encompass political positioning as well. Openness, from its conceptualization as
                    a marketing solution for hackers to its political arrival in the form of new
                    initiatives and mandates, operates as what political analysts once called a
                    glittering generality: a vague term with generally positive connotations.
            

                The Politics of Publishing
                The antiquated but nonetheless germane concept of a glittering generality
                    explains the rhetorical success of openness. Who could accept its
                    opposite–closed access? The idea is not only uninviting but also contradictory,
                    all the better to ensure the positive value associated with open initiatives.
                    The Institute of Propaganda Analysis introduced the term glittering
                        generality in their 1937 publication The
                        Fine Art of Propaganda, which may be the first text to raise
                    openness to a political ideal. In the course of rejecting undemocratic political
                    developments in the United States and Europe, the Institute argued for public
                    discourse out in the open: 
                        Around the cracker barrel, a spirit of friendly good
                            sportsmanship has been the treasured tradition
                        
                    . Their defense of democratic principles took aim in particular at
                    Catholic extremist Father Charles Coughlin. As an anti-Semitic socialist, Father
                    Coughlin epitomized everything the United States opposed in the years leading up
                    to World War II. His newspaper and radio program, repugnant in the extreme,
                    certainly existed out in the open in the sense that he made
                    them available for public consumption. The sense of open that the Institute
                    advocated did not mean, primarily, accessible. Rather, the authors of The Fine Art of Propaganda gave openness an
                    ideological value constellated with other democratic virtues such as independent
                    thought and research. In a world split as never before between two
                        faiths, the foreword explained, open discussion offered a mode of
                    sincere communication that could resist the deceptions associated with autocracy
                        .
                The ideological sense of openness intended by the Institute for Propaganda
                    Analysis found philosophical footing in the work of Karl Popper. During the same
                    years the Institute worked to discredit the rhetorical sleights of
                    propagandists, Popper wrote his best-known work of political philosophy, The Open Society and Its Enemies. In the preface
                        to the second edition, Popper writes that he worked on the book from March
                        1938 to 1943 . The Institute for
                        Propaganda Analysis remained active from 1937 to 1942. And like the
                    Institute, Popper understood openness as a political solution to the historical
                    problem of defending liberal democracy against totalitarianism as it manifested
                    in fascist and communist states. This line of thinking made open discourses–that
                    is, discourses open to critique, revision, negotiation–the cornerstone of
                    democracy. While discourse moves into the foreground, the democratic
                    institutions that support them appear as abstractions, as when Popper described
                    an ideal political process as rational: 
                        Only democracy provides an institutional framework that
                            permits reform without violence, and so the use of reason in political
                            matters
                        
                    . Given the context of its historical moment, one can appreciate how
                    Popper’s opposition to unreasonable discourse and violent reform would appear as
                    implicitly anti-Nazi even without staking out a political position. More than
                    any institutional program or framework, however, the first volume of The Open Society and Its Enemies concludes with a
                    strong emphasis on 
                        the new faith of the open society, the faith in man, in
                            equalitarian justice, and in human reason
                        
                    . By mustering social faith in opposition to totalitarianism, Popper left
                    the problem of an open politics implicitly linked to liberal democracy and free
                    market economics as if openness constituted the animating spirit of capitalism.
                    That meaning of the open society grew more prominent in the
                    second half of the twentieth century within a Cold War context.
                The influence of Popper’s legacy on open access debates started to take shape in
                    the mid-1980s under the direction of billionaire businessman George Soros. While
                    Popper left the question of institutions abstract but implicitly related to
                    state power, Soros made them concrete and explicitly geared toward commercial
                    enterprise. Soros began implementing an economic version of Popper’s open
                    society in 1984 with an alliance between his primary foundation in New York City
                    and the Hungarian Academy of Science to establish the Soros Foundation Budapest.
                    Other foundations in the region followed as Soros labored under the influence of
                    what he described as rather potent messianic fantasies to open communist
                    states up to neoliberal, capitalist influence . I fancied myself as some kind of god or economic reformer, he wrote
                    in 1987 . By 1993 Soros had created the Open
                    Society Institute (later renamed the Open Society Foundations) to manage various
                    foundations operating in the former Soviet Union with his financial support . In this way, Popper’s
                    philosophical faith in reason inspired a push to shape political and economic
                    forces that, after the Cold War, would create the material conditions of
                    international knowledge production. 
                The Open Society Institute’s $3 million grant to support the Budapest Open Access
                    Initiative (BOAI) illustrates one avenue of influence it used to achieve that
                    mission. Widely understood as coining the term open access as well as defining
                    its scope, BOAI first invited universities, libraries, and professional
                    associations to embrace open access as a means of advancing their
                        missions in 2002 . Inspired by the theological
                    imaginary that some of its most prominent signatories helped popularize (notably
                    Eisen and Harnad), the Budapest initiative struggled to imagine libraries and
                    universities as anything other than a barrier to scholarly communications in
                    need of reform. Since their first meeting the initiative has periodically
                    reaffirmed their goal 
                        for Open Access (OA) to all new peer reviewed
                            research
                        
                    . The universal sweep of the mission betrays a misunderstanding of
                    different institutional missions and different fields of research. Such
                    extravagant aims conferred urgency and simplicity to the open access message
                    while it remained a marginal force in academic publishing. Fifteen years and
                    several important mandates later, BOAI proclaims the same message as if its
                    implications have not changed.
                 Part of what we have argued is that the implications of open access advocacy did
                    change as it moved into the mainstream, starting with the 2012 Research Councils
                    UK mandate. The religious, especially Protestant, rhetoric that once conveyed
                    moral opposition to excessive profit margins and unnecessary restrictions on
                    scholarly communication just as easily informed a neoliberal argument for open
                    access on the basis of economic development and free trade. David Willetts, UK
                    Minister of State for Universities and Science, demonstrated the smooth
                    rhetorical pivot from attacking the so-called cathedrals of corporate publishing
                    to attacking academic institutions when he made the case for open access in a
                        Guardian op-ed titled, We
                        Cannot Afford to Keep Research Results Locked Away in Ivory Towers
                    . Willetts blamed academic institutions for
                    sequestering research behind paywalls, as if university libraries conspired with
                    faculty to devise that system of payment. Calling for more
                        transparency, he invoked openness in Popper’s sense of
                    enlightenment rationality and state accountability as a justification for
                    mandating pay-to-publish gold open access. His argument obscures the fact that
                    libraries have a method of delivering free content to users, one that
                    extraordinary inflation and privately controlled online databases threaten to
                    break. Nowhere does Willetts mention those problems associated with the
                    corporatization of academic publishing that the open access movement sought to
                    redress, yet the anti-institutional force of open advocacy carries his argument
                    all the way to its concluding appeal 
                        to commercialise the fruits of [British] research more
                            quickly
                        
                    .
                The archivangelists generally do not object to commercial interests comingling
                    with academic research. Yet, despite including familiar watchwords, the RCUK’s
                    mandate did not impress them. Mike Taylor greeted a revised form of the mandate
                    on his blog with a vomiting stickman and called it 
                        the result of lobbying by a truly regressive publishing
                            industry
                        
                    . Harnad issued an equally disgusted statement arguing that the new
                    policies would waste money while propping up the status quo in publishing . In April 2015, Times Higher
                        Education reported that UK research organizations spent more than
                    £10 million on article processing charges in the first year of the policy . The trajectory toward corporate assimilation of open
                    access drove Harnad to declare his retirement from archivangelism in early 2016.
                        I fought the fight and lost, he tweeted in an exchange with Michael
                    Eisen, 
                        and now I’ve left the #OA arena
                        
                    . Even in that farewell note his rhetoric borrowed from a theological
                    imaginary, this time reoccupying the position of Apostle Paul. I have fought
                        the good fight, wrote Paul as he faced martyrdom. 
                        I have finished my course, I have kept the
                            faith
                        
                    . Harnad confirmed his retirement in a subsequent interview that featured
                    a picture of the open access archivangelist pointing to the heavens. His
                    alienation from open advocacy, he explained, grew over time as he repeated the
                    same arguments to no avail .
                
                    Mike Taylor’s reaction to RCUK mandates (Taylor, 2013)
                    
                
                
                    Stevan Harnad, archivangelist (Poynder, 2007) Poynder, R. Stevan Harnad, image (2007). Available at http://poynder.blogspot.com/2007/07/oa-interviews-stevan-harnad.html.
                            [11 April 2017].
                    
                
                If repeating the same rhetoric of archivangelism did not succeed in achieving
                    what Harnad hoped, one might fairly suggest a new approach. Protestant metaphors
                    have provided a convenient rallying point for open access advocates but these
                    same stories emerged from western socioeconomic traditions that marry well with
                    aggressive corporate profiteering and suspicion of intermediary
                    institutions–publishers, certainly, but also libraries and non-profit
                    organizations like JSTOR. In doing so, open rhetoric has mobilized individual
                    action without imagining how sustained change in academic publishing might build
                    on existing information infrastructures. By way of conclusion, we want to
                    propose a different understanding of online access that does not resort to a
                    dogmatic universalism bound up with the Protestant imaginary. If the
                    anti-cathedral rhetoric of open access reoccupies the perspective of one true
                    religion to offer one true access solution, we want to suggest a
                    community-oriented perspective that draws on a tradition of public support for
                    organizing and disseminating knowledge. A few recent initiatives
                        associated with the digital humanities mark positive steps toward library
                        support for community-driven access. Importantly, these initiatives avoid
                        replicating the theological imaginary of open access. See the Open Library
                        of Humanities for an example that encourages collaboration between
                        libraries, publishers, and scholarly associations . For
                        a discussion of how Traditional Knowledge labels and the Mukurtu CMS
                        represent more nuanced perspectives on access, see . In the sciences, SciELO and Redalyc offer
                        models of open access that rethink the mandate model for encouraging free,
                        online access to research. See .
                
                We recognize in libraries a centuries-long tradition of caring for
                    information–its access and regulation; its organization and contextualization–as
                    a public good that can incorporate various political, cultural, and religious
                    values. Although neither simple nor unproblematic, the tradition of public
                    libraries carries with it an ideal of democratic education currently under
                    threat by a broken model for academic publishing. More practically, libraries
                    have a variety of access solutions from onsite use and traditional lending to
                    online viewing and download. More than cathedrals, bazaars, or evangelical
                    missions, libraries have the potential to support research communities by
                    investing in not-for-profit knowledge systems. By contrast, the rhetorical
                    tradition inherited from open source computing weakens democratic publishing
                    solutions by providing moral legitimacy to neoliberal trends that political
                    theorists such as Wendy Brown link to an erosion of self-governance. In that
                    sense, open evangelists, like many missionaries before them, find themselves
                    implicated in furthering exploitative traditions even as they spread the good
                    news of equality, democracy, and universal access .
                    We hope to see open access advocacy invest itself less in circumventing public
                    institutions–even if their power structures deserve critique–and invest more in
                    new systems for sharing knowledge that place publishers, libraries, and authors
                    in functional relation to one another.
            
