Title:  To Visualize Past Communities: A Solution from Contemporary
                    Practices in the Industry for the Digital Humanities 
Volume:  011
Issue:  2
Date:  16 March 2017
Abstract:  
                
                In this article, we discuss a way for visualizing interactions or solidarities in
                    a past community. The method that we expound is derived from process-oriented
                    views used in the industry. Therefore, this attempt to adopt practices from
                    outside of the traditional humanities framework must be clearly justified in
                    terms of epistemological position and in terms of choice among the numerous
                    available tools. First, we try to define what the process term could mean in the
                    humanities; then we explain our choice of a representation; we also carry out
                    tests of our method on selected case studies to visualize and question scholarly
                    works. Last, we offer the reader a prototype that must be improved to produce
                    automatic visualization of particular situations.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Designing tools that help visualize scholarly works and offer various
                    perspectives is undoubtedly one of the key features of the Digital Humanities.
                    Indeed, as explained by members of the Republic of
                        Letters program, visualizing helps see things we did not see before and get a better sense
                        of the overall shape and structure. See http://republicofletters.stanford.edu/
                In this work, we discuss a method of representation In
                        fact, we will qualify this term further on. that provides both a
                    pedagogical assistance and a synthetic tool for such visualizations. Indeed, we
                    propose to explore a core aspect in human organizations, namely the way they set
                    up, consciously or not, a process to structure their practices. In order to
                    highlight and characterize certain practices among others as a process, we
                    develop a rigorous representation that we fully expand with
                    the help of the latest web standards. In addition, we connect this
                    representation to a model of data open to any results of the same type. The
                    conclusions that we present here come from encounters between scholars and
                    experts in the quality of industrial processes. From the discussions between
                    these counterparts, finding a common language ideally based on clear rules, in
                    order to ensure a thorough understanding of each other, has emerged as a
                    necessity. What follows is thus intended for pedagogical purposes, but it could
                    also be regarded as a help to put new questions to the foreground.
                At first view there seems to be a tremendous distance between research on history
                    and the search for optimal processes that would minimize the ratios of
                    breakdowns and subsequently provide the high level of quality of an industrial
                    production. Yet, our will to learn from the work of one another has convinced us
                    that the notion of process was already present at various periods of time in
                    history. Since in the industrial context people have a long-term experience on
                    how to represent dynamic process-oriented situations from a start point to an
                    end point, we argue that, by means of a proper translation, it is then possible
                    to offer new perspectives on historical works, as long as they contain one or
                    more process dimensions. Furthermore, we assert that these perspectives pertain
                    to the Digital Humanities domain. Indeed, as Daniel Cohen says in his book
                        Digital History, the digital in history mainly
                    points to a representation of historical materials and investigations with the
                    help of new technologies . To expound our point, we expressed scholarship evidence in a
                    process-oriented way to bring it into Digital Humanities material. We chose the
                    production of knowledge as a first field for our methodological investigation to
                    show its pedagogical virtues. In this contribution, we assumed that the case
                    studies we present may be regarded as a set of more or less ordered, more or
                    less planned, more or less tacit processes. 
                First, we would like to justify that assumption by reviewing works carried out by
                    historians and by showing that they could be visualized in terms of process.
                    Then we shall present some process-oriented representations and we will explain
                    the choice of one of them in particular. We will try to apply our methodology to
                    two particular works, dealing for the first one with information management and
                    for the second one with the industrial production of fabric. Last, dealing with
                    technicalities, we will show a way to translate our representation in a
                    technical fashion with the help of the last web standards and by presenting a
                    client-side prototype based on a specialized JavaScript library.
            

                Process in the humanities
                In this work, we define a process as a set of activities bringing about a result,
                    performed with accuracy and full control by actors who may interact with each
                    other as the links of the same chain. This chain of connected activities forms
                    in a long or short period of time, consciously or not. All actors of such a
                    process pursue a common objective which implies solidarities and sociability.
                    Therefore, we argue that if we manage to disclose such processes from the past,
                    we obtain information about the way communities were organized. Thus, our
                    purpose in this article is to propose means and rigorous methodologies to
                    visualize such processes in history. We chose to rest upon works of historians
                    to illustrate our method, although we could also apply it to primary sources.
                    Indeed, once we have identified relevant processes to highlight interactions
                    between actors, we are ready to visualize them with the help of our tool and
                    subsequently to question our sources on the basis on what was revealed by that
                    new display.
                First, let us exemplify our point with cases that were studied by historians and
                    that are related to the production of knowledge.
                Many works of historians deal with the production of knowledge at various periods
                    (Antiquity, Middle Ages, Renaissance, Enlightenment…) and in different areas
                    (Europe, the Islamic world, China…). In this section, we suggest that some
                    scholarly works could be represented in terms of process if we can agree to a
                    definition that would be both wide enough to model different situations and
                    sufficiently accurate to take into account the specificity of the humanities. In
                    a book published in 2000, Tiziano Dorandi analyzes various aspects of writing in
                    Greek and Roman Antiquity from the draft to the book edition . In particular, he examines the conditioning of
                    papyrus, the format of its sale (roll or sheet), and the subsequent impact on
                    the writing of the Ancients. Then, he tries to describe the composition of a
                    treatise: from the gathering of documentation to the note-taking in order to
                    build a collection of notes, the author reviews practices of famous ancient
                    writers, such as Cicero and Pliny the Elder. For instance, he indicates that
                    Pliny was used to first making his assistants take notes on wax tablets before
                    dictating his commentaries on a new physical support from well-ordered notes. He
                    also envisages the passage from the sketch to the note-taking and finally to the
                    edition of a book and its diffusion towards various readers. Dorandi’s well
                    documented study describes the production of knowledge by ancient writers
                    grounded on robust ways of making. This invites regarding that production in
                    terms of process, if we consider such as an accurate, very often repeated and
                    constantly improved manner of achieving a particular task.
                In an article entitled Notes on Medieval Production and
                        Valuation in Late-Medieval Brittany, Diane Booton investigates the
                    different steps followed by a priest in early fourteenth century Brittany to
                    produce a missal and a psalter . The study is carried
                    out on the basis of tax registers, ecclesiastical payment
                        ledgers and municipal account books. From these sources, the author
                    identifies several groups of actors who might have participated in the
                    elaboration of the work: parchment makers, papermakers, scribes, illuminators
                    and bookbinders. For each of these groups, the author gives precise information
                    about its internal organization and its interaction with its social and economic
                    environment. For example, we learn that the wages paid to skilled and
                    experienced scribes represented a great amount in the total cost of the
                    production of a manuscript. We understand that the scribes were organized as a
                    team led by a coordinator who might also be in charge of contracting with a music annotator, illuminator, bookbinder. If we
                    see this situation in terms of process, we can assert that a process is
                    something which has the property to be connected. Indeed, the different groups
                    involved in the making of the psalter must achieve their own task and forward
                    the result to the next group. This is of course a sequential view of the chain
                    of processes which does not forbid that certain parts of the manufacturing can
                    be led in parallel (for instance, the making of the cover and the copying of the
                    manuscript).
                Other works of historians dealing with the production of knowledge in other
                    cultural areas could also be quoted. As an example, let us mention the study of
                    Johannes Kurz who proposed in 2007 an article about The
                        Compilation and Publication of the Taiping
                            yulan and the Cefu yuangui,
                    in which he analyzes the constitution of major works (encyclopedias and digests)
                    in the Song period (late tenth century), and presents the personnel who was to
                    take part to it under the command of the emperor . This
                    article also alludes to the collection and selection of the sources that
                    prevailed in their fabrication.
                These foregoing examples show that a number of human activities can be modelled
                    by a set of processes and from this point of view, it allows us to emphasize the
                    relationships between individuals in a historical, social and technical context.
                    Hence, our problem is to find a way of representing such processes in a Digital
                    Humanities framework. In this view, let us cite some process representations
                    that have already been tested and experienced in DH.
                Many Digital Humanities programs were initiated in recent years, of which some
                    highlighted connections between actors, geographical areas or events and the
                    underlying processes. For instance, the Republic of
                        Letters (already mentioned) consists in drawing up a mapping of the
                    correspondence between Renaissance scholars. See for instance http://republicofletters.stanford.edu/index.html This
                    program is strongly related to the social network analysis field which is a
                    relevant perspective for studying a community insofar as it accounts for human
                    relations and consequently the processes that govern their establishment.
                        This work is not the place to review all the literature on social network
                        analysis inasmuch as it is extensive. Let us only mention .
                Another worthwhile example is the Macroanalysis book
                    by Matthew Jockers in which the author applies digital tools to massive digital
                    libraries data and metadata, such as Internet
                        Archive and HathiTrust, to dig up
                    beyond the layers of literary well-known published works and account for unjustly neglected authors. Jockers determines the
                    frequencies of certain words, works on patterns and tabulates his results by
                    genre, date, nationality or origin of the authors. This work is inscribed in the
                        distant reading program as defined by Franco
                    Moretti in his Graphs, Maps, Trees
                    . In the chapter dedicated to Trees, Moretti rests on Darwin’s Origin of
                        Species, and specifically on the Divergence of
                        Character section to analogously address the issue of literary
                    survival. He chooses British detective fiction as a field of investigation and
                    builds a tree to distinguish the novels that use clues from others, which
                    enables him to highlight that the latter ones were all forgotten. In the second
                    level of branching, he refines the character of divergence and classifies novels
                    with necessary clues and not necessary etc… This tree accounts for literary
                    transformation under the pressure of social
                        selection. As in Darwinian evolution, that transformation seems to
                    be the result of a long-term process of which the causal factors
                    must be identified and analyzed. In that case, the process
                        term refers to a natural evolution not
                    deliberately ordered nor commanded by a community of human beings. For that
                    reason, the tree diagram acts as a classification scheme according to a certain
                    criterion, that is, the divergence of a character. It represents the outcome of
                    one or more underlying processes the nature of which we do not know. But, this
                    tree diagram describes in no way a process in action. Indeed, mapping relations
                    between Renaissance scholars or building tree diagrams such as above reports the
                    macroscopic dimensions of human and social organizations.
                In contrast, in this essay, we intend to concentrate on the processes that human
                    communities set up for a precise objective and that dynamically account for an
                    action being made. In this way, what we propose can complement the tools and
                    methods that we have just mentioned above (such as tree diagrams or network
                    mapping) insofar as we focus on the process itself in such a way that we can
                    disclose the atomic dimensions of the situations we investigate. Thus, we
                    consider interactions between elements that may be either individuals or
                    material resources or even more abstract entities such as activities. The choice
                    of such interactions enables us to account for complex situations (behind which
                    we find individuals, organizations or external constraints) that we describe
                    with an identical framework whatever the details that we obtain from historical
                    works.
                Therefore, we think that modern methods of process representation could
                    contribute to highlight the interactions between these various elements and, as
                    such, that they would give a relevant description of past collective enterprises
                    like, for example, the production of knowledge.
            

                The choice of a process representation
                In order to make a choice of a process representation for visualizing scholarly
                    works, we should first consider what a process means in our contemporary world
                    and especially in the industry where the need for formal and rigorous methods is
                    crucial. 
                In a modern wording, a process may be defined as a series of linked activities
                    and resources (either material or human) which transform input elements into
                    output ones . Thus, an organization or a collective
                    activity may be modeled as a set of processes evolving in an external
                    environment (represented by constraints that must be respected) focused on a
                    specific objective. The interaction between processes may be regarded as a
                    communication channel in which a flow circulates. It raises the problem of the
                    relevancy of these modern concepts for representing works in history such as
                    those briefly described above. In fact, we do not mean to represent the past
                    world but only to construct an interpretative
                        framework for accounting situations described in scholarly works.
                    This epistemological position is clearly related to
                    the status of modeling in the humanities. Following Michael Gavin, we argue that
                    our process-based model do[es] not represent the past, but
                        our ideas about the past and, in our case, ideas derived from
                    scholarly works . Therefore, when we talk about
                        representation, we mean a way of representing the
                    processes that constitute our interpretative framework. As
                    a matter of fact, modeling in the humanities does not appear as a novel
                    activity: for example, using categories to delimit a
                        conception of the world is already an activity of modeling 
                    .
                There are several ways of representing processes. All of them correspond to
                    different points of view. We can quote, for instance, those focused on heuristic
                    conceptions, usually called mind maps. They are very relevant to account for
                    decision processes but do not seem to correctly represent situations and
                    activities already well experienced as those we would like to illustrate
                        here. Let us mention commercial products: https://www.mindjet.com/home/ or http://www.matchware.com/en/default.htm and their equivalent
                        software: http://freemind.sourceforge.net/wiki/index.php/Main_Page and http://www.freeplane.org/wiki/. 
                
                The Unified Modelling Language (UML), See http://www.uml.org.  mainly
                    related to software development, specifies several diagrams dedicated to precise
                    situations (static, dynamic, sequential, interactive...). In particular, the UML
                    workgroup recommends to the user the Activity Diagram in order to highlight the
                    chaining of activities of a system. It is useful to model an interactive
                    process. More precisely its features are close to those of a flow chart or of an
                    algorithmic tree. Figure 1 is an example of an
                    activity diagram which accounts for a course registration process in an academic
                    institution. Each rounded rectangle represents an activity, that is to say, a
                    step of the process, whereas the rhombus-shaped figure stands for a decision
                    split on the basis of an exclusive choice (an XOR operator in Boolean terms).
                    The grey bars symbolize synchronization steps while the black thin arrows play
                    the role of input or output elements.
                
                    Example of a UML Activity Diagram
                    
                
                Although UML focuses on software and system designs, it can be extended to other
                        purposes. For example, the SysML modeling language refers to
                        engineering systems. For example, a more business oriented approach
                    has been standardized by the Object Management
                        Group as the Business Process Model and
                        Notation (BPMN) to provide the capability of
                        understanding the internal business procedures. There are
                        several other notations. Let us mention, for example, the workflow language
                        Yet Another Workflow Language (YAWL) (see http://yawlfoundation.org). As the UML Activity Diagram notation, BPMN offers several components to model
                    a process oriented view in a business approach. At least, we can cite the event,
                    activity, gateway and connection elements. The event elements (represented by a
                    circle) denote something that happens: the Start event is the process trigger
                    whereas the End event is the result of the process. The activity elements
                    (rounded corner rectangles) describe the work that must be done. The gateway
                    elements (diamond shapes) determine forking and merging of paths depending on
                    conditions (exclusive, event evaluation, inclusive…). All these elements are
                    linked by connection elements (sequence, message passing, and association) to
                    describe the overall process. See http://www.bpmn.org and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_Process_Model_and_Notation.
                     The UML and BPMN methodologies, which share common roots (as they are
                    standardized by the same consortium), appear as good candidates for our
                    subject.
                As a matter of fact, we preferred a methodology of representation derived from
                    the quality of process and we will try to justify our choice further. The
                    quality of process ensures that, for a certain probability or more precisely at
                    a certain error rate, which must be minimized, a process will produce the
                    expected output element. The philosophy of such a representation consists first
                    in observing what already exists and then, upon these observations, in
                    establishing a diagnosis of what must be improved. For this purpose, such
                    methods provide robust ways of building a framework or a model for apprehending
                    reality. With this process representation, we can position ourselves as
                    observers of experienced situations and not as designers of a system, which we
                    cannot pretend to be when scrutinizing the past. In the industry, minimizing an
                    error rate may be characterized as a progress. It is
                    achieved by adopting a broad vision of the company that
                    enables obtaining more control of its activities by a fine analysis. This
                        business process approach is of course rooted in our
                    contemporary world and we must maintain a necessary critical distance if we wish
                    to adapt it to our subject. And to do so, we must first state precisely that, in
                    our case, progress cannot be related to any
                        improvement in terms of quality, for we do not intend
                    to make an audit of the past scholars. We only wish to set in motion a current
                    methodology of quality improvement to visualize past activities. In that
                    perspective, the broad vision offered by that methodology
                    meets the expectations of historians using Digital Humanities techniques for it
                    implies a fine and rigorous analysis of all related activities. 
                Let us now briefly describe the methodology. Companies implement process
                    referential and maps, which define the interactions between processes, show and
                    reveal the overall coherence. It is a tool of communication and therefore it
                    represents the synoptic view of all business processes (sequence and
                    interactions between processes). 
                Processes and roles relating to these are generally independent of the
                    organization and functions. The method of process representation that we
                    consider here is inscribed in an overall toolbox usually declined in five phases
                    of which the main and key objective is to converge to a
                        zero-defect approach in a chain of production.
                        This methodology is called Define Measure Analysis
                            Improve Control (DMAIC); see ,  and . To that
                    purpose, the expert must build in the first phase a process map of the
                    production, and then analyze it in order to improve and optimize the quality of
                    making. We would like to focus on the first phase of the toolbox that proposes a
                    robust set of tools to establish such a map.
                In the reality of industry, the project manager must ensure that basic questions
                    such as the project relationship with the overall objectives, the
                        nature of the problem and the goal have been understood by all
                    stakeholders. Hence, it follows a progressive approach, including multiple
                    steps, each of them being focused on a specific problematic. We will also
                        see below in this article that this approach can be a source of rich
                        perspectives, offering the possibility to emphasize and compare various
                        process evolutions.
                
                During the so-called first phase, the project manager starts by understanding the
                    current process and its related characteristics (process boundaries, the way
                    products and services are actually delivered, etc.). For that, several tools are
                    useful to visualize and point to the process that needs improvement, to identify
                    start and stop points of the process under consideration, to identify the
                    customers of the process and to ensure a shared understanding of key elements of
                    the process, including what it looks like and what it should deliver. These
                    tools are the SIPOC, the high-level process
                        maps and the detailed process maps. For a synthetic
                        presentation of the SIPOC process representation, see , see also .
                SIPOC stands for Supplier, Input, Process, Output, and Customer. It deals with business process
                    representation as the logical organization of suppliers, inputs, and work
                    activities designed to produce a required end result (product or service output)
                    for internal or external customers.
                Then, the high-level process maps and detailed process maps
                    representations propose a focus on the process itself detailing its activities,
                    main flows, and other elements.
                The SIPOC, as a first representation, greatly helps to understand the process
                    context. This is very important, as chains of process in companies are quite
                    usual, meaning that the outputs of the first become the main inputs of the next
                    one, etc. To be brief, we can state that, in the SIPOC wording, Supplier provides inputs to the process, Input spans materials, resources, and data necessary
                    to execute the process; Process is a collection of
                    activities that accepts one or more inputs and creates output that is of value
                    to customers; Output is related to products,
                    services or data resulting from a process whereas Customer points to internal or external entity that receives
                    outputs.
                When focusing on the process itself, the high-level process maps and the
                        detailed process maps representations are useful. An example of a
                    process map that we will use and detail further in the present article, is the
                        flowchart. A process flowchart
                    includes several key elements which are the main activities and milestones of
                    the process; the flows between activities, e.g. main inputs and outputs; the
                    roles associated with the various activities; the different elements supporting
                    the run of a given activity.
                Figure 2 is an example of the flowchart template
                    used to represent the various processes in the Thales Group
                        Chorus 2.0 referential. Table 1 is the
                    associated caption.
                
                    High-level process maps, flowchart principle 1/2
                    
                
                
                    High-level process maps, flowchart principle 2/2
                    
                        
                        The role(s) associated with an activity. The person responsible has to
                            be highlighted (bold, italic, underline…). Each activity, including the
                            decisional milestone, has to be associated with one or several
                            roles.
                    
                    
                        
                        Activity title: Short (50 characters max), typically using an
                                action verb and a complement, A few
                                keywords as typically a set of substantives allowing to
                            understand the activity main content.
                    
                    
                        
                        Case where, for this activity, a lower level description is available
                            (flowchart and procedure).
                    
                    
                        
                        Decisional milestone title: Short (50 characters max), typically using
                            an action verb and a complement.
                    
                    
                        
                        Document (instruction, guide, template, form, manual, example) or
                            folder supporting the activity execution.
                    
                    
                        
                        Indicates for each activity, decisional milestone, the main associated
                            input(s).
                    
                    
                        
                        Indicates for each activity, decisional milestone, the main associated
                            output(s).
                    
                
                To summarize our choice, we state that we intend to apply a method used in the
                    industry to describe and to visualize particular situations reported in
                    scholarly works. This method consists in coupling a generic and macroscopic
                    representation (SIPOC) with a more detailed process map (namely a flowchart)
                    specifically developed and thought of by the Thales Company. In that
                        sense, we follow the recommendation of Harry Rever, the Director of Lean Six Sigma International Institute for
                        Learning: SIPOC makes sense at a high level exercise whereas a more
                        detailed process map is the next logical step. See .  The main benefit of this flowchart on BPMN is its ability to
                    make visible, in a simple way and on the same diagram, the roles (namely the
                    main actors and the stakeholders), the activities with their inputs and outputs
                    and the implemented means. In addition, the flowchart is situated at a rather
                    satisfactory level of accurateness but it is also sufficiently macroscopic to
                    provide an overall view that corresponds to the expectations of any Digital
                    Humanities practitioner whose objective is to comprehensively render precise
                    results. In addition to its intrinsic simplicity due to the vertical layout, all
                    these reasons inclined us to implement this representation in the framework of
                    Digital Humanities.
            

                Case studies: application of the SIPOC-Flowchart representation
                Indeed, in their work on Slavery in American Society before the Civil War
                    conducted at the University of Virginia, W. G. Thomas and E. L. Ayers argue that
                    one of the activities of a Digital Humanities project is the translation of 
                        professional scholarship-evidence into forms that take
                            advantage of the possibilities of electronic media
                        
                    . In this work, the scholars applied Digital Humanities methods to
                        explore the way slavery divided American society before the Civil War. They
                        used the capabilities of new technologies both for
                            analysis and for presentation of the argument, relying on
                        Geographic Information System (GIS) and on Extensible
                            Markup Language (XML) to connect large
                            amounts of information. This translation may be achieved
                    by a relevant arrangement of the information system. In a basic information
                    system architecture, we usually identify several components. Among them, we find
                    the data model which organizes the interrelated pieces of information (usually
                    in a database) and the view which displays results extracted from that
                    database according to a query. The view component has gained huge importance so
                    that it usually influences the design of the data model. See for example
                        the MVC pattern as discussed in .
                    Figure 4 represents a schematic articulation of the main components for our
                    Digital Humanities pattern.
                
                    Three main components based on the Model-View-Controller pattern. In our
                        solution the View component is a SIPOC/flowchart. The Model component is
                        discussed below whereas the Controller is a piece of software which extracts
                        data and prepares them for the View component.
                    
                
                In this section, we shall see how our process-oriented methodology can offer the
                    opportunity to build a view component with the intention to visualize historical
                    data.
                We shall exemplify our methodology on case studies drawn from Ann Blair’s Too much, to know
                     and we will try to extend it to another scholarly
                        work. Indeed, we will try to examine the conference proceedings of
                        which the topic is Copy and counterfeit in the
                            Renaissance, see .
                We first chose Too much to know because it embraces
                    most of the aspects related to the production of knowledge in a particular
                    period, that is, the Renaissance. Ann Blair’s book is indeed about scholarly
                    information management before the modern age. The author devotes five
                    well-documented chapters on that question. In particular, in chapters 2 and 4,
                    she gives a lot of insights on the note-taking activity regarded as a central
                    step towards information management (chapter 2) and on compiling, which can be
                    viewed as a following step resting on the output collected from the note-takers
                    (chapter 4). These chapters are documented by numerous and detailed examples
                    which give hints on how the different actors could manage the abundance of
                    information. We would like to reread these chapters from the perspective of our
                    methodology, first by drawing a generic SIPOC scheme. The main objective of this
                    generic scheme will be to offer original views of historical data and, probably
                    in a further work, to build an atlas of processes set up by early modern
                    scholars. Its only virtue will be that of positioning the different activities,
                    as parts of the process, in the global process that leads to a final tool of
                    information management. On this basis, we will examine a case study for which
                    some of the previously detailed phases are consistent with historical
                    materials.
            

                Generic SIPOC
                In chapter 2, the author sets the bases of a history of note-taking, as 
                        various kinds of writing in response to listening,
                            reading, or thinking…for the production of a composition or
                            report
                        
                     pointing to the difficulty of such a history due to the loss of material
                    or its immediate destruction inherent in its use. Indeed, as mentioned, 
                        erasable writing surfaces were commonly used for
                            temporary notes
                        
                    .These surfaces were wax tablets bound in a codex form, pocket-sized
                    writing tablets, slate blackboard, sand tray…In addition to the fragility of
                    those writing surfaces, the discarding of notes, which was common among scholars
                    and especially their heirs, is another feature that makes the taking-note
                    process difficult to analyze . Another reason
                    which accounts for the loss of notes is their physical
                        integration into a manuscript used for printing as illustrated
                    through Pierre Bayle’s Dictionnaire historique et
                        critique
                    . We can already anticipate that
                        taking notes, discarding notes and integrating notes
                    will be categorized as activities in the SIPOC representation whereas the
                    so-called associated means will be represented by all kinds of
                        erasable surfaces: on one hand wax tables, sand tray,
                    slate blackboard as mentioned above, and on the other hand loose sheets stored in bundles and notebooks as stipulated further.
                    What could be the roles corresponding to those activities in the SIPOC
                    flowchart? If we read Ann Blair more thoroughly, we learn that the notes taken
                    by readers on erasable surfaces were often destroyed. Those first-order notes, as characterized by the author, served sometimes
                    as a basis to second-order notes put on a more
                    durable surface. These could also be put into circulation after revision and
                    authorization by the speaker . So, the
                    listeners (students, secretaries…) in conjunction with the speakers may be
                    considered roles in the first-order and/or
                        second-order notes production activities. In
                    some cases, the author gives details on how scholars took notes or made
                    annotations when reading a book: sometimes they highlighted passages with
                    keywords in the margins to produce a running index . One feature relevant to the process-oriented note-taking
                    activity is the debate between scholars who advocated reading without
                    interruption and those who, in contrast, recommended stopping reading in order
                    to excerpt and to copy passages in a notebook . Note-taking most often took one of two forms: either by
                        epitome or abridgment, that is, by paraphrasing or summarizing the
                    sources, or by head or commonplaces, that is, by
                    copying passages from the source into a notebook under a commonplace heading.
                    These ways of working shed light on the note-taking process
                    that we will link to the first-order notes
                    activity.
                As the quantity of notes increased, it became of central importance to set up
                    tools for their management. One crucial tool was the assignment of headings to a
                    set of notes. As Blair mentions, the choice of such headings was rarely
                    discussed by scholars, although it was crucial to effective
                        note-taking and required judgment, as part of a decision process
                        . Another important decision involved the
                    number of headings to be used: to be useful, headings had to be chosen
                    accurately and their number had to be great enough to guarantee sufficient
                    subdivisions, but small enough to prevent the storing of too many notes under
                    the same topic. Another tool for managing notes was their indexation which
                    supposed that each passage of a notebook 
                        would be entered into the index under a keyword
                        
                    . One way to do so was to alphabetize the passage under its principal thing and to draw up an index on sheets corresponding to each letter of the alphabet
                    with references to the notebooks. That way, the index could receive new headings over time. This indexation of a notebook is
                    therefore described as a living process which, together with the constitution of
                    headings, corresponds to an activity in a SIPOC that could be entitled notebook management tool elaboration.
                What was the main purpose of excerpting and accumulating notes in notebooks?
                    Blair tackles that question further in chapter 2. The historical materials she
                    presents in her development depict the notes taken by scholars as an aid to writing, as worded by a subtitle of the
                    chapter. In our view, that aid to writing is one
                    branch of the process of writing, and may be considered one of the steps that
                    describe, in the SIPOC, the achievement of a reference book in early modern
                    times.
                In chapter 4, more focused on the compiling activity, the author gives many hints
                    on the methods used by compilers and on the social and technical context they
                    were acting in. In particular, she discusses some social and legal elements,
                    which, to our view, should be included in the process description by a SIPOC.
                    For instance, the questions of obtaining privileges, which were only valid
                    within a certain jurisdiction , or of
                    avoiding censorship  were determinant in the
                    making of a reference book, although not purely technical. In figure 4, we
                    propose to represent the main steps of the reference book creation process, as
                    an application of the SIPOC diagrams presented in the previous section. In the
                    SIPOC symbolism, the blue frames represent activities that may be described by
                    another flow chart, that is, that have a degree of complexity which justifies a
                    detailed process representation.
                
                    Global flow chart delineating the compilation of a reference book creation
                        process. At this level: each activity may be described by another flow chart
                        which plays the role of a focus on it.
                    
                
                Regarding the compiling activity itself, it may be considered the result of
                    collaborations either diachronic, when 
                        compilers relied on earlier work
                        
                    , or synchronic, when compilers relied on amanuenses . So, earlier works such as notebooks, or
                    aids from helpers, may be categorized as inputs in our SIPOC-based reading.
                If we look more precisely at the technical activities as practiced by the actors,
                    we find some rather basic ones, such as 
                        selecting a passage from a source and assigning the
                            passage to a topical heading
                        
                    , but also some new techniques based on the use of
                        slips and of cutting and pasting from printed books.
                Thus, to describe an overall process, we can consider flow charts at several
                    levels: at the top level, we represent global processes whereas more detailed
                    processes may be specified at a second level by another flow chart.
                This is described in figure 5 where we translated the note-taking activity
                    according to the elements of Blair’s work previously reported.
                
                    A focus on the note-taking activity.
                    
                
                As we can see in figure 5, each activity is still framed by a blue rectangle
                    which means that we consider possible another level of accurateness. Below, we
                    exemplify that third level flow chart with Sacchini’s first-order-notes taking activity.
            

                A case study
                This foregoing review of Ann Blair’s chapters 2 and 4, translated into a process
                    oriented representation, gave clarifications on the sequences of the activities
                    (at different levels) that yielded a final intellectual product corresponding to
                    the expectations of scholars in early modern Europe. But this generic
                    representation based on SIPOC and flow charts only assigns a correct position to
                    each component in the global process (roles, activities and associated means)
                    provided that the component is effective in the process. If we focus now on a
                    particular case with the intent of building its relevant SIPOC, we should be
                    able to visualize its shift from the generic representation. In particular, we
                    will inevitably have to contend with gaps in historical information, which
                    amounts to the absence of certain components in the SIPOC flowchart. The choice
                    of a particular case could be made in function of different criteria. For
                    instance, we could follow the process of one scholar or a group of scholars who
                    committed themselves to a particular production. That kind of process would
                    spread over a certain geographic area, over a short period of time (that of the
                    scholar’s career). In contrast, we could also take into account the achievement
                    of a book over a long period of time, such as Theodor Zwinger’s Theatrum Humanae Vitae, which, as related in chapter
                    2, spanned over almost one century and a half, or the Polyanthea produced during 178 years.
                For the sake of simplicity (if the term is relevant for such
                    a study), we propose to focus on the Jesuit Francesco Sacchini as a note-taker.
                    Sacchini’s way of taking notes contrasted with that of others as he recommended 
                        the interruption in reading that resulted from stopping
                            to copy a passage into one’s notebook: it slowed down reading and aided
                            retention
                        
                    . In more detail, we learn that Sacchini recommended taking notes in two
                    steps: first he selected passages and wrote them out on a notebook in the order in which they were encountered, and
                    second he copied the passages out in another notebook under commonplace headings
                        . If we read Blair’s account correctly,
                    we assume that Sacchini read a passage once and wrote it twice as just
                        mentioned. This is suggested in 
                        and confirmed in , and further in  by an example of a student who followed
                        Sacchini’s method. The selection process was materially performed by
                    underlining the passage of interest in a book . Then, as we pointed out in the previous section, the choice of a heading was
                    also an important step in the process. Concerning Sacchini’s method of heading
                    choice, Blair alludes to it , but it is
                    likely that we do not have sufficient materials to give a thorough development.
                    It is anyway worth mentioning and positioning it in the flow chart, even if we
                    are not able to provide a focus on it. It is likely that the choice of a heading
                    was made when copying the passage out for the second time, enhanced by
                    familiarity with the text acquired during the first round of note-taking. That
                    iterative process is described by figure 6. 
                
                    First-order-notes taking exemplified by Sacchini’s method. In this third
                        level flow chart, each activity is framed by a black rectangle which means
                        that we do not intend or that we are not able to give more details of the
                        process.
                    
                
                In this section, we showed that the process oriented view, which is the SIPOC
                    diagram coupled with flow charts at different levels, proved to be a powerful
                    candidate to visualize and represent data at the front-end of a digital system
                    where historical work must be stored. Beyond its advantages in terms of
                    visualization, it compels an accurate and rigorous analysis of activities, and
                    in so doing, it enables setting up a powerful focus on specific cases.
                    Therefore, it provides the scholars with a tool reference for comparing
                    different cases and for raising subsequent questions. In addition, that tool
                    does not concentrate only on individuals, but it defines, in a broad meaning,
                    activities and roles related to each other, which gives an account of the
                    interactions between the actors and their environment. Last, one more advantage
                    of such a methodology lies in its ability to provide a global and overall
                    representation of a past enterprise.
                However, we must be careful when using this methodology. Indeed, the first
                    problem we encounter when we try to apply the SIPOC and flow chart
                    representation is related to the effort we must make to deeply understand all
                    its subtleties. Indeed, this methodology was not first designed for historical
                    works: it is then necessary to adjust it to the needs of historians (for
                    instance, by redefining some of the vocabulary). Furthermore, it rapidly proves
                    to be inoperative if the amount of scholarship evidence is not sufficient, as it
                    is demanding many details to be enlightening.
            

                Another case study: the industrial production of fabric
                This foregoing and detailed part has shown that the SIPOC-flowchart representation is well-adapted to a certain type of
                    scholarly work, namely any work related to the production of knowledge. But, we
                    can now legitimately examine whether that method of visualization could be
                    applied to other works. To answer this problem, we favored a pragmatic approach:
                    as our point is not to build a theoretical framework within which we would
                    demonstrate logically the validity and the relevancy of our method for a general
                    case, but rather to show that it can help visualize results of selected
                    scholarly works in a thorough way. To that end, we put our attention on a recent
                    publication, Copy and Counterfeit in the
                        Renaissance
                    , which collects the proceedings of an
                    international conference dedicated to this topic. It is a 500-page volume
                    divided into two main parts: the first one is theoretical and deals with art,
                    book, or science and religion history; the second one, more practical,
                    investigates different cases of literature, book, art, science, religion or
                    economy counterfeit. One of these case studies describes and analyses textile copy and counterfeit in the Renaissance
                    . In this chapter, the author makes the distinction
                    between imitation and copy or counterfeit. In certain cases, imitation consists
                    of the substitution of raw materials used to make the textile. For example, the
                    origin and the quality of the fiber used to make the textile were of first
                    importance: making products with wool from another origin than expected (maybe
                    cheaper) was a constant temptation, but these products were usually considered
                    falsified. Another example: were the silk threads made with first choice silk or
                    with scrap material? In Italy, the regulations demanded that thread be spun with
                    pure materials, which implied thorough controls. The next step in textile
                    fabrication was the weaving phase. It was then possible to circumvent the
                    quality standards by introducing threads of different quality levels or by using
                    less thread than recommended. We learn from the chapter that it was a source of
                    numerous conflicts within the production centers. After the weaving, many
                    textiles were bleached or dyed. The quality of the dying was also a matter of
                    discussion: some colors could be made with different materials. Their durability
                    and the damages caused by the subsequent chemical reactions were variable and
                    influenced the quality of the final result. Last, high quality textiles needed
                    fine finishes of which the quality determined also that of the product. During
                    these last phases, there were numerous opportunities for counterfeiting: quality
                    of the textile and quality of the fabrication procedures were the main
                    parameters to play with for copying original products. To prevent these
                    practices, the authorities had organized committees that examined the fabric
                    quality. They had set up production standards and inspection organizations that
                    certified the products and, when necessary, they declared fraud perpetrations.
                    For instance, in Augsburg, woolen sheets were inspected at several times during
                    their production: these inspections mainly involved the material quality of the
                    fabric and also the quality of its treatment. Surely, the practices of
                    inspection and certification were different according to the areas and the
                    production places. The inspection and its subsequent certification were
                    materialized by seals printed on the fabrics with ink, wax or lead. The wax
                    color indicated the quality level. 
                As the reader can anticipate, this chapter of the book is rich and full of many
                    details that can lead astray someone not familiar with that scholarly topic.
                    After that first general presentation, the author expounds a detailed case study
                    focused on linen production in Westphalia. As our purpose is not to summarize
                    that fascinating study, we only would like to benchmark our method of
                    representation to the previous general considerations.
                In figure 7, we tried to render these considerations in a SIPOC-flowchart
                    representation.
                
                    Flowchart representation of the textile fabric manufacturing.
                    
                
                In this diagram, we chose to define six main activities controlled by four
                    milestones corresponding to the different inspections and certifications that we
                    briefly presented above. This flowchart rests on the principle that a process
                    which would successfully pass all these phases would produce certified and not
                    counterfeited fabric. All these activities are represented as general ones,
                    which means that they may be unfolded into subactivities to provide more
                    details. This could be achieved, for example, by extracting the information
                    contained in the footnotes of the chapter. Note that the bypass arrow between
                    the Dying quality control and the Quality control milestones
                    models a normal fabric, namely a fabric that has not been
                    finely finished. On the right side, we attached to each activity its inputs,
                    outputs and its associated means (in a parchment symbol). Note that the question
                    mark we appended to the associated means state that the author of the chapter
                    did not clearly mention them. However, when we figure out in terms of process
                    the situation that he describes, the question of the means implemented by the
                    textile workers must be raised at the precise place pointed by the flowchart.
                    This is another virtue of such a representation: the gain of an overall view
                    inclines the reader to raise questions that pertain to a specific point and that
                    did not arise the first time.
            

                Technicalities: data model and the SIPOC-flowchart representation as a
                    frontend-view
                For more than forty years, digital system architects or designers have adopted
                    common methods to build databases according to standard models. As previously
                    mentioned, an information system, that is to say the core of any Digital
                    Humanities project, usually rests on three main components (see figure 3). First, the data model, mainly a
                    database, contains the scholarship work organized according to a rationale.
                    Then, the view acts as an interactive component between the data model and the
                    end-user. It is a simple web page, a rich interface application (or RIA based on
                    JavaScript framework) or a traditional graphical user interface (java based for
                    example), depending on the level of sophistication. Last, the controller is the
                    component that connects to the database, retrieves the data relevant to the user
                    query and prepares them for a display on the view. The main advantage of such
                    architecture lies in its ability to distribute the overall development among
                    different specialized skills (database design, programming and view web-based
                    design). We have already presented the process map methodology as the view
                    component relevant to certain historical works. Let us now briefly describe what
                    could be another central brick in Digital Humanities: the organization of
                    historical evidence or the design of specific databases. In human sciences, the
                    databases must essentially follow the relational model based on the second
                    and/or third normal forms . From this architecture, it
                    is then easy to produce XML or JSON files, XML stands for eXtended Markup Language (see http://www.w3.org/standards/xml/and http://www.w3schools.com/xml/default.asp), whereas JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) describes a JavaScript
                        Object (see http://www.json.org).
                        Both XML and JSON are intended to data interchange. provide them with
                    vocabulary or ontologies, implement an efficient search engine to retrieve data
                    and make them capable, through relevant protocols, to open a dialog with other
                    web-based applications and exchange data. In the field of bibliographic
                        databases, we can cite protocols like OAI-PmH. See http://www.openarchives.org/OAI/openarchivesprotocol.html
                
                Those technological “novelties” may not be regarded as simple tools by the
                    historians any longer. At least, they offer new visions on the historian works,
                    new ways of analyzing and new ways of researching . If
                    we focus on our SIPOC approach, we can notice that the foregoing flowcharts are good candidates for segmentation in atomic
                    entities as recommended by the relational second and third normal forms. Indeed,
                    we can anticipate, in the case of a database design, that activities would be
                    modeled by an entity which would cover several attributes such as its title, a
                    description and probably other useful fields. That entity would have a
                    relationship with others: a role entity, an input entity, an
                    output entity and a document entity. These relationships would be attributed
                    cardinalities whose values would depend on their nature. As it is obvious that a
                    role may be linked to several activities and, reciprocally, an activity may be
                    performed by several roles, the relationship activity-role will be of type
                        n-m with a 0-N cardinality on each side. This means that
                        the entity is involved in the relationship at least zero times and at most
                        several times. Concerning the input, output and document entities, we
                    can consider, for the sake of simplicity, 1-n relationships with the activity
                    entity, which means that an activity is related to, at most, one input
                    (respectively output or document) and that the input activity may be linked to
                    another activity. As a consequence of such a choice, the field that describes
                    the input (respectively output or document) must be multivalued in order to
                    account for the fact that, in reality, several inputs may correspond to one
                        activity. So, the description field of an input element would
                        correspond to several inputs. For instance, input1 will be described
                        by first order notes, books, letters. This is technically simpler
                        than considering three elements input1 (first order notes),
                            input2 (books), input3 (letters) that we should link to
                        the same activity through an n-m relationship. It induces more
                        redundancy but offers more simplicity. The entity-relationship scheme
                    that represents that model is as below: 
                
                    Simple entity-relationship model for the activity of a flow chart. The
                            id_XXX stands for the identifier of the entity.
                    
                
                The diagram above must be made more complicated if we want to account for the
                    sequence of the activities, as it appears in the flowchart process. One way to model that sequence consists in
                    assigning a sequence entity to the Role-Activity relationship. In addition, as seen previously, an
                    activity may be expanded in subactivities, which amounts to create a
                        tree of activities of which we limit, for clarity
                    reasons, the number of branches to 3. The modeling of such a feature may be a
                    reflexive relationship on the activity entity itself. Therefore, a more definite
                    entity-relationship model might be represented by figure 9: 
                
                    Entity-relationship model for the activity of a flow chart with sequence
                        and expansion in subactivities.
                    
                
                To practically exploit such a model it is necessary to convert it in a relational
                    database (using the well-established rules), then to fill it with data. In order
                    to represent a particular SIPOC, one could develop an engine which would
                    retrieve the relevant data in function of a user request and which would
                    generate an HTML page to display a flowchart. Indeed, the recent HTML5 standard
                    includes a Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) 
                        See http://www.w3.org/Graphics/SVG/ engine that is able to
                    produce image on the fly. Thus, if the engine gets good geometric data
                    calculated from the database, it is then possible to generate flowcharts upon
                    requests through a well-designed interface.
                One way to draw automatically a flowchart in SVG format would be to provide the application
                    controller with a converter from relational to JSON format. Having JSON data retrieved on the client side (namely in a
                    browser) enables drawing a flowchart in SVG/HTML format, provided we wrote
                        JavaScript code based on libraries specialized
                    in data visualization such as the Data Driven Documents
                        JavaScript Library (d3js). On
                            d3js, see http://d3js.org. In order to show the feasibility of our
                    assertion, we remained pragmatic and we developed a quick prototype based on
                        d3js. We assumed that a flowchart could be stored in a JSON array
                    where each element (namely each JavaScript object)
                    stands for an activity and its associated means and roles. Therefore, in a
                        JavaScript section of an HTML page, a flowchart could be represented
                    as below:
                var sipoc = [ {"activity":"Notes Taking", "MeanIn":"Books Treatises, erasable
                    surfaces...", "MeanOut":"Various written Surfaces" "Role":"Listeners, Readers"},
                    {"activity":"Notes discarding", "MeanIn":"Notes", "MeanOut":"Nothing or
                    Integrated notes","Role":"Compilers, heirs"}, {"activity":"Printing",
                    "MeanIn":"Notes", "MeanOut":"Reference books" , "Role":"Printers"}, ]; 
                This data structure fits to the relational database model seen above and can thus
                    be easily built in a client (browser). Then, in the client side, we only have to
                    perform some appropriate d3js function calls (using
                    the functional property of the JavaScript language)
                    such as: 
                var svg = d3.select('#graph') .append('svg') .style('width', 2000)
                    .style('height',1000);
                to create a SVG plane, and: 
                svg.selectAll('rect.activity') .data(sipoc) .enter() .append('rect')
                    .attr('class','activity') .attr('x', xBarPosition) .attr('y', function (d,i)
                    {return ((i+1)*yBarPosition);}) .attr({width: widthBar, height: heigthBar,
                    style:"fill:#cb842e;stroke-
                    width:"+strokeArrowActivity+";stroke:#a00c0c"});
                to create an activity block. 
                In figure 10, we reproduced the result obtained automatically by the code given
                    in appendix. For the sake of clarity, we have represented only a few dimensions
                    of the flowchart (in black arrows) relative to the web page edges. 
                
                    Output of the JavaScript/d3js prototype derived from the SIPOC-flowchart
                        process representation.
                    
                
            

                Conclusion
                In this article, we proposed a solution derived from a combination of several
                    best practices in order to account for scholarship evidence of professional
                    historical works. The best practices we are pointing at come either from the
                    industrial management process, from the software development and from the
                    critical distance that we must take to produce a relevant visualization of a
                    scholarly work. Concerning this latter point, we carried out tests of our
                    solution on two different topics that were objects of investigations by
                    historians, namely the production of knowledge and the question of
                    counterfeiting in the Renaissance. We saw that the SIPOC-flowchart representation gives an overall view of a case study that
                    resulted from a scholarly work. It gives an insight to the shape and structure
                    that constrain the practices of a community. But we also argued that building a
                        SIPOC-flowchart helped us raise problems and
                    questions that we did not anticipate before, in the sense that our
                    representation suggests (through the blanks that it left) solving and answering
                    particular problems.
                Last, we think that it is very likely that any other work involving process or,
                    more generally speaking, solidarity between different actors in a specific
                    social context would be easily translated into the Digital Humanities field by
                    our solution. Indeed and in a practical way, once we have properly designed a
                    database to represent data coming from historical works, we open the door to the
                    web ecosystem and to all the features it offers. In particular, we can imagine,
                    following Moretti’s call for a worldwide collaboration , research programs that would involve scholars in
                    collaborative relationships for modeling and providing data in a
                    process-oriented view as we discussed above.
            

                APPENDIX: PROTOTYPE FOR AN AUTOMATIC FLOWCHART GENERATION 
                Prototype
            
