Title:  
               
Volume:  001
Issue:  1
Date:  3 April 2007
Abstract:  
            Lincoln/Net (http://lincoln.lib.niu.edu), a product of the Abraham Lincoln Historical
               Digitization Project at Northern Illinois University Libraries, represents a new type
               of historically oriented digital library resource. Like many other digital libraries,
               it contains a large amount of searchable primary source materials. Like a number of
               other historically oriented online resources, project staff have organized
               Lincoln/Net around a specific topic, in this case Abraham Lincoln’s life and times in
               antebellum Illinois. In addition to Lincoln’s own papers, the project’s databases
               contain resources shedding light on his context, including letters, diaries, and
               publications prepared by his peers. Unlike most historically oriented digital
               libraries however, the project Web site also includes a wealth of multimedia
               materials, including image, sound, video, and interactive map resources. But
               Lincoln/Net is perhaps most unique in that it furnishes its users with an extensive
               set of interpretive materials. This approach suggests that historians may play an
               expanding role in the development of digital libraries. It can also provide them with
               a badly-needed means of communicating with an audience beyond their own scholarly
               community and students. This communication can facilitate what one digital history
               pioneer has described as the democratization
                  of history, as defined by an expanded user group enjoying primary source
               materials and using them to engage in historical thinking .
         
Full Body Text: 

            I
            Lincoln/Net (http://lincoln.lib.niu.edu), a product of the Abraham Lincoln Historical
               Digitization Project at Northern Illinois University Libraries, represents a new type
               of historically oriented digital library resource. Like many other digital libraries,
               it contains a large amount of searchable primary source materials. Like a number of
               other historically oriented online resources, project staff have organized
               Lincoln/Net around a specific topic, in this case Abraham Lincoln’s life and times in
               antebellum Illinois. In addition to Lincoln’s own papers, the project’s databases
               contain resources shedding light on his context, including letters, diaries, and
               publications prepared by his peers. Unlike most historically oriented digital
               libraries however, the project Web site also includes a wealth of multimedia
               materials, including image, sound, video, and interactive map resources. But
               Lincoln/Net is perhaps most unique in that it furnishes its users with an extensive
               set of interpretive materials. This approach suggests that historians may play an
               expanding role in the development of digital libraries. It can also provide them with
               a badly-needed means of communicating with an audience beyond their own scholarly
               community and students. This communication can facilitate what one digital history
               pioneer has described as the “democratization of history,” as defined by an expanded
               user group enjoying primary source materials and using them to engage in historical
               thinking .
            A number of pioneering historians have developed online historical materials. Edward
               L. Ayers, developer of the award-winning The Valley of the Shadow Project (http://valley.vcdh.virginia.edu),
               has argued that history may be better suited
                  to digital technology than any other humanistic discipline. Nevertheless,
               he notes that the great democratization of
                  history over the last few decades has not been accompanied by a democratization of
                  audience. The rise of scholarship examining a diversity of populations, topics and approaches in ways
                  unimagined a few generations ago has often left the academy disconnected from the desires of the general
                  reading public. He muses that perhaps the tools of the digital world can help us out of this lull.
               Lincoln/Net suggests how historians may indeed address this lull by building on the
               foundation of online resources that librarians have fashioned .Ayers was among the first historians to
                  explore this promise. With the help of Anne Rubin, William G. Thomas, and a team
                  of lucky graduate students, Ayers built the Valley of the Shadow Project (http://valley.vcdh.virginia.edu/), a digital library that brought together
                  materials that shed light on the Civil War experiences of two counties, one
                  northern, one southern. The fact that all of these materials pertained to a common
                  set of events made the Valley of the Shadow Project more intelligible than a less
                  focused digital library. It also invited comparisons between northern and southern
                  experiences. The project created a sensation, attracting favorable notice in
                  national publications and sparking meaningful debate among historians .
            
            Despite historians’ prominent roles in the development of several well-known digital
               library projects, librarians have been prime movers in the development of online
               historical resources featuring primary source materials. Since the mid-1990s, they
               have used the World Wide Web, digital media formats, and database technology to
               provide a dramatically expanded public with an opportunity to consult books,
               manuscripts, and other resources long restricted in their use due to their rarity and
               fragility. Historically oriented digital libraries, most developed by college,
               university, and other research libraries, have been a boon to these institutions’
               core users: scholars, teachers, and students. These patrons readily grasp the context
               in which historical actors produced and collected primary source materials — scholars
               from a career’s reading in the secondary literature and students from their course of
               instruction. But members of the general public often find digital library materials,
               in spite of their ready availability online, inaccessible in another sense. Lacking a
               knowledge of historical context and interpretation, they find little meaning or
               significance in primary source materials’ discussion of events and controversies from
               the past. Only historians can provide this overlooked user group with the additional
               resources that they need to perceive and enjoy historical source materials. 
            Historians have yet to integrate much of their professional expertise into the
               digital libraries they produce. Many, like Ayers’ Valley of the Shadow, have
               facilitated the use of digital libraries by collecting materials pertaining to a
               specific place, period, or historical episode. But these resources largely stem from
               an idea originally developed by librarians, the idea of access. One leading
               librarian has defined access as a patron’s freedom or ability to obtain or make use of library resources , and to date historically oriented digital
               libraries have afforded a dramatically expanded number of users with this benefit.
               But they provide their users with only a fraction of what historians have to share,
               namely the perceptions and debates unique to their discipline. For generations most
               historians have made the dissemination of their special knowledge a part of their
               work. A significant portion of the work that historians do outside the research arena
               consists of providing concise and polished accounts of interpretations that fellow
               scholars agree upon, or, as importantly, argue about, to non-specialist audiences. In
               classrooms, exhibits, and public programs alike, scholars labor to share historical
               interpretations with audiences. Yet these summaries remain largely absent on the
               free-use World Wide Web. Providing Web users with this knowledge, juxtaposed to the
               primary source materials upon which historians based their conclusions and debates,
               represents a large step forward in the democratization of history. 
            In recent years a number of leading historians have remarked upon their profession’s
               seemingly increasing detachment from public discourse. In 1986 Thomas Bender worried
               about 
                  the declining significance of history in
                     the general intellectual culture of our time
                  
               . Eight years later he argued that 
                  Professional historians are becoming
                     increasingly isolated from the general public and writing primarily for other
                     historians
                  
               . In 1997 Joyce Appleby, in her capacity as president of the American
               Historical Association, insisted that, in addition to their scholarly work,
               professional historians have a responsibility to promote a better public
               understanding of how they go about the work of exploring and analyzing the past. She
               urged historians to 
                  seek every possible opportunity to talk
                     to a non-historian…about how history is produced
                  
               . Douglas Greenberg scored academic contempt for the public and added that American historians faced
               an obligation to give the public the resources necessary to make interpretations of
               the past that 
                  resonate with their own lives
                  
               . Although primary source materials represented a significant component of
               these necessary resources, Greenberg emphasized that they also included 
                  the best work that professional
                     historians are capable of producing
                  
               . A slowly increasing number of historians have begun to appear in documentary
               films and other public programs, and even on the World Wide Web. But many scholars do
               not seem to grasp how the World Wide Web can help them to reach the general public in
               new ways.
            Over seventy years ago Carl Becker dubbed Everyman His Own Historian in an address to the American Historical
               Association. In it Becker called for a living history that would provide members of a broad audience with a
               sense of meaning and identity, rather than a history that lies inert in unread books and does no work in the world. Even as his
               colleagues built a professional edifice around the goals of objectivity, Becker
               argued that history was 
                  an imaginative creation, a personal
                     possession which each one of us… fashions out of his individual
                     experience
                  
               . Recent technological developments have helped Becker's vision come to
               fruition in ways that may discomfit many historians. A brief review of some
               historical materials available on the World Wide Web suggests that the rise of new
               technologies have helped individuals and groups lacking historical training to bring
               materials, often of dubious value, to a significant audience. If professional
               historians do not bring their ideas and interpretations to the free-use World Wide
               Web, this new generation of digital entrepreneurs will provide Web users with a
               variety of historical resources largely unsupported by their discipline’s standards
               and discourse. As increasing numbers of individuals turn to the World Wide Web as
               their reference tool of choice, this situation can only exacerbate historians’
               isolation and irrelevance in public discourse. 
         

            II
            The Abraham Lincoln Historical Digitization Project builds upon the tradition
               initiated by the Library of Congress’ American Memory Project (http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/index.html), the Valley of the Shadow Project,
               and other successful digital libraries and online archives. It began in 1998 as a
               partnership in which a number of Illinois institutions, including museums, archives,
               and research and academic libraries, sought to share historical materials with the
               public. With the advent of the Internet and World Wide Web, representatives of these
               institutions met in the forum provided by a statewide library consortium to discuss
               potential ways in which they might use the new technologies to produce a digital
               library site combining materials from each of their collections. The subject of
               Abraham Lincoln quickly came to the surface. While the Library of Congress and
               National Archives hold large collections of Lincoln's presidential materials,
               resources from his life before the presidency remain scattered throughout the
               collections of individual libraries, museums, archives, and private individuals.
               Among these many collectors, Illinois institutions boasted some of the largest and
               most coherent collections of pre-presidential Lincolniana. The librarians and
               archivists planning the Abraham Lincoln Historical Digitization Project thus focused
               their attention upon this period of Lincoln's life, much of which of course took
               place in Illinois itself. United in a single World Wide Web site, these materials
               could prove extremely useful to a variety of audiences.I distinguish between
                  materials that Lincoln wrote or otherwise created and other materials pertaining
                  to his life and career, including campaign materials and commemorative objects
                  created after his assassination.
            
            Upon beginning work as Project Director in 1998, the author of this article brought
               an historian's perspective to a project facing several immediate challenges. While
               over a century of scholarship and study suggested that a large audience existed for
               online versions of Lincoln's letters, speeches, and other writings, these materials
               had been gathered and published as the Collected Works of
                  Abraham Lincoln, and were soon to be presented on the World Wide Web by
               another organization. A number of project planners had also suggested the
               digitization of large collections of materials created after Lincoln's death as parts
               of celebrated, subsequent, research projects or the larger cultural work of
               mythologizing a martyr president. But thanks to a large grant provided by the
               Illinois State Library (as agent for the Institute for Museum and Library Services),
               the project enjoyed an opportunity to grow in scope. In place of the official Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, staff members identified
               an earlier compilation of Lincoln's works, prepared by his personal secretaries in
               the late nineteenth century and therefore in the public domain . These provided a core comprising Lincoln's writings and speeches. But the
               institutions collaborating in the project held collections containing far more than
               materials directly linked to Lincoln himself. Together they boasted extensive
               resources shedding light upon society and politics in Lincoln's era, the context in
               which he lived. These materials provided the project with an opportunity to use
               Lincoln's renown and high public standing to attract a public audience to a
               wide-ranging digital library. They also provided an interpretive framework that might
               make these materials more intelligible and attractive to novice users.
            Abraham Lincoln clearly represents a popular, even iconic, figure in American
               history. The opportunity to reach a significant non-scholarly audience presented
               itself. But Lincoln's iconic stature did not begin with his assassination, or even
               his election to the presidency. During the heated campaign of 1860, Republican Party
               managers identified Lincoln, as yet largely unknown outside of his native Northwest,
               as a rail splitter, a 
                  representative man
                  
                who shared experiences with many average Americans. Like many of his
               countrymen, Lincoln had moved west with his family in search of a better life. He had
               worked with his hands on farms, steered keelboats down the Mississippi, and fought in
               an Indian War. He could boast of very little formal education, and had failed in a
               number of occupations before finding that his talents suited the practice of law. As
               a politician he had lost more elections than he had won, but now had gained another
               opportunity to seize the main chance. When Republican leaders chose to identify
               Abraham Lincoln as a representative man, they hoped that he would serve as a lens
               through which Americans, or at least non-slaveholding Americans, might see
               themselves. 
            Likewise, Abraham Lincoln serves as a lens through which today's World Wide Web users
               may examine and interpret the past, and thus provides the Lincoln/Net site with an
               interpretive framework. His life experiences shed light upon significant themes that
               historians have developed in their discussion of the antebellum period. Lincoln's
               early struggles illuminate the realm of economic development and labor in this
               period, and his role in the 1832 Black Hawk Indian War temporarily placed him at the
               center of the unfolding tragedy in which American settlers removed Native Americans
               from their lands. Lincoln's subsequent legal career brings issues of law and society
               to the forefront, and his well-known political activities outline the rise and fall
               of the Second Party System, including the genesis and development of Whig and
               Democratic political cultures in this period. Much of Lincoln's political activities
               came to focus on the conflict over African-American slavery and, hence, race
               relations. Like many other Americans, Lincoln confronted the period's evangelical
               religion and made his peace with it. Like many other American men, our sixteenth
               president married, raised a family, and wrestled with the nineteenth century's
               rapidly changing gender roles.
            The Lincoln/Net World Wide Web site's searchable databases and interpretive materials
               provide users with over thirty million words of searchable text, more than 3000
               images, and over 100 sound and 100 video files. In keeping with the idea of Abraham
               Lincoln as a lens through which users may examine and explore his context in
               antebellum society and politics, project staff members have added a wealth of
               materials created by, and describing, his contemporaries to the project's collection
               of Lincoln materials. Project users may explore texts including antebellum
               Illinoisans’ letters, diaries, and formal publications, stored in a database system,
               through the use of the PhiloLogic software suite. Developed by the University of
               Chicago’s ARTFL Project and the University of Chicago Libraries’ Electronic Text
               Services Division, PhiloLogic facilitates user searching by author, title, date, and
               genre, as well as familiar string searches. In addition, project users may explore
               subsets of texts corresponding in content with each of the project’s eight themes.
               Project staff members and workers have marked these texts up in a scheme compliant
               with TEI Lite that also uses customized Dublin Core headers to identify resources by
               the above categories. 
            Project image materials include maps, engravings, and early photographs, available
               through a MySQL database using the PHP scripting language. Project staff members and
               collaborators have also used digitized period song books to record performances of
               selected songs. These sound files are available in RealAudio format on the
               Lincoln/Net Web site. They present students and lifetime learners who find musical
               materials particularly instructive with a rich resource. They also provide an
               audience increasingly comprised of individuals familiar with, and expecting to find,
               online multimedia materials with the materials they seek. These song books also tell
               us something about Abraham Lincoln's context, and digital libraries' potential for
               illuminating the past. Historians of American society and politics have largely
               ignored nineteenth century song books as worthwhile source materials. But these
               publications played significant roles in each. Available in increasing numbers thanks
               to dramatic advances in printing technology, antebellum song books shaped many
               Americans' leisure time, time often spent today with radio, television, or video
               games. They also served as important levers for cultural work. Singing of course
               played a major role in religious services, as hymns placed religious doctrine in a
               participatory format contrasting with the Bible's text or a minister's spoken word.
               While a fair share of song books disseminated popular ditties, many others mirrored
               hymnals by setting powerful normative arguments to music. These included publications
               echoing the period's popular advice literature, such as the Young Lady's Songster, as
               well as song books devoted to temperance and other reform programs . Indeed, singing came to assume important roles in
               politics, both cultural and electoral, in the antebellum era. New technology provides
               an opportunity to recreate these important resources for today's audience.
            The Lincoln/Net site also features dynamic historical maps generated by Geographic
               Information Systems (GIS) technology. GIS maps provide project users with an
               opportunity to explore another type of historical resource: statistical data gathered
               by censuses or latter-day social scientists. At the same time that librarians and
               humanities scholars developed online digital libraries filled with searchable
               databases of texts, images, sound files, and video files, geographers and their
               collaborators in the world of systems analysts and computer programmers developed
               Geographic Information Systems. GIS provides an opportunity for its users to examine
               and analyze spatially-oriented materials in dynamic new ways. It manages and displays
               map information in a database environment that enables its users to submit queries,
               which in turn instruct the GIS software to create maps depicting only the types, or
               "layers," of information that the user has requested. For example, a GIS user may
               request a map of a region representing its railroad network, on a specific date,
               alone, without the clutter created by other types of information. That user might
               also ask GIS technology to render a map depicting the railroad network as well as
               results from the United States Census for a particular year, rendered to represent
               population density, for example. This map might facilitate preliminary research on
               the relationship between railroad development and economic development. The ability
               to isolate, depict, and overlay these layers of information makes GIS a formidable
               tool for the integration and analysis of a wide variety of data, and provides
               individual GIS users with a flexibility that facilitates inquiry and research.
                  See ; ; .
            
            In the years immediately following its introduction in the early 1990s, GIS users
               employed stand-alone computer workstations to tap databases and generate dynamic map
               resources. This state of affairs largely restricted usage of the technology's dynamic
               data layering and map generation capacities to professional geographers, university
               professors and their students, and employees of well-funded business concerns and
               government agencies. But by the late 1990s GIS developers and vendors had adapted
               their technology for ready use on the World Wide Web in the form of products such as
               Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI)'s ArcIMS. This development places
               Geographic Information Systems' considerable analytical power within the reach of a
               much larger audience, including, potentially, the users of online digital libraries.
               Much like digital libraries use metadata and full-text string searching to make text,
               image, sound, and video materials both accessible and subject to manipulation and
               analysis for a dramatically expanded audience, Geographic Information Systems unlock
               the potential of spatially-oriented data. 
            In addition to large, searchable databases of historical materials shedding light
               upon Abraham Lincoln and his context in society and politics during his
               pre-presidential years, the Lincoln/Net World Wide Web site features interpretive
               materials discussing Lincoln and these contexts. A brief, original Lincoln biography
               places local and national events in a temporal context. Original interpretive essays
               using episodes from Lincoln's life also present a public audience with an overview of
               the literature in each of eight fields: Frontier Settlement, Economic Development and
               Labor; Native American Relations; Law and Society; Political Development;
               African-Americans and White Americans' Racial Attitudes; Religion and Culture; and
               Women's Experience and Gender Roles. Lincoln/Net also features streaming video files
               in which leading historians discuss episodes in Lincoln's life as they relate to
               major themes in their scholarly publications.
            Lincoln/Net’s interpretive materials, prepared by project staff members and other
               scholars, provide project users with an opportunity to locate primary source
               materials in what one scholar has called webs of significance.
               Over thirty years ago the influential sociologist Clifford Geertz argued 
                  that man is an animal suspended in webs
                     of significance he himself has spun. I take culture to be those webs, and the
                     analysis of it to be therefore not an experimental science in search of law but
                     an interpretive one in search of meaning
                  
               .The author would like to thank Edward L. Ayers for introducing him to
                  Clifford Geertz' concept of webs of
                     significance, although he believes that he has interpreted its
                  importance in the development of online historical materials differently from Dr.
                  Ayers. These webs run through and envelop the primary sources at several
               levels. In one sense, Lincoln and other individuals and groups in his era created
               webs with their discussions of their lives and surroundings. These webs emerge in the
               primary sources featured in the project databases. The traditions and discourses in
               which historians have analyzed and discussed these sources and what they may reveal
               represent webs of significance as well. In their work scholars have produced an
               interlocking and overlapping set of texts and spoken-word events, many referring to
               each other, that enable their audience to imagine the past in specific ways. 
            Historians' interpretive work situates historical actors and the materials that they
               created within these webs by emphasizing different portions of the historical record
               and explicating selected aspects of the actors’ experience. Individual works may
               analyze actions and events with special emphasis upon the social, or the cultural, or
               the political context in which they took place, and frame their argument and
               methodology through a discussion of works in this field. Scholars interested in
               different aspects of historical experience often find meaning in, and highlight,
               divergent portions of the source materials. For example, American historians who
               introduced a new focus on social history in the 1970s identified and worked with a
               very different set of source materials from their predecessors. The political,
               intellectual, and diplomatic historians who had dominated the discipline in previous
               decades largely drew upon state papers and the work of well-known intellectuals and
               policy-makers. The new generation of social historians dug into records, long
               considered largely insignificant, that shed light upon the lives of minorities,
               working people, and women. They also employed quantitative techniques drawing upon
               census returns and other statistics. By the 1990s another generation of scholars had
               begun to explore the connections between society and politics in light of the new
               social history. 
            These structures provide World Wide Web users with a variety of interpretations of
               historical materials, and ask them to weigh the available evidence in order to assess
               their persuasive power. But these interpretive schemes need not be mutually
               exclusive. The Web enables librarians, historians, and other collaborators to present
               what Janet Murray has called 
                  the kaleidoscopic canvas that can
                     capture the world as it looks from many perspectives — complex and perhaps
                     ultimately unknowable but still coherent
                  
               . Online historical resources composed of digital library materials selected to
               illuminate specific aspects of historical experience, matched with historians'
               interpretations of these problems or themes, offer the possibility of fulfilling the
               new technologies' democratic promise by prompting World Wide Web users to become
               their own historians. Ayers’ student, colleague, and collaborator William G. Thomas,
               III places this goal at the center of digital historians’ agenda when he notes that
                  We…are trying to democratize history
                  with our projects. As he puts it, 
                  We want to give students and others
                     access to the materials of the past, allowing them to engage in the process of
                     doing history…
                  
               . 
            This democratizing initiative traces its roots back to at least two major movements
               in the historical profession. First, public historians, or those historians working
               outside of academia in museums, historic sites, or other public forums, argue that
               they seek to enable their patrons to think historically, to explore the complexity
               and contingency of change over time. In 1978 Robert Kelley, a leader in establishing
               the nation's first public history program at the University of California, Santa
               Barbara, argued that his students brought the historical method to the public .
               Another public historian has argued that he and his colleagues can help laymen 
                  learn to participate in the research
                     process
                  
               . At the very least, they share the basic goal of encouraging people to think about the past for
                  themselves (Karamanski, quoted in Cole 1994, 17). Public historians' exhibits and programs
               have realized these goals in that they have brought selected primary source materials
               and artifacts, framed by scholars' interpretations in broad outline, to public
               audiences .
            Second, historians concerned with classroom education have promoted an ideal of
               "active learning" using primary source materials. Deanne Shiroma has summarized this
               line of thinking by arguing that 
                  As students work with primary sources,
                     they have the opportunity to do more than just absorb information; they can
                     also analyze, evaluate, recognize bias and contradiction, and weigh the
                     significance of evidence presented by the source
                  
               . Randy Bass and Roy Rosenzweig add that 
                  The analysis of primary sources, and the
                     structured inquiry learning process that is often used in such examinations,
                     are widely recognized as essential steps in building student interest in
                     history and culture and helping them understand the ways that scholars engage
                     in research, study, and interpretation
                  
               . They go on to add that virtually all
                  versions of the national standards for social studies and history call for
               the use of primary source materials in an active learning environment . 
            Digital materials built around librarians’ concept of access thrive in institutional
               settings like schools, colleges, and universities, where students can bring knowledge
               gained through classroom instruction and reading lists to bear in the crucial
               formulation of their queries. This intellectual capital, amplified through teachers'
               workshops and the other professional development events, greatly facilitates
               students’ becoming their own historians. But members of the general public using the
               World Wide Web for educational purposes, or lifetime learners, usually
               encounter an online archive in far different circumstances, and with quite different
               needs, than student groups. Unlike enrolled students, these individuals and groups
               usually lack any recourse to instruction or other forms of historical expertise that
               may inform their exploration of a digital library. The more diligent and/or ambitious
               among them may find a wealth of stimulating materials on the Valley of the Shadow
               Project World Wide Web site, but they will largely rely upon their own interests,
               formed from personal experience, to guide their database queries. Some may employ
               historical training they received in high school or college classrooms. But many
               others will shy away, intimidated, from its mass of data. One reviewer of the Valley
               of the Shadow Project World Wide Web site noted that it fails 
                  to outline conceptual frameworks through
                     which a user might approach the archive
                  
               . Another remarked that 
                  To get much out of…the Web site…users
                     must have a prior notion of what kind of information they are looking
                     for
                  
               . As the historian Roy Rosenzweig has concluded, 
                  While digital collections may put
                        the novice in the
                        archive, he or she is not so likely to know what to do there
                  
               .
            Lincoln/Net’s interpretive resources provide Web users, and especially lifetime
               learners, with a new level of access to primary source materials, complementing the
                  freedom or ability to obtain or make use of them. The Oxford English
               Dictionary suggests other aspects to the concept of accessibility. It defines
                  accessible as able to be (readily)
                  understood or appreciated. In order to enable users outside the
               educational community to understand and appreciate their collected materials,
               Lincoln/Net furnishes its users with more than the opportunity to examine excellent
               digital reproductions of primary source materials, or even a metadata scheme
               reflecting the state of academic discourse. It also provides users with accounts and
               summaries of this discourse itself, laying out both the events that they discuss and
               scholars' various interpretations of them. A new generation of online historical
               resources, matching historians' ability to frame and pose historical questions and
               debates with digital libraries' new technologies, can make historical materials more
               fully accessible to the general public. Armed with these tools, members of the public
               can begin to engage in the process of doing history.
            
            Professional historians may instinctively recoil from presenting members of the
               general public with such a custom made opportunity to comb over their research
               methods and findings as an affront to their authority. But historians must surely
               believe that in the vast majority of cases this phenomenon will serve to buttress
               that authority by demonstrating historians' judicious use of the evidence. By
               injecting themselves into the rapidly widening historical forum that the World Wide
               Web represents, historians can win new significance in the formation of public
               historical consciousness, and contribute to the general public's ability to come to
               understandings of the past fashioned from their individual experience. These
               understandings will serve to bridge the gap between scholars' interpretations, long
               available only in monograph or article format, and the literate public. Developed
               from their own analysis of primary source materials and evaluations of scholars'
               interpretations, they may also provide individuals with the sense of meaning and
               identity that Becker sought. 
         

            III
            If Lincoln/Net represents a departure from digital archives and libraries featuring
               primary sources alone, it also diverges from the vast majority of other World Wide
               Web sites providing historical interpretation. With the rise of the Web a new
               generation of online entrepreneurs rushed to furnish its users with a wide variety of
               online resources on which advertising might appear. As is the case in a number of
               other disciplines and subjects, these Web sites have become for many Americans a
               principal source of information. Today many students, lifelong learners, and other
               members of the public turn to the World Wide Web or, more specifically, the
               ubiquitous Google search engine, for a wide variety of data and interpretation.
               Recent research in library science shows that 
                  Google, or similar web search engines,
                     is the information finding tool of first choice for many users - far ahead of
                     proprietary online services or libraries and light years ahead of print
                     sources
                  
               . One educator allowed that 
                  Our librarians are fully aware that
                     Google is our students', our faculty's, and sometimes our own first choice to
                     find information…. Everyone starts with Google except librarians
                  
               . Google provides its users with lists of Web materials in response to words,
               terms, or phrases that they have typed into its search interface, ranking these
               materials' potential usefulness principally by two criteria: their total number of
               users, and the number of times that other Web pages have provided links to them.
               World Wide Web sites that appear among Google's first responses to a simple, broad
               query appear there because they have received significant attention on the Web. Their
               position on the crucial first page, or even first several pages, of Google’s
               retrievals will of course contribute to their continued popularity. Also see
                     . For an analysis of how Google ranks web sites for
                  its users, see . For a discussion of how to assess online
                  historical materials, see the Public History Resource Center's "Evaluating Web
                  Sites" at http://www.publichistory.org/evaluation/index2.html. 
            
            World Wide Web users employing general terms like American History, Civil
                  War, and Woman Suffrage, can unearth a diverse collection of resources
               comprised in part of online digital libraries produced by academic and historical
               institutions. These searches more readily direct users to a set of materials produced
               by individuals and business enterprises outside the library, historical, and archival
               professions, however. Some of these Web sites mix a smattering of digitized primary
               source materials and interpretation with advertising and promotional materials and a
               plethora of links to other, similar sites. Many contain no primary sources at all.
               Librarians and historians have noted that these sites present users with the
               challenge of assessing their reliability. But they are attracting far more online
               visitors than digital libraries governed by professional standards. See ; ; .
            
            A review of a number of these Web sites provides a snapshot of professional
               historians' relative standing on the World Wide Web today. In response to a search
               for materials pertaining to American History, Google produced a list topped by
                  http://americanhistory.about.com. The larger About.com Web site contains
               the following welcome: Each month more that
                  20 million people visit About.com. Whether it be home repair and decorating ideas,
                  recipes, movie trailers, or car buying tips, our Guides offer practical advice and
                  solutions for every day life. About.com developers go on to describe their
               approach to distributing content: 
                  About.com was founded in 1997 with the
                     simple premise, that people are the best Guides to the Internet…Today, when you
                     read an article on About.com, you are tapping into a powerful network of 475
                     Guides — smart, passionate, accomplished people who are experts in their
                     field…
                  
                About.com's top-ranked American History page features an introductory
               statement from Martin Kelly, your Guide to
                  American History. A summary of Kelly's qualifications reveals that he
               holds a B.A. and M.A. from the University of Florida. He has worked as a secondary
               school Social Studies teacher for eight years and is currently at work on the
               Advanced Placement American History Course for the Florida Online High School. Mr.
               Kelly is clearly a credentialed and industrious educator. But the Web site that he
               administers quickly reveals clear signs of its place within a larger media conglomerate.
                  http://www.about.com identifies itself as
                  a part of The New York Times Company.
            
            The About.com American History site itself attempts to provide coverage of a wide
               variety of periods and themes, but lacks a comprehensive organizational scheme. A
               brief investigation of available materials reveals that the site principally provides
               a series of links to other online historical resources, some hosted by universities
               and colleges. A few contain primary source materials. A click on the link entitled
                  Wars and Diplomacy produces a
               list of three recommended resources, including Top American History War Movies, apparently selected
               by Mr. Kelly. A click on Government and
                  Politics yields a list of two resources: Political Humor and U.S. Government Information and Resources. The list of
                  Political Humor materials
               emphasizes current events, leading with a story entitled Video makers famous for filming women flashing their breasts
                  plan to donate revenues from Girls Gone Wild episodes
                  tied to Mardi Gras to help Hurricane Katrina victims, CNN reports.
               About.com developers clearly try to repackage existing Web resources, including
               current events journalism, as historical materials. But, perhaps more significantly,
               they find no place for professional historians. Neither the About.com site, nor any
               Web site to which it provided a link, featured the work of a professional historian,
               either in selecting materials or interpreting them . 
            The HistoryNet.com and U-s-history.com also appeared in the top ten responses to a
               search for American History. The HistoryNet.com site boasts that it delivers the deepest and broadest collection of
                  articles from leading writers and historians, accessible to novices and students
                  as well as experts. A review of available materials reveals that the
               Primedia History Group, the world's
                  largest publisher of history magazines provides TheHistoryNet with a steady flow of high-quality
                  editorial content and the authoritative input of editors who are among the leaders
                  in their respective fields. A search for this content leads to a toolbar
               prominently displayed atop the HistoryNet.com page, which serves to direct users to a
               set of activities quite at odds with finding actual historical materials: Subscribe, Renew, Shop, Classifieds,
                  Forums, Book Reviews. Of these activities, Forums provides access to online web logs, each
               directly tied to a Primedia publication .
            The Historical Text Archive appeared at number nine on Google's list of materials.
               Its opening page announces The HTA publishes high quality articles, books, essays,
                  documents, historical photos, and links, screened for content, for a broad range
                  of historical subjects (http://historicaltextarchive.com, accessed September 22, 2005). Cutting
               directly to the chase, the HTA's front page also declares that it contains 682
                  articles, 68 books, and 5938 links. A review of a number of these materials
               reveals that the site attempts to provide materials pertaining to a dizzying array of
               historical themes and periods. Many of these articles consist of primary source
               materials, including Lincoln's Second Inaugural. They also include the work of
               professional historians, including Russell F. Weigley's The
                  Civil War as Fought in the West: Was It Different?, a detailed discussion
               supported by a wealth of footnotes. This document takes the form of a scholarly
               article or book chapter, yet appears without citation, again leading to questions
               about copyright infringement.
            However, the authority of the Historical Text Archive is compromised by its inclusion
               of materials which, though presented as part of the site’s historical content (in
               sections entitled Other History Articles and Informative Articles), in
               fact serve to guide the user to commercially sponsored links. A review of these
               materials, listed under headings including Black Lights and Cell Phones
               shows a series of broadly informational discussions of these devices, framed by the
               same attractive graphics that accompany the site’s primary sources and professional
               historians' interpretations — but including, in most cases, several links to
               commercial web sites selling the product in question. Many World Wide Web sites rely
               upon advertising revenue in order to make materials freely available to the public.
               Created by Donald F. Mabry, an historian and administrator at Mississippi State
               University, the Historical Text Archive represents the work of a professional
               historian, and it presents a significant amount of valuable historical materials. But
               the Archive's presentation of purportedly informational materials that in fact serve
               to introduce and direct its users to advertising sites badly undermines its
               credibility.
             Online historical materials thus run the gamut from the Library of Congress'
               impeccably documented, well-organized American Memory
               projects to TheHistoryNet's transparent attempts to market its paper publications.
               Somewhere in between lies Donald Mabry's attempts to support his Historical Text
               Archive through online advertising. Many American Memory collections feature largely
               bibliographical introductions presumably prepared by librarians. But well-funded,
               sophisticated digital libraries and home-made Web sites alike present American
               History to a vast public largely without scholars' queries, interpretations, and
               debates.
            Professional historians cut a negligible profile on the World Wide Web. While most
               university and college students and faculty enjoy access to their monographs and
               articles in for-pay online formats, the rankings in Google search responses suggest
               that large numbers of individuals not attached to institutions of higher learning
               (and likely many who are) often make use of the variety of other online historical
               resources discussed above. While most historians have largely ignored the World Wide
               Web, the rise of new technologies has undermined long-standing structures and
               hierarchies of authority. Independent journalists and bloggers using the Web have
               caused untold headaches for political campaigns and, in the case of individuals
               discrediting Dan Rather's investigation of George W. Bush's National Guard service,
               humbled a major news organization . These
               developments have also leveled the playing field in the world of intellectual and
               cultural life. Digital technology and cheap, widely available home computers and
               scanners enable anyone with access to a library to digitize texts, images, and
               multimedia materials. The Web itself has allowed anyone with the ability to design a
               Web site and access to an Internet Service Provider to offer their ideas to the
               world. These individuals and groups include history enthusiasts and digital
               entrepreneurs who have provided the public with a new set of popular historical Web
               sites. In part because professional historians have produced so few online resources
               examining significant historical events, many laymen turn to these resources for
               their knowledge of the past. Lacking the command of historical details necessary to
               evaluate these sites' reliability, their users often consult resources that most
               historians would find highly dubious, at best. This unfolding technological and
               social dynamic challenges historians' authority in the public eye. It also obliges
               them to step forward and share their ideas and interpretations with the public. 
         

            IV
            The rise of online digital libraries and archives like the Library of Congress'
               American Memory projects or the Valley of the Shadow Project has enabled scholars,
               educators, and students to explore primary source materials far more readily than
               ever before. Only a few years ago an individual found him or herself obliged to
               travel to a library or archive, and often a single, specific library or archive, in
               order to examine these sources. Today, the World Wide Web's expanding reach provides
               many of these individuals with an opportunity to examine these materials at their
               leisure. But high quality digital library projects reflect only a portion of new
               historical materials available on the World Wide Web. Many Americans make use of
               sites developed by amateurs or commercial concerns seeking to use historically
               oriented content to attract web users. Too often About.com, TheHistoryPlace.com, and
               other, similar resources provide shallow, unfocused, and undocumented collections of
               historically oriented materials. From a scholar's point of view, they do not provide
               significant educational resources. Their significance lies rather in the way that
               they have democratized history in a way quite unlike what Ayers and Thomas imagined.
               These materials' rapid emergence online have truly made everyman his own historian. Carl Becker imagined
               laymen thinking about history in new ways that enabled them to relate scholars'
               accounts of past events to their own experiences and identity. Today everyman not
               only locates obscure historical documents on the World Wide Web; everyman produces
               his or her own historical Web site. These online resources illustrate the impact of
               the last decade's pervasive set of technological changes more fully than librarians’,
               and a few prescient historians,' production of digital libraries. 
            Technology’s pervasive democratization of history cuts against the grain of the
               historical profession’s development. In the twentieth century historians defined
               themselves as professionals in part by largely removing themselves from public
               discourse. Moving away from the work of the nineteenth century's more literary
               historians, professionalizing scholars increasingly devoted themselves to a new ethos
               emphasizing objectivity, research, and the expansion of knowledge. This orientation
               led historians to produce articles, monographs, and book reviews speaking almost
               exclusively to a limited audience of fellow professionals. In an era marked by rapid
               technological changes, increasing functional specialization, and the rise of large
               bureaucracies, historians devoted themselves to establishing a hierarchy of what one
               scholar has called 
                  sound opinion
                  
               . In the first half of the twentieth century, a period marked by considerable
               deference to experts, this approach gained historians considerable cultural
               authority. But in the postwar era Americans increasingly came to doubt and challenge
               their experts. A variety of factors, including the arrival of a generation of GI Bill
               students on college campuses and the United States' Cold War emphasis upon funding
               higher education, combined to convince historians that their disengagement from
               public discourse produced large rewards. But as politicians and taxpayers
               increasingly demanded that public universities educate more students with less state
               financial support, historians' isolation from the public became a liability. Today,
               historians increasingly find themselves obliged to prove their value to the public
                  . 
            The new technologies that have helped to produce an array of dubious historically
               oriented materials on the World Wide Web can contribute to democratizing history by
               taking up the challenges posed by Appleby, Greenberg and, ultimately, Becker. They
               can provide a vast public with a more complete set of historical materials, including
               both primary resources and historians' interpretations of them. Historians’ concise
               descriptions and accounts of the circumstances in which individuals and groups
               created materials comprising the historical record can lay out a series of events
               allowing users to place individual source materials, and the events that they
               describe, in a temporal context. These accounts can also illuminate significant
               themes and arguments that have emerged from historians' evaluation of primary
               materials. Each of these interpretive elements provides digital library users with a
               framework within which they may begin to examine and assess elements of the
               historical record. These frameworks, or webs of significance, represent a new level
               of access to primary source materials, providing users with expanded ability to
               understand and appreciate them. 
            The World Wide Web provides an ideal platform for historians to reach out to a broad,
               public audience and show how their work pertains to, and enriches, Americans' lives.
               This approach represents an attempt to realize Thomas Bender's vision of a civic professionalism. He argues that,
               in seeking to reach a public audience, 
                  the point is not to displace the
                     traditional scholarly question; rather we must think more clearly about its
                     most fruitful relation to general education and the public world
                  
               . In 1994, when Bender wrote these words, he framed the effort to reach a
               public audience as largely a matter of achieving a new interpretive synthesis in
               written documents and other public pronouncements, like lectures. The World Wide
               Web's basic technology enables historians to set aside the thorny question of
               synthesis, at least for the time being. Rather, Web sites examining well-known public
               figures, episodes, or events can place historical materials in a light making them
               more attractive to the general public.
            This is not to say that Web sites like Lincoln/Net simplify history. Like any
               relatively sophisticated Web site, Lincoln/Net can present a multiplicity of accounts
               and interpretations in parallel, enabling the user to draw his or her own conclusions
               or, in effect, create their own synthesis. As Janet H. Murray has argued, 
                  We no longer believe in a single reality,
                     a single integrating view of the world, or even the reliability of a single
                     angle of perception. Yet we retain the core human desire to fix reality on one
                     canvas, to express all of what we see in an integrated and shapely
                     manner.
                  
                Theoretical discussions of multiple perspectives can seem maddeningly abstract
               to members of the general public. But digital history resources focused on public
               figures like Lincoln, or similar topics, can furnish the public with a resource
               providing examples of divergent realities, as in the cases of different aspects of an
               individual’s experience, or conflicting descriptions of single events. But these
               multiple realities may remain largely invisible to the uninitiated person using
               digital libraries containing only primary source materials. Only historians'
               participation in digital library projects, and especially their presentation of
               materials analyzing and interpreting primary sources, can begin to unpack these
               multiple perceptions, realities, and histories for a public audience. These webs of
               significance can help members of the public to begin exploring primary source
               materials for themselves and, ultimately, relate them to their own experience and
               identity.
            If the Web represents an ideal environment for individuals' self-directed exploration
               of primary source materials, it also helps to facilitate historians' participation in
               the collaborative work necessary to produce these resources. Historians have
               benefited from the rise of digital libraries. Many have integrated large new sets of
               online primary resources into their teaching curricula. A farsighted few have
               explored new technologies' impact upon historical scholarship. But, to date, most
               academic historians have largely ignored these technologies' implications for their
               own roles in public life. In doing so, they have failed the American public. They
               have also failed their own self-interest. Academic historians can use the rapid
               technological changes that are shaping our society to demonstrate how their
               scholarship and debates relate to the general public and encourage critical thought -
               in other words, demonstrate their value to society. If they do not, they may soon
               confront significant portions of the American public relying on amateurs'
               undocumented online historical materials. They may also find themselves increasingly
               marginalized in their own universities and colleges as faculty members' ability to
               attract outside grant funding becomes an ever larger part of academic life. Finally,
               they may find themselves increasingly vulnerable to state officials' attempts to use
               new technologies, in the form of distance learning, to push scholars and critical
               thought farther to the margins in the world of higher education. A new, more
               democratic history is a part of historians' future, like it or not. Today they face
               the question: will they add their voices to this discussion? 
         
