Title:  A Review of 
Volume:  010
Issue:  2
Date:  7 June 2016
Abstract:  
                This review summarizes Limor Shifman’s book Memes in Digital
                        Culture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014). The review parallels the
                    book’s three main platforms, which are also the issues Shifman argues must be
                    resolved to integrate the study of digital memes meaningfully into academia and
                    industry. These issues include agreeing on an exact definition of the word
                        meme, differentiating memes from virals, and conducting more studies
                    that examine the practices and politics behind memes. The review concludes with
                    a summary of the areas for research opportunities for digital humanists based on
                    Shifman's articulation of the basics of digital meme theory.
            
Full Body Text: 
Introduction
In the 2012 Summer Olympics, female gymnast McKayla Maroney was such a heavy favorite
                to win the individual vault competition that the conversation among analysts focused
                primarily on which gymnasts might win silver and bronze medals. Maroney’s presumed
                dominance made it all the more shocking when she fell during her routine, leaving
                her in second place with the silver medal. While on the medal stand, Maroney was
                unable to contain her disappointment and unintentionally made a distinct scowling
                expression — one that was caught on camera and quickly spread across the Internet.
                Almost immediately, a McKayla is not Impressed website
                appeared on Tumblr.com, and countless copies of her pose were remixed into photos
                that showed her (in her exact original pose) in settings that ranged from the grasp
                of King Kong, to the animated moon of Pandora, to the Situation Room during the
                Osama bin Laden raid. A meme was born — one that became so notorious, it resulted in
                a real White House photograph in which President Barack Obama imitated the scowling
                expression with Maroney. It is digital phenomena like these that Limor Shifman sets
                out to study and explain in her book Memes in Digital
                    Culture.
As a prerequisite to discussing Shifman’s book, we should first review the origin of
                the word meme. In his 1976 book The Selfish Gene
                (republished in 2006), Richard Dawkins truncated the Greek word mimeme (which
                means something imitated) to coin the simpler (and perhaps more memetic) word
                    meme, which he defines as a
                    unit of cultural transmission — in other words, a melody, idea,
                catchphrase, clothing fashion, or any concept that spreads person to person . However, while Dawkins’s theories on memes
                explain the phenomenon of imitating sounds and ideas directly from person to person,
                Dawkins himself could never have anticipated the explosion of digital memes that
                would eventually proliferate on the Internet. In fact, Dawkins’s theories on memes
                remained dormant until the late 1990s, when memes became easily digitized and could
                quickly propagate at the click of a button .
                With the advent and popularity of digital photo and video editors enabling
                participants to easily remix content, memes became commonly associated with the
                Internet and other modes of digital communication. In extending his own definition
                of memes as they relate to digital environments, Kenneth Mondschein adds that: 
                    …memetics has drawn its strongest
                        supporters from the rather more literally minded camp of computer scientists
                        and devotees of Internet culture — not only because the memetic model of
                        human intelligence is similar to the programming of a computer but because
                        memes are a useful metaphor for describing certain phenomena that occur in
                        the online world.
                    
                 With the rise of Internet-based memes, Limor Shifman authored her book not
                only to define the digital phenomenon of Internet memes but also to take 
                    a first step in bridging the yawning
                        gap between (skeptic) academic and (enthusiastic) popular discourse about
                        memes
                    
                . As such, Memes in Digital Culture is a book
                that serves as a valuable conceptual primer for meme practitioners and an important
                preliminary text for digital humanities scholars interested in pursuing research in
                the theory and practice of Internet memes.
Shifman begins her book by extending Dawkins’s original concept of memes to Internet
                memes, which she defines as 
                    the propagation of items such as
                        jokes, rumors, videos, and websites from person to person via the
                        Internet
                    
                . I appreciate Shifman’s definition because it does not constrain the term to
                image macros and other Photoshopped imitations of images that
                people commonly associate with Internet memes — it also encompasses simpler modes of
                communication that could include basic text messages. Another important attribute of
                Internet memes is that they typically share common characteristics with other
                related memes , all which are based on one
                original much like Dawkins’s memes were based on an original cultural component
                initiated by one person. In her introduction, Shifman poses two premises for her
                book. Her first premise is that memes have been ignored in the field of
                communication and should be studied from a communication-oriented perspective. Her
                second (and more complicated) premise addresses two groups who I believe to be the
                book’s likely audience — meme practitioners, who are enthusiastic about the role of
                memes in popular digital culture, and academics, who are often skeptical of memetics
                as an explanation for behaviors in human and digital culture. Shifman believes an
                ongoing debate that exists between both groups must be toned down to allow us to
                collectively ask not which side has the correct perspective on memes but whether or
                not the concept of memes could simply be useful for anything in general . Shifman suggests we must resolve three
                primary issues before memes in digital culture can be integrated meaningfully into
                academia and industry. First, we must agree on an exact definition of meme.
                Next, we must clearly differentiate the competing term viral from the idea of
                memes. Finally, we need more studies that examine the practices and politics behind
                memes . These three issues set the platform for
                the rest of her book.

                Defining Internet Memes
                Shifman continues using Dawkins’s theories to apply the word meme to the
                    Internet phenomenon of imitating, modifying, and circulating digital content.
                    Dawkins explains that, for memes to spread successfully, they must possess three
                    properties: 
                        longevity, fecundity, and
                            copying-fidelity
                        
                    . Shifman applies these same properties to digital memes by arguing: 
                        Online meme transmission has
                            higher copy fidelity (that is, accuracy) than communication through
                            other media, since digitization allows lossless information transfer.
                            Fecundity (the number of copies made in a time unit) is also greatly
                            increased — the Internet facilitates the swift diffusion of any given
                            message to numerous nodes. Longevity may potentially increase, as well,
                            because information can be stored indefinitely in numerous
                            archives.
                        
                     I agree with the logic Shifman applies in comparing the properties of
                    Internet memes with the properties Dawkins discussed; however, trying to tie
                    them too closely together seems to contradict a well-articulated case in later
                    chapters where Shifman differentiates memes from virals. Meme theory as
                    discussed by Dawkins portrays memes as items being imitated and spread without
                    change as a requirement — for example, workers hearing a coworker whistling a
                    catchy melody and then whistling the same melody themselves. This behavior,
                    which Dawkins describes as being memetic, is much like the behavior of a photo or video going
                        viral on the Internet. However, Shifman tackles the
                    potential contradiction and suggests we 
                        turn Dawkins’s definition on its
                            head by looking at memes not as single ideas or formulas that propagate
                            well, but as groups of content items
                        
                    . Using this approach, Shifman offers an exact definition of Internet
                    memes: 
                        (a) a group of digital items
                            sharing common characteristics of content, form, and/or stance, which
                            (b) were created with awareness of each other, and (c) were circulated,
                            imitated, and/or transformed via the Internet by many users
                        
                    .
                Shifman not only provides us with an exact definition of Internet memes but also
                    presents a breakdown of Internet meme genres. She categorizes nine specific
                    genres into three general groups that include the documentation of real-life
                    moments, the explicit manipulation of content, and the creation of a new universe of meme-oriented
                    content . Although this discussion is not
                    critical to defining Internet memes, it is useful information for meme
                    practitioners and academics to use in categorizing their subject matter.
            

                Differentiating Memes from Virals
                Having offered a clear definition of Internet memes, Shifman tackles
                    differentiating memes from virals — the second of the three issues she argues
                    must be resolved before memes can be integrated meaningfully into academia and
                    industry. Shifman defines a viral as 
                        a single cultural unit
                            (formulated in words, image or video) that is spread by multiple agents
                            and is viewed by many millions
                        
                    . However, in differentiating virals from memes, she says we should think
                    of them as two ends of a dynamic
                        spectrum instead of two different entities — after all, a meme often
                    times starts as a viral . When Baby Cha-Cha” appeared dancing to the introduction of
                        Hooked on a Feeling in 1996 (one of the
                    earliest Internet phenomena), the animated video went viral as
                    viewers everywhere emailed it to family, friends, and coworkers . However, when the baby appeared dancing at the foot of
                    Ally McBeal’s bed in a dream on the television show Ally
                        McBeal, the video became a meme. Shifman asserts that 
                        we should think of memes and
                            virals as different modes of engagement rather than as passive versus
                            active formulations
                        
                    . Memes have a more obvious level of engagement because they require
                    manipulation of the original content. But virals, though easy to perceive as
                    passive because we simply pass them along to the next viewer, may also have a
                    level of engagement because the viewer might include their own comments before
                    passing the viral along. Shifman ties her meme-viral differentiation to academic
                    research by drawing on James Carey’s theories on communications as transmission
                    and ritual . Studies on virals tend to
                    embrace the transmission model of communication and are typically conducted by
                    researchers in marketing and politics — fields in which rapid and prolific
                    spreading of content is paramount. Studies on memes tend to embrace the ritual
                    model of communication as they reflect participants’ cultural beliefs and their
                    desire to share values .
                Shifman also addresses viral and memetic success, positioning the subject in
                    terms of factors that enhance content virality and features that are prevalent
                    in memes. In addressing virality, she recounts a 2012 study conducted by Jonah
                    Berger and Katherine Milkman in which the researchers studied the virality of
                    nearly 7,000 online articles from The New York
                        Times. Shifman highlights six factors she coins as the six Ps that explain how
                    positivity (and humor), provocation (of high emotions), packaging (content
                    organization), prestige (of the author), positioning (page placement), and
                    participation (audience involvement) influenced the virality of the articles in
                    the study . To explain memetic success,
                    Shifman separates meme features into those that are characteristic of memetic
                    videos and those that are characteristic of memetic photos. Memetic videos tend
                    to include ordinary people, flawed masculinity, humor, and repetitiveness
                    (actors repeating something over and over) , while memetic photos tend to include a juxtaposition between
                    the actor and surrounding elements (often times with a deepened ridicule of the
                    original) or people in frozen-motion poses (in which a ludicrous posture can
                    make the actor appear funny) . I believe
                    Shifman’s most important theories on viral and memetic success as they relate to
                    the discussion on meme-viral differentiation comes when she discusses viral and
                    memetic commonalities and differentiators of success. Features that are common
                    to both memes and virals include simple packaging, humor, and tools to engage
                    viewer participation. Features unique to virality include prestige of the
                    author, positioning, and emotional content. Finally, features unique to memetic
                    success include memetic potential (such as repetition) and the presence of a
                    puzzle or problem that requires solving (such as figuring out the juxtaposition)
                        .
            

                Studying the Practices and Politics Behind Memes
                The last of the three issues Shifman tackles is the lack of studies that exists
                    on the practices and politics behind the creation and diffusion of memes.
                    Throughout the book, Shifman emphasizes the lack of research on Internet memes,
                    even concluding the book by stating 
                        there are considerably more
                            question marks than exclamation points in the state of our knowledge of
                            Internet memes
                        
                    . However, despite the limited studies available, Shifman was able to
                    offer two chapters discussing practices of Internet memes as they exist in
                    politics and as they are dispersed globally. Of all chapters in the book, these
                    chapters make the most compelling case for the need for future research on
                    Internet memes, demonstrating that memes are not simply a pop-culture phenomenon
                    but that they have a meaningful impact on political campaigns and important
                    social causes. As Shifman argues with regard to political memes, they 
                        are about making a point —
                            participating in a normative debate about how the world should look and
                            the best way to get there
                        
                    . Internet memes can also reflect true political participation. Whereas
                    traditional studies of political participation measure involvement through such
                    quantitative practices as voting and political-party registration, modern
                    political participation includes expressing political beliefs and opinions on
                    social causes through blogging and posting satirical text and media on the
                    Internet, thus transforming the perception of political participation to include
                    the engagement in digital media .
                Perhaps the most obvious example of political participation through digital media
                    came with the 2008 U.S. presidential campaign, on which social media had a
                    profound impact. Additionally, as Shifman points out, digital media proves to be
                    pivotal not only for mainstream campaigns but also for grassroots and social
                    movements. After new media was abundantly used during the Arab Spring movement,
                    the idea of mass protests became memetic in large U.S. cities such as New York
                    City and other areas where Occupy Wall Street
                    ensued. In these movements, 
                        protesters made extensive use of
                            new media for organization, persuasion, and mobilization
                        
                    . Shifman suggests that political Internet memes serve three interwoven
                    functions: to persuade or advocate for political candidates in election
                    campaigns; to empower grassroots activities by citizens; and to provide an
                    inexpensive, accessible, and enjoyable mode of public expression . Even in nondemocratic societies,
                    Internet memes offer a means of democratic subversion, in which citizens
                    manipulate digital media (which is often censored) to carry out messages for
                    change .
                The impact of Internet memes for political and social advocacy is probably most
                    evident in their ability to propagate across national borders and cultural
                    divides. Shifman suggests that memes are rarely confined to a single geographic location and have
                    in fact 
                        become powerful — yet often
                            invisible — agents of globalization
                        
                    . To demonstrate Internet memes’ ability to diffuse globally, Shifman
                    cites several studies that included the dispersion of text (email), photographic
                    content (photo with text), and audiovisual content (video). In many cases, the
                    memes undergo user-generated
                        globalization, in which they are localized, translated, and
                    distributed globally by ordinary Internet users . Shifman’s discussion on this globalization phenomenon is
                    intriguing, given that corporations invest large amounts of money on their own
                    content localization and translation. Shifman states that user-generated
                    globalization has gone unnoticed in research literature  — I believe it is an area of research she
                    should add to her discussion on research opportunities in the final chapter of
                    her book.
            

                Applying and Studying Memes in the Digital Humanities Field
                While Internet memes often serve an entertainment purpose in pop culture, digital
                    humanists can use them as tools to convey messages both within and across
                    cultures and then track them to see how they propagate and evolve throughout
                    their lifecycles. Such a campaign could be useful for studying how different
                    populations and cultures interpret and modify content to serve localized
                    purposes. Similar campaigns can also be useful for simply communicating or
                    promoting commercial or ideological messages across cultural boundaries.
                Shifman discusses both controlled studies and spontaneous meme propagation in
                    which participants used memes to express ideologies and rally support for social
                    and political causes. In one controlled study on verbal memes, researchers used
                    the Internet to spread a gender-biased joke about men, women, and computers that
                    poked fun at the agonies of, as the joke’s title suggests, Upgrading from Girlfriend 7.0 to Wife 1.0. The joke compared
                    elements of the changed relationship, from the male perspective, to the
                    difficult changes users often experience when upgrading software. The study
                    showed that the joke demonstrated memetic behavior, traveling well across
                    linguistic and cultural borders and even evolving into different
                        flavors that reflect the nuances of local cultures. The
                    joke even crossed gender borders and evolved into a version that expressed
                    relationship difficulties from the female perspective . 
                Digital humanists can also see the power of memes in expressing political and
                    social ideologies. Shifman discusses the spontaneous propagation of video memes
                    based on a Korean-pop music video called Gangnam
                        Style, which produced a large number of derivative videos that
                    spanned many languages and nationalities. Even in the United States,
                    participants modified and circulated the video to mock Mitt Romney and express
                    disapproval of perceived ideologies during the 2012 presidential election .
                Creating such a study or campaign is relatively easy with present-day tools and
                    social media websites. A digital humanist can create a provocative or
                    promotional illustration (or derive a meme from one) to post to social media
                    websites such as Tumblr.com, Memes.com, and Reddit.com and then monitor its
                    number of views, comments from participants, and postings of derivative memes.
                    Content authors for such studies may achieve greater success in their campaigns
                    by applying the six success factors that Shifman points out (the six Ps discussed previously) to help
                    influence memetic interest in their content.
            

                Summarizing Primary Points and Exploring Opportunities for Research
                In her final chapter, Shifman summarizes four primary points that she believes
                    merge into a single assertion that we need to take Internet memes seriously
                    : 
                        
                                Though its origins predate its use on the Internet, the word
                                        meme is relevant in understanding a wide range of
                                    contemporary behaviors.
                                If we define Internet memes as groups of related items with
                                    similar characteristics (as opposed to one item dispersed as a
                                    viral), we can study them for both their social values and the
                                    individual voices behind them.
                                We share viral content for different reasons than we
                                    mimic or remix memetic content.
                                Internet memes play a key role in politics and global
                                    cultures.
                            
                        
                     At the beginning of her book, Shifman states, 
                        only a handful of studies have
                            actually examined the practices and politics involved in the creation
                            and diffusion of Internet memes
                        
                    . She brings this claim full circle by concluding with a discussion of
                    four promising areas for research in digital memes: politics of memetic
                    participation, Internet memes as a language, memes and political change, and
                    viral and memetic success . As an
                    academic new to and now interested in the study of memes, I found this
                    discussion to be very useful and believe it can help other academics in digital
                    humanities explore new topics for research. Not only did Shifman’s book help me
                    understand concepts and philosophies on digital memes and virals, it inspired me
                    to look more closely at her proposed areas for promising research and to
                    potentially integrate the study of memes in my own teaching, particularly in my
                    courses on developing online content. I believe projects that have students
                    create and then follow the lifecycles of Internet memes and virals will help
                    teach those students how to use such digital phenomena as rhetorical strategies
                    for propagating information and beliefs, including those that can promote
                    political and social ideologies and influence change in society.
                Through Memes in Digital Culture, Shifman starts a
                    conversation on digital memes and virals and invites others to join the
                    discussion and pursue future research to further our understanding of memes, to
                    which I reiterate her book’s closing remark: challenge accepted.
            
