Title:  German Narratives in International Television Format
               Adaptations: Comparing 
Volume:  015
Issue:  1
Date:  21 May 2021
Abstract:  
            
            This article cross-culturally compares the German remake of the Quebec sketch
               comedy/sitcom series Un Gars, Une Fille ("A Guy and a
               Girl") the the original version by correlating quantitative data derived from the
               Adobe Premiere Pro annotation function on the duration of narrative segments and
               incorporating these data into a an interpretation of family conflict management
               strategies, gender roles and conflicts between the mother-in-law and the the young
               30-something couple as protagonists. The article examines a scene in which the
               daughter confronts her mother's trauma-inducing behavior on her as a young girl, and
               the boyfriend confronts the mother-in-law's animosity toward him. The article delves
               into the background for the transactional, belligerent, and obligational thinking
               behind the family relationship of the German couple compared to the more affectionate
               and conciliatory relationship in all other versions. The investigation postulates
               that the family relationships in the German context must be seen within the context
               of the Inability to Mourn, a major psychological study
               by Margarete and Alexander Mitscherlich in the 1960s of politically salient post
               World War 2 trauma among a large variety of social groups in West (and East) Germany.
               The emotional repression as a result of various forms of guilt, which never
               explicitly surfaced in the confrontations, was passed down from generation to
               generation, while this same, or similar social psychological contexts was seemingly
               not a factor in other countries, many of which had also experienced repressive
               dictatorships during World War 2 and afterwards, in which adaptations of these series
               were produced. Further collaborative investigations would be required to uncover the
               reasons for this discrepancy.
         
Full Body Text: 
The proliferation of global television formats since the 1950s, particularly those of
            scripted fictional narratives and their local adaptations, raise important questions
            about the nature and content of global culture and discourses, and the local
            contributions to those discourses. Each iteration is the result of cultural, historical,
            political, technical, and economic conditions specific to each country, and help
            determine how culturally, aesthetically, and discursively proxemic local narratives are
            created. German producers have long participated in the global format trade, both
            officially and inofficially. The German adaptation of the US crime series Dragnet in the 1950s, known as Stahlnetz, became paradigmatic for a long tradition of German crime shows
            currently still popular, such as the West German Tatort
            (ARD from 1971), and the East German Polizeiruf 110, and
            the plethora of similar shows currently on both public service broadcasters ARD and ZDF,
            as well as their private broadcasting counterparts. Some of the more successful and
            popular ones, such as Ein Herz und eine Seele (1973-1976),
            a loose adaptation of the British series Till Death Us Do
               Part (BBC1 1965-1975), may not be immediately recognizable as an adaptation,
            and some of them, such as Lindenstrasse (ARD 1985-2020) or
               Gute Zeiten Schlechte Zeiten RTL 1992-) may have long
            surpassed the broadcast period of the original and therefore have become shows in their
            own right. 

            List of different versions of Un Gars, Une Fille and
               the dates of their first broadcast. Table courtesy of Avanti Cine Group.
            
         
Some of the more recent prominent adaptations in German television like Verliebt in Berlin (ZDF 2006-2008), adapted from the Colombian
            telenovela Yo soy Betty, la fea (RCN 1999-2001), or Stromberg (ProSieben 2004-2012), adapted from the Ricky
            Gervais/Steve Merchant UK mockumentary comedy The Office
            (BBC2 2001-2003), are more or less recognizable adaptations of the originals. With the
            popularity and expansion of particular genres such as doctor and hospital dramas and
            comedies, it is sometimes difficult to determine if a series such as In aller Freundschaft-Die jungen Ärzte (ARD 2015-) is an
            adaptation of the US Grey’s Anatomy (ABC 2005) as is the
            clearly identifiable Turkish series Doktorlar (Show TV
            2006-2011) of the Colombian El Corazon Abierto (RCN
            2010-2011). 
Less successful adaptations have also been attempted on German television. The UK doctor
            series Doc Martin (ITV 2004 -), adapted for German
            television as Doktor Martin (ZDF 2006-2009) starring Axel
            Milberg, was cancelled after two seasons, while the US sitcom Married with Children (Fox 1987-1997), known in its German adaptation Hilfe, meine Familie spinnt (1993), was less successful and
            unable to achieve the success of adaptations or the original in other markets such as
            the Russian, Argentinian, Chilean, or Colombian. Among the less successfully adapted
            series on German television was the adaptation of the Quebec series Un Gars, Une Fille (Radio Canada 1997-2002). Since the series went on to be
            successfully adapted in a wide variety of other markets up to the present, I believe it
            warrants a comparative investigation into factors which may or may not have contributed
            to its lack of success. The series started out in Quebec as a 6-10 minute stopgap sketch
            comedy show between primary half-hour or hour-long shows. Later, it was transformed into
            a half-hour sitcom-like comedy incorporating the separate sketch segments. While the
            French, Italian, and Spanish adaptations retain the same or similar sketch comedy
            length, most of the other adaptations, including the German, incorporate three such
            sketches to create a half-hour sitcom-like structure. In the twenty-year history of
            adapting the format (see Table 1 for the official versions), it has undergone some
            changes, but still retains its basic structure and sequencing.
The current study will investigate adaptations from the standpoint of creating the
            content and structure of the adaptation as a hybrid narrative subject to analytical
            deconstruction and reconstruction by means of computer annotation software. For the
            purposes of the analysis in this study, Chalaby’s definition of a television format will
            be used, which, even though he applies it to reality and other non-scripted series, can
            also be applied to scripted dramas and comedies such as Un Gars,
               Une Fille. Chalaby (2011) defines a format as a show
               that can generate a distinctive narrative and is licensed outside its country of
               origin in order to be adapted to local audiences
            . Chalaby’s definition includes also a narrative
            component and he refers to the concept used by the Format Recognition and Protection
            Association (FRAPA) that includes a distinctive narrative
               progression
            , dramatic arcs,
            storylines, and trigger
               moments
            . Chalaby cites Michel Rodrigue, one of the
            driving forces behind the international distribution of Un Gars,
               Une Fille, who Chalaby also calls one of the industry’s
               founding fathers to highlight the inherently transnational nature of formats.
            According to Rodrigue, a series becomes a format only once it is
               adopted outside its country of origin
            . A format entails a transfer
               of expertise (Page 3 Top) contained in a set of rules of international and
            local knowledge passed down to the producers in a bible. Therefore, formats are
            hybrid and function as bridges to take viewers through a succession
               of emotional states.

            Bar graph of Part 1 of the Mother-in-Law scene illustrating shot length (in
               percentage) of the scene, with the smaller blue-colored fields indicating the
               transitions between the shots. The longest segments in most versions is the last
               light-brown colored segment which is the confrontation between the boyfriend and the
               mother-in-law. That has been excluded from the German version.
            
         

            Bar graph of Part 2 of the Mother-in-Law scene showing the longest shot to be the
               mother-daughter talk about trauma, a segment which has been excluded from the German
               version.
            
         
There are digital instruments available for measuring shot length (www.cinemetrics.lv) recognizing facial
            characteristics such that male and female characters may be distinguished and their
            screen times measured (http://neurotechnology.com). There are also digital instruments, both
            commercial (Atlas.ti and MMA Video) and open source (ELAN, Anvil), which assist in the
            measurement of different kinds of segments to reveal specific localization strategies
            underlying success or lack thereof. The current project uses Adobe Premiere and Final
            Cut to multimodally compare the German Du und ich with the
            Quebecois original and counterpart Un Gars, Une Fille. The
            bar graph for Part 1 and Part 2 of the mother-in-law scene were developed using the
            annotation function of Adobe Premiere Pro, the results of which were tables of segment
            lengths after exporting to Microsoft Excel. In Excel, the tables were transformed into
            bar graphs that are displayed here.
A multimodal investigation is appropriate since the entire range of modes of
            communication may be deployed in culturally salient ways in order to achieve what I am
            calling, with Uribe-Jongbloed and Medina
               (2014), discursive proximity. Multimodal scholar Kay O’Halloran was a leading
            figure in the development of the video annotation software MMA-Image and MMA-Video. The
            software was developed at the Multimodal Analysis Lab in the Interactive and Digital
            Media Institute at the National University of Singapore and was designed to use a multimodal digital semiotics approach involving the development of
               interactive software with functionalities for systematic multimodal analysis of text,
               images, and videos
            . In asserting that transcription is
            transduction, Flewitt et al (2013: 52), point
            to the challenge of balancing the accurate notation of
               events, the clear description for the research
                  reader, and the transcription format adequate for the research purpose
               while doing justice to the type of data collected
            . According to them, the use of annotation software
            results in reduced versions of observed reality, where some details
               are prioritized and others are left out
            . Television scholar Jeremy Butler, whose book
            employs a narratological approach to the study of televisual texts, investigated the use
            of digitally generated statistical data to study the editing style of the sitcom Happy Days (1974-1984) with the online Shot Logger software
               www.shotlogger.org to measure and
            compare cutting rates of season 1 and season 2 to determine a statistically significant
            difference between them due to the switch from a single to a multiple camera production
               .

            Illustration of the anomalous characteristics of the German version: Notice only
               one part of the Mother-in-Law visit scene instead of the two parts of the other
               versions. It is also little more than half the length of the longer pre-visit
               segments.
            
         
Relevant approaches to cross-cultural and critical study of multimodality in my own work
            use concepts of Jewitt (2016) for understanding general
            principles of multimodality in their interaction with each other in multimodal ensembles
            which are intentionally selected and configured for particular — and in our case
            cross-culturally salient — types of meaning making ,
            especially the interaction of image and writing .
               Bateman and Schmidt (2011) are pertinent for cross-
            cultural film and television studies, since — derived from Metz, Bordwell, and others —
            they explicate the importance of and expound upon the notions of shots, scenes,
            spatiality, temporality and sequentiality underlying cross-cultural film and television
            analyses which include qualitative and quantitative data. Finally, Machin (2013) assists in developing a methodology for
            cross-cultural multimodal critical discourse analysis. For him, critical discourse
            studies represent not only a kind of knowledge about what goes on
               in a particular social practice, ideas about why it is the way it is and what is to
               be done, but also reveal models of the world and why
               these are legitimate and reasonable ways of acting in the world
            . I am therefore multimodally extending the notion
            of cultural proximity proposed by Straubhaar and La
               Pastina (2005) which is at work at multiple levels due to
               peoples’ complex identities beyond linguistic, religious, geographic or other group
               cultures based on dress, ethnicity, gestures, humor etc.
            , whereby audiences will prefer television programs
            that are most proximate or most directly relevant to them in
               cultural and linguistic terms
            . Van Keulen
               (2016) introduces the notion of aesthetic proximity to address the fact that
            certain technologically- based aesthetic components of audiovisual texts go beyond the
            linguistic and cultural systematic patterns to encompass the entire range of modes of
            communication in the adaptation process.

            Screen shot of video clips of nine different versions of Un
                  Gars Une Fille (l to r, upper to lower: Quebec, Serb, Israeli, Polish,
               Ukrainian, Turkish, Latvian, Russian, Bulgarian) showing the use of the same music
               segment at different points in the narrative of the crucial confrontation scene
               between the boyfriend and the mother-in-law. The music indicates sympathy for the
               different characters in or outside the frame in the confrontation. The music cue
               therefore complete changes the focus of identification purely by its insertion at
               different times during the shot.
            
         

            Screen shot of Final Cut Pro timeline with the Mother-in-Law scene(s) of the
               one-part German series Du und ich on top, and the
               two-part Quebec series scenes in Un Gars, Une Fille on
               the bottom.
            
         

            Final Cut Pro timeline with Mother-in-Law scene(s) showing exploded view of the
               German series Du und ich lined up with the corresponding
               segments in Un Gars, Une Fille.
            
         
The confluence of cross-culturality, multimodality and narratology is evident in Jeremy
            Butler’s characterization of the televisual text as polysemic, but he states the
            televisual text does not present all meanings equally
               positively and explains that meanings are adjusted differently through dialogue, acting styles, music, and other attributes of the
               text
            . Butler also points out that the televisual text is
            implicitly structured in a pattern to be polysemic but reflects and supports those in a
            position of political power while allowing space for alternative or contested meanings
               . Multimodal research aims for systematic
            interpretative analysis of televisual and filmic texts by finding
               systems of contrasts that organize and pre-structure filmic devices
            . The assumption underlying the research comparing the
            German Du und ich with Un Gars, Une
               Fille is that different modes and complexes of modes of communication are
            interculturally salient and are the component of a multimodal cross-cultural critical
            analysis.
My own previous cross-cultural comparative research has identified different types of
            adaptation based on similarities and differences in narrative structure, content, and
            sequencing  of various adaptations, including Verliebt in Berlin (2009a) and Stromberg (2009b), and other versions of Un Gars, Une
               Fille. This research created a typology of adaptations which measured
            proximity to, or distancing from, the narrative structure, content, and sequencing of
            the original or many other adaptations.
In a study entitled Narrative as a Mode of Communication: Comparing
               TV Format Adaptations with Multimodal and Narratological Approaches, (2019)
            in a volume edited by Wildfeuer, Pflaeging, Bateman, Tseng and Seizov (Eds.) entitled
               Multimodality. Towards a New Discipline, I argue for
            incorporating quantitative and qualitative narratological data on the content, structure
            and sequencing into multimodal analyses of television format adaptations, using the
            example of the mother-in-law scenes in Un Gars, Une Fille,
            in order to supplement multimodal hermeneutic interpretative analyses as an extra
            dimension. For this current study, I completed bar graphs (see Figures 2 and 3) of 10
            different versions which illustrated the relative lengths and durations of shots in
            percentages of total length of episodes to register culturally specific additions,
            deletions, and modifications made to the different versions to accommodate cultural
            proximity.

            Final Cut Pro timeline illustrating the gaps in the German series Du und ich indicating the exclusion of segments included in
               the Quebec original version, Un Gars, Une Fille.
            
         

            Final Cut Pro timeline showing how the additional segments thee German series
                  Du und ich line up with the Quebec original version
               of that series Un Gars, Une Fille.
            
         

            Screen shot of the pre-visit decision in Une Gars, Une
                  Fille to visit the Mother-in-Law just before the seduction of the
               boyfriend. The intimate and endearing seduction takes place in the couple’s
               bathroom.
            
         

            Screen shot of the pre-visit decision to visit the mother-in-law (Du und ich) to get financial support for payment of a tax
               debt. The decision takes place in the kitchen and the couple displays less affection
               than the encounter in the Quebec version.
            
         
One of the unsolved challenges I encountered when presenting knowledge gained from this
            methodology was the inability of current computer visualizations based on graphics,
            tables, and charts derived from Microsoft Excel to adequately display the complex
            relationships of multimodal knowledge at the heart of audiovisual texts in general, and
            different television format adaptations in particular.
In recent multimodal research on the same mother-in-law scenes , I compared different versions of Un
               Gars, Une Fille and the role of music to guide the empathy of the viewer
            toward or away from different characters in culturally specific ways by slightly
            adjusting length and position of a particular segment of sad music in the audiovisual
            text to that particular character. These findings were placed within the context of
            gender role depictions and applied the dual-concern model of family conflict management
            strategies in the mother-in-law scenes of the different versions. It was thus possible
            to determine whether, in the different versions, different family members deployed
            yielding, problem-solving, contending, or inaction strategies toward the other members
            of the family in culturally specific ways, whether it be the mother-in-law, the
            daughter, or the male protagonist. This is illustrated in the video clip in which the
            same music segment is deployed in different positions of the shot to guide sympathy or
            empathy with a different character.
The story of Un Gars, Une Fille revolves around the
            relationship and domestic lives of a heterosexual, non-married and childless
            30-something couple, who has been together for at least 15 years. Because of its sketch
            comedy heritage, most adaptation contain three scenes of approximately 7-8 minutes
            during which the couple is engaged in activities and conversations about themselves,
            friends, and relatives in a variety of spaces, including domestic spaces at home
            (kitchen, bedroom, bathroom, living room) and public spaces (shopping centers,
            restaurants, bars, art exhibits, in a car, at a police station, etc.). The scene at the
            heart of the current investigation occurs at the apartment of the female’s mother, the
            mother-in-law of the male partner. The scene is divided into two parts in most of the
            versions except the German, and each shot or topic of conversation is divided by a
            distinctive transition which is comprised of music and graphics. The scene is usually
            monospatial, i.e., it takes place in the dining room of the mother-in-law only, with a
            stationary and largely point-of-view camera in which the mother is, to varying extents,
            outside of the frame. The visit to the mother-in-law is instigated by a sex scene during
            which the daughter has to convince the partner to go with her to her mother’s, and the
            scene ends when the couple leaves the apartment of the mother-in-law with leftovers.

            The German Version’s Anomalous Narrative Structure and Content: Transactional
               Relationships 
            All of my above-mentioned investigations excluded deeper comparisons with the German
               version, for the most part, due to the anomalous nature of the German version. The
               chart in Figure 4 illustrates that the German version of the pre-visit scene, in
               which the visit to the mother-in-law is anticipated, is more the twice as long as all
               other versions at 8:14, while the visit itself, divided into two separate episodes in
               most other versions, is put into one episode in the German version, and is thus half
               the length of the others. The anomalous character of the narrative sequencing and
               structure of the German version can be seen not only in the Figure, but also when the
               German version is lined up with the Quebec version on a Final Cut Pro timeline as in
               the four illustrations (Figures 5-8).
            This is one of several structural, content, and sequence modifications in the German
               adaptation which give an indication of the radically different historical and
               political context of family and gender discourses in that country compared to others.
               In most of the other versions, the motivation to visit the mother-in-law can be
               traced back to the daughter’s affection and emotional bond with her mother. In order
               to convince her boyfriend/husband to visit her mother, who hates him and likewise
               hates the mother-in-law, the female partner seduces him with oral sex, filmed
               tightly-framed in a bathroom while he is shaving, brushing his teeth, or cutting the
               hair in his nose. The shot takes approximately two minutes and is usually done in a
               comical, yet intimately positive manner highlighting the affection between them. This
               can be seen in the screen shot of the Quebec version in Figure 10.
            
               Loyalty quality of German version with a primarily obligation-oriented
                  relationship motivation vs. other versions with a more affection- oriented
                  motivation to visit the mother of the daughter.
               
            
            In the German version, on the other hand, the visit to the mother-in-law is motivated
               by an effort to get money from the mother to pay back a tax debt discovered after the
               female protagonist discarded her partner’s receipts needed to take deductions. She
               suggests a visit to her mother to see if the mother can help them out. This
               transactional instrumentalization of personal and family relationships stands in
               sharp contrast to the justification for visiting the mother-in-law in all other
               versions. This story line also forms the narrative arc for the visit in the German
               version since at the end of the visit the mother-in-law merely hands the couple an
               envelope upon which the address of her ex-husband’s tax attorney is attached so that
               they might consult with him later. Even though the transactional nature of the
               relationship seems to be discredited and reproached, the disappointed expectation of
               financial support casts the mother as calculatingly miserly and selfish, which
               resignifies both the mother-daughter relationship and the couple’s relationship to
               the mother as instrumentalized and transactional. This both legitimizes the
               skepticism of the male character while simultaneously revealing traces of affection
               between the mother and the daughter during the exchange. The screen shot of the
               German version (Figure 11) illustrates the difference in atmosphere by the change in
               location (the kitchen), the topic of conversation (tax debt vs mother), and the
               physical distance between the two during the conversation (close vs. distanced).
         

            Obligatory vs. Affectionate Loyalty
            Family loyalty is at the root of the visit in all
               versions, but the German version portrays this loyalty largely as an obligation,
               whereas the other versions foreground affection and the empathetic emotional bond
               between mother and daughter, even though the male character is sidelined in many of
               the shots. Psychologist Müller-Hohagen (1994) defines loyalty as a system of structured ethical demands and expectations
               internalized unconsciously as a family obligation by the child which guides it
               throughout its life . The chart (Figure
               12) illustrates the dual nature of loyalty - incorporating aspects of obligation as
               well as affection and emotion - as it is realized in the different versions of the
               series. In the face of the lighthearted and ironically comical, and, for the male
               partner, self-deprecating reason to visit the mother (he states that men have no principles when the opportunity for oral sex
               arises), the German version closes with a confrontation and argument between the
               couple about how the male partner refuses to take money from the mother. The sequence
               after that shows the couple in front of the mother’s apartment door, with the (out of
               frame) mother looking through the peep hole in a point-of-view shot, listening to the
               couple continue the argument about not taking money from the mother. There is a
               noticeable lack of warmth and intimacy between the couple in the German version
               compared to others, and this behavior is continued throughout the visit, during which
               irreconcilable differences between the male partner and the mother generate
               confrontation and derisive comments from both of them. It is interesting to note that
               important sequences in the other versions are excluded in the German version. In
               these sequences, the male partner exhibits compassion and understanding for the
               mother or the daughter in spite of their differences. 
            
               The cover of the original US-version of the book by Nancy Friday, to which
                  different local versions of Un Gars, Une Fille made
                  explicit reference in many local versions, excluding the German Du und ich.
               
            
            
               The German edition of the Nancy Friday book, references to which were excluded
                  in the German Du und ich.
               
            
            Finally, instances of physical contact between the male and female partners - all of
               which are included in the other versions - are likewise not as prevalent in the
               German version. One of the excluded segments in the German version is a discussion
               introduced by the daughter about the Nancy Friday book My
                  Mother, My Self, also published in Germany as Wie
                  meine Mutter (Like My Mother) My Mother My Self. The daughter in the other versions uses
               this book to introduce the notion of trauma perpetrated upon the daughter by the
               mother, and engage the mother in a discussion about how the mother traumatized her in
               childhood. While there are variations on the activities created the trauma in the
               different versions - washing a beloved teddy bear in bleach by accident, refusing to
               let the daughter take a bath with the father, not giving porridge to the daughter
               before the father receives his own portion during a meal - it is significant that the
               notion of trauma in these versions is an individual psychological condition inflicted
               on the daughter by the mother with no further social consequences whatsoever and no
               trace of political or historical contextualization. In all other versions, the family
               relationship is depicted as a purely mother-daughter problem.
            This stands in sharp contrast to notions of trauma at the heart of psychoanalytical
               practice in Germany, as well as to notions of trauma at the heart of social and
               political discourse in Germany as a result of World War II and the Nazi period. The
               lack of mention of trauma in the German version is glaring due to its prominent role
               in German historical and psychoanalytic discourse. This was intitiated by Alexander
               and Margarete Mitscherlich with their 1967 book Die Unfähigkeit
                  zu trauern (The Inability to Mourn) and led
               to a broad array of subsequent investigations and publications of psychoanalytic
               practice into the role and effects of trauma in the transgenerational transmission of
               historical experiences in postwar German society since the 1940s. In comparing the
               German version of Un Gars, Une Fille with any one of the
               other versions, particularly those from countries whose populations were drastically
               affected by World War 2 such as France, Poland, Russia, Ukraine, Greece, Israel, and
               Italy, the political consequences of the psychological issues should be incorporated
               into the analysis. This would necessitate a much longer analysis than can be
               accomplished here.
         

            The Political Roots of German Psychological Trauma
            Generic concepts of trauma and traumatization focus on individual experiences
               considered potentially life-threatening. These are combined with overwhelming
               feelings of fear and helplessness, and processing is hindered by a lack of physical
               and mental or emotional resources .
               Traumatization emerges after a particular event or series of events which are
               prevented from further processing and social or physical-psychological integration by
               the individual in its aftermath . In the German
               context, trauma discourse has been applied to the postwar experiences of both victims
               and perpetrators of the Nazi period and entails a social and historical,
               transgenerational component that is intertwined with the individual experiences of
               the traumatized and their second and third generation offspring. Psychoanalysts in
               Germany, Israel and other countries have grappled with trauma among the victims and
               perpetrators.
            Hondrich (2011) asserts that 55 to 60% of the
               German civilian population during the war had traumatic experiences, while
               approximately 30% were traumatized. In addition, Hondrich advocates including all
               European societies in the analysis of postwar trauma because according to him these
               societies also experienced trauma but there was no effort made to speak about the
               trauma nor engage in therapies to treat it, even though it deeply penetrated the
               personal biographies of many members of most of these other European societies. For
               this reason, the methodology employed in this comparative study, which investigates
               the intimate trauma-affected interconnection and layering of the personal and the
               political at the root of the encounter of the mother-in-law with the couple, could be
               paradigmatic for comparing other versions of this television format in other
               countries, particularly in light of the fact that other versions make explicit
               reference to trauma within the framework of Nancy Friday’s book My Mother, My Self. The book, while it does not focus on trauma, still
               discusses the non-verbal transgenerational transmission of the contradictory sexual
               identities of being a sexual woman and partner to a male spouse on the one hand, and
               a non-sexual nurturer and provider of emotional security and love to all family
               members on the other. The nonverbal or paralinguistic transmission of these
               ambivalent identities participates in the same socialization and internalization
               processes as the traumatic experiences of the wartime and postwar generations.
            In spite of its lack of its explicit mention in the German version, there are several
               signals of transgenerational trauma transmission in the mother-in-law scene. The
               first evidence is the shock of the mother upon hearing that the daughter has visited
               a psychologist, an event that would explicitly and implicitly violate the efforts to
               keep silent about family trauma and its transmission to further generations observed
               in patients of German psychoanalytic practitioners (A and M Mitcherlich, Haarmann,
               Müller-Hohagen, Bode, and a plethora of others). In addition to showing and admitting
               fear, such visits would reveal the de-coupling of fright from the traumatic
               experiences among the mother’s post-war generation so repressed and denied by the
               subsequent generation .
            The second piece of evidence is the response of the daughter to her mother that the
               two of them never spoke about anything in the family.
               This is a reference to what psychologists Frick-Baer and Baer (2015) and others point
               to as keeping silent about crimes of the Nazis and other
               forms of war-induced trauma. They concluded that this speechlessness facilitated the transmission of feelings of guilt to the
               second generation, who may not have directly experienced the cause of trauma, but
               were affected by its aftermath through the silence of the perpetrator generation .
            The third indicator is the aforementioned transactional nature of the family
               relationship foregrounded for motivating the visit in which there is a noticeable
               deficit of affection between the couple. According to Gesine Schwan (72) and others,
                  Beschweigen or keeping silent about the extent of culpability in the
               participation of Nazi atrocities, as well as about the trauma as a result of the
               wartime experiences such as expulsion, bombings, hunger, fear, rape, death, and
               atrocities against others affects the ability to feel and express empathy in
               political and personal life, develop trust in oneself and strangers, and accept
               responsibility for one’s own life. Schwan speaks of Gefühlskälte (coldness of feeling), i.e., a lack of emotional warmth
               and a sign of a damaged personality which seemed to prevail in many German families
               of the postwar period. Traditional pre-Nazi and Nazi varieties of masculine virtues
               as hardness (Härte), fulfillment of duty,
               self- sacrifice, and refusal of empathy were passed on to the postwar generation,
               which learned to hide their pain, but perpetuated the emotional emptiness induced by
               that behavior in interpersonal and social relationships practiced by their parents,
               which in turn was compensated for by the following generation in obsessions about
               work and pursuing a consumer lifestyle as a new utopia
                inherent in the Stunde Null or Zero Hour
               myth of the beginning of the German economic miracle.
            One shot in the German version is shared among all other versions in almost
               unmodified form, and epitomizes the transactional instrumentalization of
               relationships characterizing that version to a greater extent than all others. In all
               versions, the mother is playing the board game Monopoly
               with the daughter and the daughter’s boyfriend, and the boyfriend is the first loser
               in the game and is thus the first to exit. This prompts the mother to mercilessly
               gloat about beating the male protagonist, while the daughter offers to bail out her
               partner, an impossibility since she has insufficient funds to do so. Still, the
               mother strenuously objects to the daughter’s bail-out attempt by claiming winner’s rights and displays a coarse ruthlessness towards
               the other two. The daughter vehemently protests to no avail, while her boyfriend is
               more than happy to put an end to his participation in the game. While the aggressive
               ruthlessness of the mother’s gaming strategy in the German version is framed as just
               one more aspect of the transactional and emotionally distanced relationship between
               the mother and the couple, in the other versions this kind of behavior is mitigated
               by other shots in which the mother and daughter are shown emotionally bonding over
               photographs, a shot that is missing in the German version. In addition, a further
               segment in the other versions features the boyfriend agreeing with the mother that
               she should rent out the daughter’s former room in the house/apartment, while the
               German version modifies the debate such that the mother appears to prefer the money
               to maintaining the daughter’s legacy in the house.
            All of the above-mentioned indicators point to the disturbed dialog between the
               generations, a dialog which Schwan (1997:
                  126) considers crucial for the basic consensus of society about values and
               transgenerational relationships. Müller-Hohagen (1994: 45) emphasizes that the dialog between the
               generations was impaired by the war experiences of the perpetrator generation, their
               denial, guilt and silence such that the trust and loyalty in families, which are
               otherwise imbued in the child before its conscious awareness, are undermined by the
               contradiction that the parents are both the child’s enablers and protectors, but were
               also culpable in the crimes of the Nazis. Tilman Moser
                  (1993) underscores the collusionary culpability of second generation
               children in creating what he calls the contract between
               the generations based on the de-realized ideal of child innocence at the core of
               parental silence. Through identification with the parental generation, the next
               generation learned to hide pain and fear. The children spared their parents from
               embarrassing and revelatory questions about their participation in the Nazi period in
               order to uphold the myth of the new beginning. Moser asserts that many of the
               repressed, denied, and manipulated experiences and values upheld by the Nazi regime
               were incorporated into the minds and behaviors of the war and postwar generations,
               but they were also transgenerationally transmitted to the third generations,
               something which he states is becoming harder and harder to recognize, especially
               since much of the transference of this influence is unconscious due to the fact that
               the children of the perpetrators, the passive supporters and victims kept silent and
               remained emotionally damaged instead of working through their trauma.
         

            The Mother-Boyfriend Relationship: Adversarial Animosity vs Begrudging
               Competition
             One of the most important segments in all other versions of Un
                  Gars, Une Fille is the confrontation between the mother-in-law and the
               boyfriend. This segment is excluded from the German version with serious consequences
               for the narrative. In all other versions with the exception of the German, the
               adversarial relationship, mentioned in the pre-visit segment as the crucial reason
               the boyfriend needs extra persuasion to go along, is the topic of conversation
               between the mother-in-law and the boyfriend in the last shot before the end of the
               scene in the first part of the meeting, and helps reveal the reason for the animosity
               on the part of the mother. In this segment, the daughter, who is about to go to the
               toilet, admonishes both her mother and her boyfriend to behave themselves and not
               fight with each other during her absence. In most versions, the boyfriend then
               challenges the mother to state the reasons why she doesn’t like him. The mother
               replies that the boyfriend looks dishonest and untrustworthy, and looks like a polygamist. This statement undermines the credibility
               and justification for her animosity toward the boyfriend since she uses an obsolete
               term for her prejudice that the boyfriend is unfaithful to the daughter and has
               affairs on the side. In addition, the term polygamy is a legal term that is invoked
               when a couple is married, which is not the case with the relationship between the
               boyfriend and the daughter. Finally, the couple has been together for more than five,
               and in most cases for seven years in most of the versions, including the German, so
               the couple is clearly in a long-term, committed, and stable family-like relationship
               that the mother is obviously unable to accept because they are not officially
               married.
            In the German version of this series, the reason for the animosity between the mother
               and the boyfriend is never directly revealed nor resolved in an open conflict between
               the two. Compared to the other versions, in which there are several segments in which
               the two are able to treat each other with more magnanimity, the relationship between
               them in the German version is more adversarial and uncompromising, with merely a
               statement by the boyfriend stating to the daughter that her mother doesn’t like him
               because they are not married, but the mother herself never reveals the real reason
               for her hatred of the boyfriend and the needlessly destructive adversarial
               relationship between them is left unexplained. This could be interpreted as a further
               sign of keeping silent that characterizes the war-time and the postwar
               generation to which the mother belongs.
            If one were to classify the mother as a member of the postwar generation, i.e., the
               second generation of wartime parents, she displays a need for maintaining the value
               of a traditional, conventional marriage in which a child is produced and she becomes
               a grandmother. Even though she herself is a divorcee whose doctor husband has left
               her, she still has no tolerance for ambiguities in the relationship between her
               daughter and her boyfriend. The fact that she is divorced, a status unique to the
               German version since in all other versions the father has died, signals that she is
               at least somewhat culpable in her — seemingly — defective (in her eyes)
               status, while the death of the father/husband would absolve her of any culpability.
               Perhaps she is trying to overcompensate her guilt and culpability in the divorce from
               her husband by displaying her belligerence to the boyfriend, to whom she is
               projecting her distrust of men in general.
            This interpretation could be buttressed by the fact that another conversation in all
               other versions is omitted in the German, which is a discussion between the mother and
               her daughter about a former boyfriend. While the topic is unpleasant for the daughter
               since the relationship between her and the former boyfriend was years in the past,
               the mother still insists on pursuing it in the presence of her current partner, who
               has obviously been witness to this topic on previous occasions. He comments
               (ironically) to both that the old boyfriend must be gay because he maintains a
               Christmas-card correspondence with the mother throughout the years. Even though the
               mother’s remarks are directed against the current boyfriend, it provides a hint that
               perhaps not all men in general are questionable partners.
            It is unclear if the mother adheres to a relationship with her daughter that could be
               what Bohleber (2011) considers to be narcissistic, one which egotistically instrumentalizes the
               children to satisfy the needs of the parent and not guide the children to be loving,
               self-sufficient, and independent personalities with their own identities.
               Psychologist Claudia Haarman, citing Diane Poole, explains several different types of
               narcissistic relationships between mothers and daughters, but it is ultimately
               unclear in the series if they have a disorienting, an avoiding, or an
                  ambivalent relationship based on the depictions in the various shots of the
               mother-in-law scene in the German version. On the other hand, the mother seems less
               emotionally available to the daughter than in other versions: The German version
               eliminates the segment in which both mother and daughter enjoy looking at old family
               photographs together, which marginalizes and ignores the boyfriend. It also excluded
               a segment in which the mother mentions that either an aunt or a family friend has
               been injured in a car accident, a segment that is in all other versions. In some
               situations, the mother seems to be emotionally “available” to the daughter and
               exhibits a semblance of the nurturing role that typifies the role of the mother
               throughout childhood, while in other situations such as the monopoly game, she
               appears distant.
            One particular instance in which the mother appears most distant is when the mother
               announces that she will be renting out the daughter’s former bedroom and requests
               that the daughter retrieve her belongings from the mother’s apartment. In all other
               versions of the series, the boyfriend agrees that the mother has the prerogative to
               undertake this step toward loosening relationship of both of them and letting go. In
               the German version of this series, however, the boyfriend supports his girlfriend’s
               protest against the mother’s efforts at removing the daughter’s cherished memorabilia
               from where she had grown up. The German version combines into one segment two
               different segments of the other versions with the result that the mother is depicted
               as emotionally unavailable to the daughter.
            The aforementioned segment in the German version is a combination of a discussion in
               all other versions about the mother-daughter relationship initiated with the mention
               of the Nancy Friday book, a discussion which results in the daughter in tears because
               of the mother’s insensitivity (and seeming emotional unavailability) to the
               mother-induced trauma. In several of the versions, the boyfriend consoles the
               daughter and is (falsely) accused by the mother of causing the daughter’s distress,
               something which is plainly not the case. Because of the elimination of the
               confrontation between the boyfriend and the mother in the German version, this is the
               only instance of him consoling the daughter.
            Still, if one were to take a comprehensive look at the relationships in the
               mother-in-law segment of the German version and compare these with other versions, it
               seems that in all versions the mother is irritated by the ambivalent nature of the
               relationship of her daughter with the boyfriend. If this were a traditional and
               conventional relationship of a married couple with a child, the mother would
               relinquish her role as nurturer to the boyfriend and evolve into a more equal partner
               with her daughter, in accordance with Nancy Friday’s characterization of these types
               of mother-daughter relationships. Because of the non-traditional nature of her
               daughter’s relationship with her boyfriend, however, the mother seems at times to be
               in competition with the boyfriend for the nurturing of the daughter. Friday asserts
               that the mother will lose this struggle due to the dual role of the daughter’s male
               partner as both a nurturer (in place of the mother) and as sexual partner (which the
               mother is unable to fulfill). Friday emphasizes that both partners see in each other
                  an escape from the mother’s rules, dependence, and
                  control
               . While this is more prominent in the other
               versions — the consolation segment with regard to the non-pregnancy in the conflict
               scene between the mother and the boyfriend prompts a snide remark by the mother that
               it is hard to watch them embrace and be intimate with each other. In these other
               versions, the daughter becomes most upset with the mother in the face of trying to
               determine whether the mother wants to be a friend or a — nurturing
                  mother to the daughter.
         

            Contribution to Digital Humanities
            Measuring the length and duration of the narrative structure, content, and sequencing
               of all different adaptations enables a means of precisely determining the additions,
               modifications, and deletions when making cross- cultural comparisons of various
               versions of television formats. As shown above, it is possible to identify those
               segments and frame these within global socio-cultural and political discourses — in
               this case about gender roles and identities and family conflict management strategies
               — operating in each local society and cross-culturally compare these with each other.
               This kind of methodology represents a multimodal critical discourse analysis of
               different versions which may be applied to a cross-cultural analysis. This kind of
               quantitative data represents an additional dimension of analysis which may be used to
               identify complex multimodal relationships that may be culturally determined, and
               contributes to revealing culturally, aesthetically, or discursively proximate
               multimodal patterns and interrelationships that would otherwise not be visible.
            This study comprises a contribution to digital humanities that applies computation to the disciplines of the humanities
               . It opens new questions and comparative forms of
               analysis of societies and cultures by using computation to gather and compare data
               otherwise unavailable to hermeneutic processing and interpretation. The
               computer-derived quantitative multimodal data on the conflict between the
               mother-in-law and the boyfriend allows us to register culturally significant, yet
               quantitatively slight shifts in the placement of musical cues in the shots of both
               characters, which otherwise would not be immediately revealed in a comparative
               analysis. 
            From a narratological standpoint, drawing on computer-derived quantitative and
               qualitative data on the durations of multimodal narrative segments allows a more
               precise determination of narrative components explained by Jeremy Butler, such as the
               protagonist and antagonist and the amount of screen time devoted to them. For Butler (2012: 25), the protagonist of a film
               is a central character around which the story revolves and with whom an audience can
               identify. Especially in a case where the roles of protagonists may change and shift
               within a series or scene, placing a quantitative value on screen time may assist in
               defining the prominence of certain types of gender-specific roles, relationships, and
               power distribution between the characters. The narrative enigma or dilemma , which represents the explicit or implicit
               question in a drama in the series Un Gars, Une Fille,
               revolves, in this scene, around the problematic mother-couple relationship. We used
               digital quantitative means for analyses to help decide if and how the conflictual
               relationship is resolved in the scene. Even though the German version varies
               substantially from the other versions in this respect, in none of the versions is the
               conflict definitively resolved. However, on the basis of different complexes of
               multimodal discursive components the empathy of the audience is directed to different
               characters on the basis of their identities and behaviors within the particular
               culturally specific narrative of the version.
         
