Title:  
               
Volume:  007
Issue:  1
Date:  1 July 2013
Abstract:  
            
            In this article, Cordell demonstrates the transformative possibilities of large-scale
               digital archives for literary history and bibliography. Focusing on the
               recently-uncovered reprinting history of Nathaniel Hawthorne’s short story, The Celestial Railroad, in the nineteenth-century press, the
               article demonstrates the central, shaping influence of religious readers and editors
               on Hawthorne’s early career. Cordell shows how the best traditional bibliography of
               Hawthorne’s works could be dramatically altered after only a few weeks’ work in
               digital archives of newspapers, magazines, and books, and using relatively simple
               search tools. Such tools not only expanded the number of known witnesses of the text,
               but also uncovered numerous paratexts: introductions to the story, articles reviewing
               or referring to the story, sermons derived from the story, etc. This social
                  text of The Celestial Railroad, Cordell
               argues, lay buried amidst millions of pages that accumulated in the nineteenth
               century and required modern tools to be uncovered. The article also discusses how
               digital interpretive tools can help make better sense of such enlarged
               bibliographies. By comparing multiple printings of The Celestial
                  Railroad using the Juxta Collation tool from NINES, Cordell argues that
               textual fluidity can tell modern readers much about how texts were understood by
               their original publishers and readers. The many changes to and discussions of The Celestial Railroad, for instance, indicate that the tale
               was popular for its perceived anti-denominational message, but nonetheless deployed
               as a weapon in denominational debates.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Taken Possession of: The Reprinting and Reauthorship of Hawthorne’s Celestial Railroad in the Antebellum Religious Press

            Introduction
            In 1847, editor Rufus Griswold published an extensive anthology of American prose,
                  The Prose Writers of America, a follow-up to his
               popular 1842 anthology of American poetry, The Poets and Poetry
                  of America. In both of these works, Griswold collects and introduces the
               works of more than seventy authors he believes will define a National Literature that shall fulfil (sic) our [the
                  United States’] promise to mankind
               . In Prose Writers
               Griswold calls Nathaniel Hawthorne’s writing superior to all else of a similar description in the
                  English language, while in a shorter preface to Hawthorne’s contributions
               Griswold ranks him among the first of
                  the first order of our writers…not excelled in the literature of the present day
                  or of the English language
               . Given the ambitious aims of his
               anthology, this is high praise indeed. However, Meredith McGill calls Griswold’s
               praise of Hawthorne striking
               because Griswold’s selections are all
                  what we would consider minor fiction
               . Griswold ignores the stories that
               modern readers favor, such as Young Goodman Brown
               , The Minister’s Black
                  Veil
               , or Rappaccini’s Daughter
               . Though these stories were available to him, Griswold
               instead reprints four Hawthorne stories that modern literary critics, teachers, and
               anthology editors mostly ignore: A Rill from the Town
                  Pump,
               David Swan — A Fantasy,
               Spring, and The Celestial
                  Railroad.
            
            The mystery of Griswold’s selections, however, can now be at least partially
               explained due to the extensive record of texts and paratexts available in digital
               archives of nineteenth-century newspapers, periodicals, and books. Working with such
               archives — either through basic search or more complex text-mining techniques — can
               enable scholars to assemble textual histories more quickly and comprehensively than
               traditional archival research allows. More importantly, these textual histories can
               differ in character from traditional bibliographies by including primary literary
               texts, reprints, and also the paratexts that introduced, extended, amended, or
               critiqued them. In search results from digital archives, paratexts cluster with their
               parent texts, foregrounding the cultural conversations that shaped how readers
               encountered and interpreted literary works. Simply finding
                  paratexts not directly appended to primary texts within print archives can be a
                  matter of luck. Brief references or allusions to other works within the tight
                  columns of a nineteenth-century newspaper are often not apparent to even the
                  well-trained scholarly eye. If those references or allusions include key terms
                  from the original text, however, the digital archive may well surface them,
                  enriching our understanding of both the original text and its cultural
                  history. In his work on twentieth- and twenty-first-century fiction, Ed
               Finn calls these conversations the social
                  lives of books. Finn mines online reviews and recommendations of David
               Foster Wallace from sites such as Amazon to find traces of popular reading choices which can constitute a fresh perspective on elusive
                  audience reactions to literature, one that reveals distinct networks of
                  conversation that are transforming the relationships between writers and their
                  readers
               . Digital archives of nineteenth-century texts
               expose similar literary networks
               Tanya Clement also suggests the term social text networks in the Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative
                  . In this article, I will use literary
                     networks,
                  textual networks, and social textual networks as rough synonyms to
                  name these sets of interconnected texts and paratexts. around short
               stories, poems, essays, and books, foregrounding questions of reception and cultural
               impact that traditional bibliographies can obscure.
            Digging for one of Griswold’s Prose Writers selections,
               Hawthorne’s The Celestial Railroad, in a range of
               digital archives,For a list of digital archives that have been invaluable to
                  this study, see the Appendix. I have
               uncovered an extensive network of reprinting, reauthorship, and reference that can
               help explain Griswold’s selection of The Celestial
                  Railroad for Prose Writers in 1847 and
               illuminates the importance of digital methodologies for literary study. By the time
               of Griswold’s publication, The Celestial Railroad had
               appeared in newspapers and magazines across the country and made Hawthorne’s
               reputation for many readers. Griswold’s was only one in a series of reprintings that
               began days after the tale first appeared in the May 1843 issue of the United States Magazine and Democratic Review. The Celestial Railroad was not a minor work, but rather a
               central text in the nineteenth-century evangelical canon, popular for its doctrinal
               orthodoxy and pithy moral instruction — both characteristics modern scholars rarely
               associate with Hawthorne, but which were central to his early reception in
               contemporary religious circles. While The Celestial
                     Railroad was published in non-evangelical religious periodicals, the
                  vast majority of reprintings appeared in newspapers and magazines run by
                  evangelical denominations: e.g. Baptist, Methodist, Adventist. My discussion in
                  this article, then, will focus on evangelical responses to the story, though there
                  will be points of intersection between evangelical print culture, the larger world
                  of religious print culture, and the even larger world of popular print culture
                  that was, in the early nineteenth century, often tacitly evangelical in
                  outlook. Indeed, the religious editors and readers — a particular social
               literary network — that embraced and shared Hawthorne’s early work helped shape
               readers’ reception of his later novels. 
            
               The Celestial Railroad is a satirical re-imagination of
               John Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress in light of
               technological and theological progress. The tale satirizes the easy, modern
               Christianity of the nineteenth century. Modern critics have mostly ignored this
               allegory as a quirky story unrepresentative of Hawthorne’s oeuvre. However, the
               larger cultural history of The Celestial Railroad — the
               social life of the tale — has been obscured to scholars until recently. The most
               thorough Hawthorne bibliography, C. E. Frazer Clark’s Nathaniel
                  Hawthorne: A Descriptive Bibliography, lists 22 reprintings of the story
               in pamphlets, magazines, and newspapers through the nineteenth century . Referencing Clark, Meredith McGill notes that a comprehensive list of the reprinting of
                  Hawthorne’s tales, would require a bibliographic feat which is as yet impossible due to the
                  inadequately indexed state of nineteenth-century periodicals
               . While a complete
               bibliography of any story remains out of reach for the reason McGill names, recent
               projects to digitize nineteenth-century periodicals provide scholars with tools
               unavailable when Clark compiled his work. 
            By mining a range of digital archives and non-digitized newspapers that digital
               editions referenced, I’ve uncovered more than 47 reprints of The
                  Celestial Railroad during the nineteenth century, and several in the early
               decades of the twentieth — more than double the printings Clark lists in his
                  bibliography. I’m currently working on a digital edition of The Celestial Railroad that will allow scholars to
                  compare versions of the text and see the editorial changes I discuss here. My
                  current bibliography for periodical reprintings of The
                     Celestial Railroad is available online and in the Appendix. A basic, TEI-encoded version of the
                  original, Democratic Review edition of the story can
                  be found online at Juxta Commons. See . I’ve
               also found several books and stories inspired by The Celestial
                  Railroad and nearly 100 direct references to the characters, settings, and
               themes of Hawthorne’s tale in contemporary articles and books. These paratexts have
               proved particularly valuable, revealing a number of new insights about Hawthorne’s
               early career and his relationship to the popular press. In particular, this research
               has pointed toward a new understanding of Hawthorne’s reception by contemporary
               religious readers. 
            In this article I will examine the editorial changes, introductions, and glosses that
               recast the message of The Celestial Railroad for
               different denominational audiences. I will argue that the religious press valued the
               story for its antisectarian moral and, simultaneously, as a shot across the bow of
               competing sects. Finally, by examining The Celestial
                  Railroad’s history of reprinting and revision in the religious press, I
               hope to briefly suggest a new reading of Hawthorne’s famous frustration with the pamphlet and piratical system
               that he worried, in a letter to Horatio Bridge, forced him to work hard for small gains as a short story
               writer . I hope to show that his feeling of
               being taken possession of so
                  unceremoniously, as his wife Sophia claimed in a letter to Louisa
               Hawthorne , may have been grounded in
               disaffection with the sectarian squabbling that both motivated and sustained the
               tale’s life in the religious print market. Indeed, this disaffection may have
               prompted the one substantial edit Hawthorne made to the story between its initial
               magazine publication (1843) and its appearance in Hawthorne’s short-story collection,
                  Mosses from an Old Manse (1846).
            
         

            Implications of The Celestial Railroad for Digital
               Literary Scholarship
            Alongside my arguments locating Hawthorne in the evangelical canon, I will discuss
               how digital archives of nineteenth-century texts enabled my discoveries about The Celestial Railroad and how digital interpretive tools
               helped me make better sense of the story’s enlarged bibliography. I hope by this
               discussion to suggest how these new technologies can inform future work in
               bibliography, periodical studies, and American literary history. As more of our
               cultural legacy is digitized, through thematic research collections and larger
               archives such as Google Books or HathiTrust, newly apparent historical and textual
               narratives promise to multiply exponentially. Not only will new witnesses of stories,
               poems, and essays surface, but so to will literary networks of reference, critique,
               and allusion that previously could have only been discovered through chance encounter
               or laborious scrutiny. The rewards of intensive, traditional bibliographic research
               may have seemed distant and speculative — a minute return for much labor. Mass
               digitization promises to reduce the time required for such research while allowing
               scholars to move between different scales of analysis, weighing the conclusions
               suggested by individual texts against those drawn through quantitative analysis of
               larger collections and archives — and, conversely, weighing conclusions drawn through
               distant analysis of archives against the telling details of individual texts. Rather
               than close or distant reading, we might
               call this zoomable reading, in which one moves between levels of
               perspective to build a robust argument. Martin Mueller has coined the similar
                  term scalable reading for
                  methodologies in which researchers use methods developed in Natural Language Processing to perform rough mapping
                     operations that are then followed by a targeted examination of selected
                     examples
                  . While I prefer the ocular metaphor of
                     zoomable I am not committed to the terminology so much as
                  the hybrid methodologies both terms represent.  Zoomable reading is
               particularly suited for uncovering and making sense of the social textual networks
               that The Celestial Railroad exemplifies — both the nodes
               of individual texts (close) and the edges of intertextual conversations
               (distant).
            Of course, claims of more, better, faster are unlikely to convince entrenched
               traditional literary scholars to experiment with digital modes of scholarship, which
               is why I devote the majority of this article to the humanistic payoffs of my digital
               research. The discoveries I enumerate here are theoretically quite traditional. Were
               I to remove references to my methodologies, this essay would outline a new historical
               account of Hawthorne’s early career drawn from a range of primary sources:
               contemporary books and periodicals. The witnesses and paratexts I have accumulated
                  could have been amassed through trips to archives and interlibrary
               loan. In practice, however, this study emphasizes the great benefits of working in a
               digital scholarly mode. To build a bibliography like mine for The Celestial Railroad without digital book and periodical archives would
               require what McGann deems unacceptable
                  expenditures of time and labor
               . Finding such a range of sources — including
               many obscure regional or denominational periodicals and many reprints uncited in any
               other publication — would have been the work of years rather than months.
            Of course, the greater expansiveness of digital archives should not be confused with
               completeness. If anything, the paratexts one can uncover digitally can emphasize the
               partialness of enumerative bibliographies. As Susan Belasco points out, anyone who thinks that most historical
                  periodicals are available online would be surprised to learn how many periodicals
                  — especially newspapers — have not been recovered in electronic papers
               . I’m certain that many more reprintings of
                  The Celestial Railroad exist. Antebellum southern
               periodicals, for instance, are less thoroughly represented in online archives than
               northern and midwestern papers. Consequently, I’ve been unable to substantiate
               Moncure D. Conway’s 1882 claim that 
                  The Celestial Railway (sic) was the first piece by
                  Hawthorne that penetrated our Southern Region when it was copied in the newspapers of that region, and
                  much enjoyed as a satire upon the rationalistic tendencies of the North
               . Conway specifies elsewhere that [i]n 1848 the Richmond Examiner brought into our house The Celestial
                     Railroad, by Nathaniel Hawthorne — a claim I’ve been unable to
               verify due to sparse library holdings, digital or otherwise, of that newspaper for
               the 1840s . It’s also quite possible that Conway,
                  writing 56 years after the fact, misremembered or misrepresented the specifics of
                  this early encounter with the story. I’ve so far confirmed only one
               southern reprinting, in Louisville, Kentucky’s Baptist Banner
                  and Western Pioneer, who printed the tale in two parts on October 19 and
               26, 1843 . Louisville’s situation on the Indiana
                  border, combined with Kentucky’s neutrality and then Union allegiance during the
                  Civil War, make this a marginally southern reprinting. The Banner also makes no claims to the piece’s satirical
                  object being the North, as Conway claims the story was interpreted in many
                  southern reprintings.
            
            Moreover, the digital archival resources we have are far from perfect. I could point,
               for instance, to Geoffrey Nunberg’s concerns about Google Books; to answer scholarly
               questions, Nunberg argues, scholars need
                  reliable metadata about dates and categories, but Google’s metadata are a train wreck: a mish-mash
                  wrapped in a muddle wrapped in a mess
               . Metadata isn’t the only problem. The quality of OCR
               across the range of nineteenth-century textual archives is uneven, resulting in
               widely variable search results. Dirty OCR forces more creative
               search techniques from scholars mining archives for specific treasure, and scholars
               must be content knowing their results will be incomplete. Finally, scholars worry
               that so much of our cultural heritage sits restricted behind pay-walls, as are many
               of the most thorough archives of nineteenth-century periodicals . 
            These are all concerns that digital humanities scholars must continue to voice. As
               Wesley Raabe contends, however, an
                  attitude of suspicion toward digital resources can be as harmful as an
               attitude of blithe advocacy: [a] digital
                  text prepared by OCR means, which is inadequate for many purposes, is uniquely
                  able to complement other methods of text acquisition
               . In the case of The
                  Celestial Railroad, OCR texts of widely variant quality have yielded
               significant treasure, especially when complemented by discoveries made through
               traditional archival research. It is worth noting, for instance, that I discovered
               those two Conway references to southern reprintings of The
                  Celestial Railroad in Google Books. In other words, I wouldn’t know to be
               frustrated at the limited holdings of southern texts within digital archives had a
               digital archive not alerted me to the likelihood of southern printings of The Celestial Railroad. That limited digital resources
               helped uncover such a rich story of our literary history should lead us to advocate
               for increased digitization of newspapers and magazines. As Belasco argues of Whitman,
               engaging with periodicals provides fresh
                  ways of understanding antebellum authors’ publication practices and enhances our understanding of
                  nineteenth-century practices of reading and writing more generally
               .
            It is especially fitting that digital technologies help uncover the life of a text in
               the mass media of the nineteenth century. As John A. Walsh points out in his
               contribution to A Companion to Digital Literary Studies,
               the nineteenth century holds a special
                  attraction for digital literary scholarship because its technical
               revolutions immediately generated our own, while the effects of those revolutions
               paralleled the effects of the digital age on society today. Many features of the nineteenth century, he claims,
                  increased literacy rates, the
                  beginnings of mass media, the decreasing costs of publishing — led to
                  ever-increasing volumes of information and the need for ever more sophisticated
                  and flexible technologies for representing and managing that information
               . Indeed, the life of The Celestial
                  Railroad in the antebellum press, as it was passed from publication to
               publication across the country, closely resembles the lives of modern texts that move
               freely among traditional periodicals, blogs, tweets, and Facebook posts.
         

            The Re-authorship of Hawthorne’s The Celestial
                  Railroad
            
            In American Literature and the Culture of Reprinting,
               Meredith McGill argues that the antebellum American experience of texts was shaped by
               the widespread, normative practice of reprinting stories and poems, without authorial
               permission, in newspapers, literary magazines, and other media. Reprinting, she argues, 
                  is a form of textual production that is
                     inseparable from distribution and reception…reprinted texts call attention to
                     the repeated acts of articulation by which culture and its audiences are
                     constituted
                  
               . The Celestial Railroad exemplifies the culture
               McGill describes. The tale was explicitly rearticulated by editors, who often
               prefaced their reprintings with laudatory introductions that contextualized
               Hawthorne’s story for their readers. Not unlike a popular link on the internet, the
               impact of Hawthorne’s story on culture can largely be judged by how often the work
               was reappropriated and recontextualized. 
            In the United States before the Civil War, a significant proportion of any author’s
               audience was deeply religious. It is this religious audience that Candy Gunther Brown
               locates in The Word in the World, where she argues that
               American 
                  evangelicals viewed participation in a
                     textual community defined by an informal canon of texts…using the Word and
                     their own words to influence the world’s redemption
                  
               . The Celestial Railroad did appear in secular
               papers like the Salem Gazette
               , Republican Compiler
               , and the National Anti-Slavery
                  Standard
                but the story moved quickly to the religious press.
               The Freewill Baptist’s Morning Star reprinted the story
               first, less than a month after its Democratic Review
               debut, and the Star’s editors noted it is from the Democratic Review
               while claiming it is worth the price
                  of the Star for a year
               . Denominational periodicals reprinted the tale first
               and most frequently, including the Adventists’ Midnight
                  Cry!
                and Signs of the Times
               ; Commonly known as Millerites after the
                  Baptist pastor William Miller, whose predictions of the end of the world organized
                  this diverse group of primarily evangelical Christians — mostly Baptists,
                  Methodists, and Presbyterians. These believers called themselves
                     Adventists,
                  Second Adventists, or Believers in Christ’s Kingdom Close at Hand.
                the Methodists’ Christian Advocate and Journal
               ; the Baptists’ Christian
                  Watchman
                and Christian Secretary
               ; and the Episcopal
                  Recorder
               . Between 1843 and the release of Mosses in 1846, the story was reprinted in many more religious than
               secular newspapers. 
            Religious newspapers were widespread and influential in the 1840s. David Paul Nord
               identifies early nineteenth-century publishers of tracts and religious newspapers as
               producers of America’s first mass medium . By the end of the 1840s, Brown tells
               us, most religious denominations endorsed
                  at least one periodical per state, many of them privately owned but issued in the
                  name of the editor’s denomination. Brown provides useful figures for the
               larger periodicals market at well: 
                  there were perhaps 5,000–6,000
                     periodicals founded during the first quarter of the nineteenth century,
                     4,000–5,000 in the second quarter, 2,500 from 1850 to 1865, and 4,300 in the
                     1870s, with a total circulation of 10.5 million, or enough to reach one in
                     three Americans
                  
               . 
            In the 1840s and 50s those religious readers encountered The
                  Celestial Railroad in their denomination’s newspapers, magazines, and
               tracts, and Hawthorne’s fame grew in the religious press even as Hawthorne complained
               about his stories’ obscurity. McGill argues that the presumption of Hawthorne’s rejection by the public
                  has enabled critics to regard his early fiction through a highly selective
                  lens, a claim the Church Review and Ecclesiastical
                  Register echoed directly in an 1851 review of The
                  Scarlet Letter. Noting Hawthorne’s own public complaints about his
               popularity, the Review claims, 
                  We think far more highly of Hawthorne
                     than he does of himself, judging by the reflection which we find in his own
                     mirror…you know that Hawthorne’s books are fairly thumbed to pieces by the
                     readers of all circulating libraries
                  
               .I cannot explore the geography of The Celestial
                     Railroad in this article, though I am developing a follow-up article
                  that will do so. Scholars often think of Hawthorne’s early career as regional, but
                     The Celestial Railroad was printed as far south as
                  Louisville and Richmond, and referred to as far west as Madison, Wisconsin — at
                  the time a U.S. territory. For more about my current geospatial work, see the
                  paper I delivered at the 2012 Modern Language Association Convention in Seattle
                     .  Indeed, for readers of the Review Hawthorne’s fame was built not on The Scarlet Letter, but on The
                  Celestial Railroad. The Review notes, we were ignorant of the existence of so
                  clever a writer, until we came across his Celestial
                     Railroad, in the columns of a newspaper and deems The Celestial Railroad
               the most natural production of our
                  author’s genius, which his books contain…It is one of the cleverest, most
                  sustained, and most ingenious specimens of quiet satire to be found in our
                  language. This tale brought Hawthorne’s name into the consciousnesses of
               readers — evangelical, pious, geographically dispersed — who otherwise might not have
               known or cared to know it, so that in April of 1850 the Christian Secretary, while listing contributors to Graham’s Magazine, would refer to Hawthorne, of Celestial Railroad memory
               .
            The digital record of this story’s reprinting includes many similar plaudits, which
               are difficult to reconcile with most modern assessments of Hawthorne. Alfred Kazin
               speaks for many scholars when he claims that Hawthorne should be read purely as a
               religious outsider, for whom 
                  [n]o orthodoxy, ever, permits the irony,
                     skepticism, personal despair — above all else the sense of contradiction and
                     unreality in human affairs that makes up the true storyteller
                  
               . Religious readers of The Celestial Railroad,
               however, valued Hawthorne’s story in large part because of its satirical bite.
               Writing about the American Sunday School Union’s (ASSU) popular tract version of
                  The Celestial Railroad in 1874, The Sunday
                  School Union reprinted Hawthorne’s tale under the title A
                     Visit to the Celestial City. These tracts are not attributed to
                  Hawthorne; in lieu of a byline, there is a note that the story had been Revised by the Committee of Publication of the
                     American Sunday School Union. The tract version was very successful,
                  and was reprinted, essentially unchanged from the original plates, in 1847, 1852,
                  1871, 1897, and 1928. Most of these versions can be found in the Google Books corpus. Though these tracts don’t attribute
                  the story to Hawthorne, Fisher’s remarks here indicate that the provenance of the
                  story was well known to at least some of the Sunday School Union’s readers.
               the Rev. George P. Fisher calls it a curious fact
                  that the Sunday-School Society should be the publisher of Hawthorne. But,
               he continues, 
                  whoever has read the Celestial Railroad will admit that this exquisite satire is
                     well entitled to its place on the catalogue of books relating to religion, to
                     be disseminated broadcast over the land
                  
               . In other words, while religious readers did note with some curiousness their
               admiration for The Celestial Railroad, they nonetheless
               defended its religious value. Its irony was not seen as antithetical to orthodoxy,
               but even instructional. 
            Denominational papers lauded the story’s 
                  rich stores of instruction
                  
               , 
                  the moral it teaches
                  
               , and its 
                  admirable commentary
                  
               , while being repeatedly
                  solicited to republish it by their readers .
               It was 
                  a startling, impressive little work,
                     worthy to be a sequel to Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress
                  
                and a remarkable satire on
                  worldly religion
               . In 1847 the evangelical New
                  Englander journal wrote that Mr.
                  Hawthorne has a very pleasant and good natured, yet successful and effective way
                  of hitting off, or satirizing the faults and foibles and errors of individuals and
                  cliques, of schools, and communities, and ages
               . For the New Englander,
                  The Celestial Railroad was that which, in this respect, surpasses all his other writings,
                  and we were about to say the writings of all but John Bunyan
               , while in 1869 the Freewill
                  Baptist Quarterly grouped The Celestial
                  Railroad with The Scarlet Letter and The Marble Faun as the three works of Hawthorne that were
                  sure of long life.
               . In fact, The Celestial
                  Railroad seems to have joined the informal, open-ended canon of texts that Brown
               claims shaped an evangelical textual
                  community in the nineteenth century . It was frequently reprinted in denominational newspapers and anthologized in
               books for Sunday Schools and pastoral training. Perhaps more tellingly, its scenes
               and characters became so familiar for readers that writers frequently referred to
               them without providing any explanatory context; religious writers in the nineteenth
               century assumed that their readers knew The Celestial
                  Railroad.
            
            This popular history disappeared, however, into the mass of textual information that
               accumulated throughout the nineteenth century, 
                  when the amount of recorded information
                     produced…becomes overwhelming and nearly impossible to process through
                     traditional means, such as reading
                  
               . Searchable digital archives allowed me to recover the social text of The Celestial Railroad, while textual analysis software
               helped me make sense of its fluidity. John Bryant writes that 
                  [d]igital scholarship offers
                     alternatives that can raise the consciousness of readers about the inherent
                     fluidity of texts and the modes of revision that cause textual fluidity
                  
               . Bryant’s notion of fluidity refers primarily to
               authorial or authorized editorial revisions of literary texts; readers should 
                  witness the different sequential
                     versions of a work together as a representation of the invisible process of
                     writing
                  
               . However, Bryant’s insights can be extended also to texts like The Celestial Railroad, which were revised by both
               authorized and unauthorized editors. Witnessing the different sequential
                  versions of The Celestial Railroad offers insight
               into the invisible process of editing undertaken by nineteenth-century
               newspaper and magazine editors.
            When Hawthorne’s original text didn’t exactly fit the purposes of a given
               publication, it was freely emended, and even in rare cases expanded, to better fit
               the mission or message it was intended to convey. Leslee Thorne-Murphy calls this
               phenomenon 
                  reauthorship: a combination of
                     successive individuals writing, editing, and rewriting in a way that shapes
                     anew the image of a single author
                  
               . For Thorne-Murphy reauthorship is 
                  a type of editing that
                     appropriates and refashions a text — a hybrid notion of authorship, one in
                     which both editors and authors are creative and original rewriters
                  
               . Hawthorne’s The Celestial Railroad was
               frequently reauthored as it spread across the United States in the 1840s and 50s.
               Such editions of the story demonstrate not only Hawthorne’s influence on evangelical
               culture in 1843, but also the influence of contemporary evangelical culture on
               Hawthorne’s burgeoning national reputation, and perhaps its influence on Hawthorne
               himself. 
            To discover these moments of reauthorship, I compared reprintings of The Celestial Railroad using the Juxta collation tool (juxtasoftware.org), Thanks to
                  the recent release of Juxta Commons, a new web service from NINES that allows
                  online sharing of Juxta-created comparison sets, I can provide links directly to
                  side-by-side comparison sets of the texts I discuss through the rest of this
                  essay. The URLs are rather long, so I will provide the links in footnotes. The
                  sub-set of text’s I have uploaded to Juxta’s web service can all be found at http://juxtacommons.org/shares/P15fA4. which allows scholars to
               visualize textual variation between witnesses of a text.
            
               A comparison set between the original Democratic
                     Review text and that of the Signs of the
                     Times. The apparent errors in the Signs
                  version come from the original and are encoded using the TEI sic
                  element.
               
            
            By comparing transcriptions of different Celestial
                  Railroad witnesses in Juxta, I was able to easily discover the changes
               that editors made to Hawthorne’s tale. Juxta was particularly useful in highlighting
               comparatively minor changes: those likely to slip my unmediated notice. I found that
               nearly every periodical reprinting of The Celestial
                  Railroad modifies Hawthorne’s text somehow, though it is often difficult
               to gauge the intent behind particular changes. Some cuts seem space-saving, others
               aesthetic: many publications, for instance, edited Hawthorne’s purposefully archaic
                  burthens to burdens. The ASSU’s Visit to the
                  Celestial City anglicized the spellings of words, excised all references
               to body parts (stomach and belly, in various places, became
                  front), and cut Prince Beelzebub’s appearance during the narrator’s stay in
                  Vanity. A side-by-side comparison of the original Democratic Review printing and the ASSU’s Visit
                     to the Celestial City can be found at http://juxtacommons.org/shares/7fRVkn. The ASSU sought to combat
               spiritual ignorance by building libraries of religious instruction for children , and so we might speculate that these latter changes
               to The Celestial Railroad were designed to protect those
               children from tantalizing or frightening images. The two most frequently cut passages
               come from the narrator’s journey thorough Vanity Fair’s marketplace. Approximately
               one third of the witnesses excised the narrator’s description of a very pretty
                  girl who bartered a heart as clear
                  as crystal for a worn and
                  defaced…jewel of the same kind, as well as a passage detailing how a member of Congress recruited his pocket by
                  the sale of his constituents.
            
            
               The original change highlighted from the Midnight
                     Cry's reprinting.
               
            
            It is possible that later witnesses copied the story, with the cut scenes, from
               earlier publications. After comparing in Juxta all of the witnesses that omit these
               scenes, the original edit seems to have been made by the Midnight Cry! and passed on as the story was recopied. A
                  side-by-side comparison of the original Democratic Review
                  printing and the Midnight Crys reprinting can
                  be found at http://juxtacommons.org/shares/4uKm3R. Perhaps for the
               apocalyptic Cry, love and politics seemed less urgent
               than the more spiritual descriptions it retained about Vanity Fair. Because reprints
               circulated through complex textual networks, however, editorial decisions made by one
               editor rippled into other publications that did not necessarily share the priorities
               that drove the initial decision. Textual analysis tools such as Juxta draw particular
               attention to these editorial artifacts, which illuminate not, strictly, the text
               itself, but its social life within its culture.
         

            The Moral of The Celestial Railroad
            
            That Hawthorne himself revised Bunyan likely contributed to the story’s success with
               contemporary religious readers. Brown argues that, while evangelicals generally respected Bunyan’s original as one
                  of the best books of all time, they also felt no qualms about altering the book to suit
               specific ecclesiastical or political needs .
               Children’s versions were prepared for Sunday Schools, and several authors rewrote the
               tale with more pointed goals, such as William R. Weeks’s reformist Pilgrim’s Progress in the Nineteenth Century
                and Sophia Louisa Little’s abolitionist Pilgrim’s Progress in the Last Days
               . Little’s Pilgrim’s Progress
                     in the Last Days holds particular interest because it was published
                  later in the same year as The Celestial Railroad.
                  Little’s hero Christian, like Hawthorne’s unnamed narrator, finds that a bridge was built over the Slough of
                  Despond, which appears of such frail
                     construction that he refuses to cross it. Little was aware of the
                  similarities between her scene and Hawthorne’s. A footnote to her novel, inserted
                  one line below the final paragraph, reads, 
                     NOTE. — The
                           Celestial Rail-Road was not in print at the time this was
                        written. The mention of the Bridge at the Slough of Despond, is an
                        accidental coincidence
                     
                  . That Little was aware of The Celestial
                     Railroad, and assumes her readers will be aware enough of it to spot
                  the similarities between it and her book, again testifies to the story’s wide
                  influence in 1843. Hawthorne entered a market, then, that welcomed
               innovations from its established texts, and especially loved Pilgrim’s Progress. 
            In the story, Hawthorne’s narrator relates a dream in which he visits Bunyan’s City
               of Destruction to find that a railroad had been constructed to the Celestial City.
               Proponents of the railroad tout its leisure, the way it clears difficulties — quite
               literally, as the railroad company tunneled through the Hill Difficulty that pilgrims
               once struggled over — from pilgrims’ paths. Like Bunyan’s Christian, Hawthorne’s
               narrator encounters other travelers along his route, not all of them pilgrims,
               including Mr. Smooth-it-away, who serves as his guide and the conductor of the new
               railroad. Like Christian, he encounters monsters, such as the Giant
               Transcendentalist, who has replaced the Giants Pagan and Pope, and shouts at passing
               travelers 
                  in so strange a phraseology, that we
                     knew not what he meant
                  
               . Waypoints along the route, which the narrator searches out in 
                  Mr. Bunyan’s road-book
                  
               , are seen from the train window as the engine rushes by: the one exception
               being the city of Vanity Fair, where the train makes a long stop.
            Hawthorne’s narrator naively believes that the world progresses steadily through
               technology and social improvement. He in many ways embodies a perverse version
                  of the religious progressivism best described by Ernest Tuveson in his important
                  study of antebellum American millennialism, Redeemer
                     Nation
                  . He is impressed to learn of the demon
               Apollyon’s new employment as the train’s engine driver. He thrills at the liberality of the age in
               which 
                  all musty prejudices are in a fair
                     way to be obliterated
                  
               . He likewise rhapsodizes over the ease of train travel over the harsh
               experiences of past pilgrims,
               and is enthralled by Vanity Fair’s societies for all manner of virtuous purposes, into which a man has merely to connect himself,
                  throwing…his quota of virtue into the common stock from which 
                  the president and directors will
                     take care that the aggregate amount be well applied
                  
               . The narrator’s faith in progress is so complete that even after he encounters
               two worthy simpletons making their pilgrimage by foot and whose sturdy repudiation of all part in [Vanity
                  Fair’s] business or pleasures convince him to leave, he still claims, 
                  I was not simple enough to give up
                     my original plan of gliding along easily and commodiously by rail-road
                  
               . In fact, the narrator and his fellow passengers marvel at the preposterous
                  obstinacy of these two dusty
                  foot-travellers in the old pilgrim guise who keep their intolerable burthens on their backs and
               refuse to take advantage of modern
                  improvements. The modern pilgrims mock them, while Apollyon blows smoke
               and steam into their faces for the amusement of his passengers . 
            The old-fashioned pilgrims follow a parallel path to the narrator’s throughout the
               story. They appear alongside the train several times, and then again as prophets in
               Vanity Fair, warning Hawthorne’s narrator that the railroad concern is a
                  bubble, and a miserable delusion
               . The story ends within sight of the
               Celestial City, where Mr. Stick-to-the-right and Mr. Go-the-old-way are seen entering
               the city’s gates amid 
                  an exulting strain…of music, with
                     height, and depth, and sweetness…at once tender and triumphant
                  
               . Hawthorne’s old-fashioned pilgrims endure the trials the narrator avoids —
               Hill Difficulty, the Slough of Despond — and in the end these evils, described by the
               narrator in thoroughly modern terms as inconveniences, are reconciled by their
               triumphant entrance into eternity. 
            The narrator’s story, by contrast, ends at the terminus of the railroad line, as its
               passengers are shuttled out of the cars and into [a] steam ferry boat, the last improvement on this
                  important route. Mr. Smooth-it-away declines to cross with them, a twinkle of livid flame
               springing out of either eye, proving
                  indubitably his fiendish nature, heretofore hidden to the modern pilgrims.
               As Mr. Smooth-it-away promises the narrator We shall meet again, he implies that the boat
               is headed not to the Celestial City at all, but to Hell . The narrator’s allegorical Christian life is revealed as a series of
               failures to encounter spiritual trials or to make difficult, or even uncomfortable,
               spiritual decisions. Instead he glides along the tracks to damnation, passing by and
               interpreting the signs of his times badly.
            Contemporary religious readers read Hawthorne’s train as a symbol of the compromises
               required to be both Christian and thoroughly modern. The paratexts that constitute
               the textual network of The Celestial Railroad — e.g.
               introductions to the story, articles using the story as illustration, sermons based
               on the story — often read Hawthorne’s narrator as representative of a false faith in
               progress for progress’s sake. The Giant Transcendentalist, the misguided divines of
               Vanity Fair, and the other figures of the tale were seen as the debased products of
               such compromises. What consistently changed, however, as the story passed between
               newspapers, magazines, and anthologies, were the real-world antecedents to
               Hawthorne’s allegorical figures: the people or groups that each paper identified as
               dangerous religious innovators.
            For the Adventist readers of the Signs of the Times,
               deeply invested in a vision of Jesus Christ’s imminent Second Coming, Hawthorne’s
               story 
                  admirably illustrates the progress
                     made in popular religion since the days of John
                     Bunyan, and shows the improvements made by the Transcendentalists and
                     Neologists, to be found in our modern popular churches. We commend it to those
                     among the sects who are the most bitter against the coming of Christ, as a
                     looking glass in which themselves are strikingly reflected
                  
               . The Signs implies that those who are the most bitter against the coming of
                  Christ — in other words, those who are most critical of the Adventists’
               central doctrine — are the improvers of religion Hawthorne satirizes — the Directors
               or passengers of the Celestial Railroad. By contrast, the Signs implies that Adventist believers, anxiously watching the signs of
               the times, are the dusty foot travelers, Mr.
               Stick-to-the-right and Mr. Go-the-old-way, evangelizing to their misguided
               brethren.
            However, ten days later a neighboring publication would suggest an opposite
               interpretation of the story. The Cambridge Palladium
               introduces their reprinting similarly to that of Signs,
               noting that 
                  THAT RAILROAD — shown up on our
                     first page…admirably sets off some of the religious features of the present
                     day
                  
               . Both papers use admirably to assess the story’s depiction of failures in contemporary
               religious practice. The Palladium next refers to the
                  Signs's publication of the story, noting that [t]he article was originally published in
                  the Democratic Review, and has since been copied by brother Himes (the
               editor of Signs). This arch, familiar brother
                  Himes hints at the paragraph’s ultimate turn, as the Palladium wonders if this
                  last-mentioned brother, if he should look carefully, could not see his own face
                  reflected in the looking-glass somewhere
               . In other words, the Palladium asserts that The Celestial
                  Railroad, which Himes confidently printed as an indictment of
               non-Adventist Christians, instead indicts Adventists — implying that Adventism is not
               a return to authentic, biblical Christianity, but a neologism to be condemned. 
            Such vehement sectarian rhetoric was, in the 1840s, a relatively new phenomenon in
               the United States. We can track its rise using Google’s recently released Ngram
                  Viewer, The Google Books Ngram Viewer can be found at http://ngrams.googlelabs.com. For
                  more on the potential value of this tool to historical and literary research, see
                  Geoffrey Nunberg’s recent article, Counting on Google
                     Books, in the Chronicle of Higher
                     Education
                  . which allows scholars to track the frequency
               of words and phrases across Google’s corpora of texts. In Graphs, Maps, Trees, Franco Moretti points out what a minimal fraction of the literary field we all work on
               in literary studies, drawing claims about literature and culture after reading 
                  less than one per cent of the novels
                     that were actually published
                  
               . The Ngram Viewer exemplifies Moretti’s solution to this problem, distant reading, by allowing scholars to track
               trends in language across millions of books rather than selecting evidence from a few
               representative works. The Ngram Viewer can offer broad insights into the concerns of
               an historical period and generate the kinds of questions that drive close analysis.
               In this case, we can correlate the sectarian strife evidenced in the history of this
               one text with a much broader concern about sectarianism in contemporaneous
               literature.
            
               Ngram graph for the words sectarian and sectarianism between
                  1800–1900
               
            

            Looking at the American English corpus between 1800 and 1900, for instance, we can
               see that use of the word sectarian spiked in use during the decades just
               before the Civil War. Sectarian appears in approximately 0.000025% of the
               books and periodicals in the corpora that were published in the United States in
               1800. Over the next decades, however, use of sectarian steadily increases. By
               1850, sectarian appears in 0.000375% of the books in the corpora published in
               the U.S. In other words, books and periodicals in 1850 used sectarian more
               than ten times more frequently than books in 1800: an increase of an order of
                  magnitude. The word sectarianism follows a similar trajectory. To see
                  the data for both sectarian and sectarianism, see . 
            
            To make sense of this data, of course, we must abandon the quantitative universe and situate the
               use of sectarian within literary and historical contexts . We must zoom in. In this case, the dramatic
               increase in use of sectarian comes during a period of rapid denominational
               schism in the United States. By the 1840s and 50s, the nation’s largest denominations
               — Methodist, Baptist, etc. — comprised a quickly-multiplying host of sub-groups,
               sects within sects, each insisting on the sanctity of particular social, political,
               or theological distinctions. Perhaps most importantly, in 1845 — two years after the
               initial printing of The Celestial Railroad, and in the
               middle of its run through the evangelical press — the Baptist and Methodist
               denominations in the United States both split into northern and southern conventions
               over slavery. This rapid denominational centrifugation bred anxiety about how
               thoroughly churches could disagree and disperse while remaining members of one
               mystical body. 
            Brown sees this tension as latent in the mission and purpose of the antebellum
               religious press. On the one hand, the religious press fostered the informal
                  canon of evangelical texts to which The Celestial
                  Railroad belonged. This set of documents, both secular and sacred, and
               shared across many sects, fortified a sense of an invisible…pilgrim community of believers united
               by their common evangelical Christianity . But such
               ecumenical efforts were often undermined by zealous denominational editors and
               publishers, who 
                  saw themselves countering the errors of
                     the secular press and rival religious denominations by proclaiming pure gospel
                     truth
                  
               . A crowded religious periodicals market necessitated that publications
               distinguish themselves in order to attract and retain subscribers. Searching
               nineteenth-century newspaper archives for key theological terms bears this argument
               out. One finds vehement articles defending large and small gradations of doctrine and
               practice: articles for and against infant baptism, predestination, the reality or
               unreality of hell, and even the morality or immorality of children’s Sunday
               Schools.
            Distinctly denominational critiques are hard to identify in Hawthorne’s original text
               of The Celestial Railroad. There are the Giant
               Transcendentalist and Pope, but the divines of Vanity Fair are never identified
               precisely. Looking at the wide social textual network this study has unearthed, we
               can see that whomever Hawthorne meant to parody, his readers redirected the story’s
               satire toward their own targets. For antebellum believers, The
                  Celestial Railroad resonated because it spoke to the general problem of
               denominationalism — satirizing the religious neologists who have
               innovated the Christian message until unrecognizable — while simultaneously provoking
               print wars that entrenched denominational battle lines. While the satire of The Celestial Railroad was read as an attack on
               sectarianism, the history of its reprinting paradoxically reinforced denominational
               disagreements. Rail roads to the Celestial
                     City,
                the Wisconsin Argus complained in 1845, 
                  cross each other in every
                     direction
                  
               .
            In introductions to the story and editorials referencing it, religious editors and
               readers consistently identified their sectarian rivals with Hawthorne’s Mr.
               Smooth-it-away, the Rev. Wind-of-Doctrine, or the Giant Transcendentalist. In 1855,
               the Washington, D.C. newspaper National Intelligencer
               lamented the trend of rewriting Pilgrim’s
                  Progress, This lament comes from a review of George Wood’s very long
                  two-volume novel Modern Pilgrims, a distinctly
                  denominationalist work Wood claims was
                     suggested to me by Hawthorne’s inimitable allegory, The
                        Celestial Railroad. Wood structures his novel around his
                  pilgrims’ visits to a series of towns, houses, institutes, and communes, each
                  meant to satirize a particular denomination or social movement. For example, in
                  place of the Interpreter’s House in Buynan’s Pilgrim’s
                     Progress stand three interpreters’ houses, the Wesleyan (Methodism),
                  Andover (Congregationalism), and Roger Williams (Baptist) . Wood’s denominationalist retelling makes explicit what was implicit in most
                  readings of Hawthorne’s original among religious readers. noting that
                  [n]early every interested observer
                  of the religious spirit of the age has thought, spoken, or written his own story
                  of the modern pilgrims. It has become the common courtesy ecclesiastic,
               the article continues, 
                  for us to ascribe to each church
                     other than our own some innovation on the old line of travel; the old line
                     being of course ours — Bunyan being, like Paul, always the
                     Coryphæus of the creed of the household wherein he is read
                  
               . The coryphæus was the leader of a Greek chorus, and can refer to the chief or leader of a party, sect, school,
                     etc (OED). The Intelligencer means, then,
                  that religious readers all identify Bunyan, and thus the old-fashioned pilgrims of
                     The Celestial Railroad, as in agreement with their
                  own doctrine and denomination. Writing about The
                  Celestial Railroad, the Intelligencer claims
               its wide popularity was due to the fact that its idea corresponded to the prevalent suggestions in many
                  minds, while it was so
                  general that it did not take sides for or against any sect; so it could be freely
                  used by every sect against the rest, and was therefore eagerly printed in all
                  church newspapers…and each family read it on Sunday evening in its own weekly,
                  with sly whispers of a Minie rifle-shot into the ranks of some so-called
                     Christians they knew of
               
               . Readers claimed affinity with the old-fashioned
                  pilgrims and contrasted themselves with the This-todays and That-tomorrows of
               the other churches in town. As the Intelligencer points
               out, this identification was simplified by the broad allegorical strokes of
               Hawthorne’s original. The reader knows only the Rev. Dr. Wind-of-Doctrine’s name.
               Hawthorne never specifies precisely which doctrinal winds blow him about: what
               denomination he represents, where he stands on predestination, or his opinion about
               the scriptural warrant for slavery. 
            Readers projected themselves into the roles of Mr. Stick-to-the-right and Mr.
               Go-the-old-way, the two pilgrims who stick to Mr. Bunyan’s road-book despite
               the difficulties of the road. In the first edition of the Sunday School Union’s
                  Visit to the Celestial City, Hawthorne’s two dusty
                  foot-travellers feature prominently in two of the edition’s four illustrations
               — once in the foreground, watching the train pass in the distance, and again urging
               the narrator to repent in the bustle of Vanity Fair .
               Articles frequently echoed Hawthorne’s language about these two pilgrims. The Christian Watchman, published by the Baptist Missionary
               Society of Massachusetts, published The Celestial
                  Railroad in the same issue as an editorial on Holy
                  Living. By this phrase, the Watchman assures
               its readers, 
                  We do not mean any newly discovered
                     track that shall lead to such results, but the old and
                        safe road that has been travelled by all Christians for the last
                     eighteen hundred years
                  
                (my emphasis).
            Likewise the Congregationalist Boston Review used The Celestial Railroad to illustrate the differences between
                  two theologies, the Old and the
                  New, that were dividing Congregationalism. The Old theology, the Review claims, is
                  God-given, apostolic, and ever the same, while the New is always changing, its adherents carried about by every wind of doctrine.
                (my emphasis). The Rev. Dr.
               Wind-of-doctrine is the most prominent divine in Hawthorne’s revision of Vanity Fair.
               The Review echoes his name to describe the debased New
               theology and that of Mr. Go-the-old-way to describe its own, God-given and
                  apostolic theology. Moreover, the Review
               notes, Nobody studies the Catechism
                  now, because there’s a
                  railroad by which cheerful
                  crowds head to heaven by
                  steam, and have a good social time of it, too. The Reviews article abridges The Celestial
                  Railroad into three paragraphs, borrowing liberally from Hawthorne’s
               language without citing him or his original story directly, in order to lampoon the
                  New theology ruining Congregationalism .This uncited, paraphrasical use seems to indicate that by 1861,
                  when this Review article so liberally cribbed from
                  it, The Celestial Railroad had become commonplace
                  enough that direct citation was unnecessary; the story was a canonical indictment
                  of spiritually dangerous denominational innovations, from which characters and
                  images could be freely drawn for spiritual illustration.
            
            The most dramatically edited — or perhaps the most thoroughly re-authored — version
               of the tale is easier to understand. Editorial tinkering with The Celestial Railroad culminated in the Adventist reissue of the story
               in February 1844, as a tract in the Bible Examiner
               series. According to Juxta, eighty-nine percent of the story’s text is changed
               between the Democratic Review and Bible Examiner versions.A side-by-side comparison of the original
                     Democratic Review printing and the Bible Examiner reauthorship can be found at http://juxtacommons.org/shares/7Vzym2.
            
            
               A comparison set between the original Democratic
                     Review text and that of the Bible
                  Examiner. Note that the majority of the text varies between the two
                  versions, a trend that largely persists throughout the comparison.
               
            
            The Bible Examiner version carries an extended title —
                  The Celestial Rail-road; or, Modern Pilgrim’s Progress: After
                  the Manner of Bunyan, Vividly Representative of the Present-Day Professors of Religion — and an extended attribution:
                  From the original, by Nathaniel Hawthorne. With
                  additions and alterations. Several of the minor edits made between the
               original Democratic Review printing of The Celestial Railroad and those in the Midnight Cry! and Signs of the Times are
               carried over here. It seems likely, then, that the editors and co-authors of this
               version worked from previous Adventist printings of the story. Scholars,
                  including Clark, have long been aware of this reprinting of The Celestial Railroad, but no one seems to have investigated it in
                  any detail. Despite the fact that this witness completely overhauls Hawthorne, no
                  note of this appears in any bibliography of the tale. I’m hesitant to list this
                  version of the story as Hawthorne’s at all, given how few of the words in the
                  tract are his.
            
            The anonymous Adventist editor, or co-author, of this version scrupulously details
               those additions and alterations in a paragraph-long introduction:
            We are indebted to Mr. Hawthorne for the
               idea itself of a Celestial Rail-road; also for all on page 5, after It was my good fortune, &c.;
               pages 6 and 7; page 8, excepting the first two sentences, and We patronise — Creed-ality; page 9, except
                  I should not omit — from the
                  sight; pages 10, 11, and 12, but only down to of slaughtered
                  pilgrims; pages 13, 14, and 15, but only down to an auburn wig; the
               last half of page 17, commencing, Day after day; page 18, except the
               sentences, Are we not told,
               &c., to cannot be the right
                  way, also excepting the words are Millerites and, in the middle of the page,
               and except the last paragraph, commencing, One day, moreover; page 21, from At a short distance, &c.,
               down to a disposition to
                  sleep, on page 22. A few verbal alterations have been made in these parts,
               but not affecting the sense or style. The rest is not from Mr. Hawthorne's pen, and
               may contain sentiments he would not be willing to endorse.
            This writer carefully distinguishes between the Bible
                  Examiner's words and Hawthorne’s, acknowledging sentiments he would not be willing to
                  endorse in the new tale, but still retaining Hawthorne’s title, On
                  the first page of the story itself, the title is simply The
                     Celestial Rail-road; the extended title is only on the title
                  page. and, ostensibly, Hawthorne’s sense and style. While
               acknowledging their divergences from Hawthorne’s original, in other words, the Bible Examiner's editors nonetheless support a fiction of single authorship that
               would have shaped their readers’ perceptions of Hawthorne . 
            The final line of the Bible Examiner's extended title,
                  Vividly Representative of the Present-Day Professors of Religion, hints strongly at the
               denominational mission of this rewriting, and the text aims throughout to clarify the
               points of satire and praise in Hawthorne’s original, and to bring an explicitly
               apocalyptic tenor to the piece. February 1844 falls during the height of
                  speculation, anxiety, and anticipation surrounding the predictions of Baptist
                  pastor William Miller, who spawned the Adventist or Millerite movement by
                  predicting the end of the world first in 1843, and then again in 1844. As
               such, just after the narrator speaks — in Hawthorne’s words — of the public spirit of some of the inhabitants
               who built a railroad to the Celestial City, he notes — in new words — that for a long time I had regarded the
                  stories about an impending destruction as the mere dreams of some silly
                  persons
               . He then encounters the two old-fashioned
               pilgrims much earlier than did Hawthorne’s narrator, describing how they looked to me exactly like the picture
                  which my fancy had formed of Bunyan’s pilgrim. The pair proceed to warn
               the narrator that they are fleeing
                  from the wrath to come because the Judgment which for a long time has lingered, is
                  just about to be executed, and all these things shall be dissolved
               .
            Nearly every page of the Bible Examiner's Celestial Railroad revises Hawthorne’s original. New fellow
               pilgrims join the narrator in this version of the story: Messrs. Pliable, Worldly-wise-man, Presumption,
                  Love-lust, By-ends and Hold-to-the-world as well as Miss Ornament, Miss Thoughtless, and Miss
                  Novelize
               . These passengers point to many distinctly
               Adventist concerns about their religious contemporaries: that they clung too fiercely
               to temporal things (Messr. Love-lust, Messr. Hold-to-the-world, Miss Ornament), that
               they too flippantly dismissed their Adventist brethren (Messr. Worldly-wise-man,
               Messr. Presumption, Miss Thoughtless), or that they too readily and thoughtlessly
               modernized faith (Miss Novelize). Accordingly, the Bible
                  Examiner's train passes new sites, the town of Morality, which has grown very much since
                  Bunyan’s day and the newly
                  settled but thriving towns of Deism, Universalism, and Restoration
               . The town of Restoration might
                  be less obvious to modern readers; it refers to Alexander Campbell’s Restoration
                  movement, which attempted to reconcile denominational differences — which makes
                  their pillory here as a denominationalist town more biting — through a millennial
                  vision of a united evangelical Christianity. Ultimately, the Restoration movement
                  spawned several evangelical denominations, such as the Disciples of Christ.
               Later in the Bible Examiner's version the narrator will
               add the newly chartered provinces of
                  Carnality and Formality, in which we observed the flourishing towns of Mormonism,
                  Love-gain, Community, Puseyism, Self-righteousness, and Falsepeace, and
                  Scoffers-town
               . These new towns share the map with
               places from Hawthorne’s and Bunyan’s originals, such as the City of Destruction,
               where the narrator’s pilgrimage begins, the town of Shun-repentance, and
               Vanity. By federating new theologies, such as Mormonism, with such disreputable
               neighbors, the Bible Examiner emphasizes its disdain for
               them, and clarifies for the reader precisely who they should read as modern
                  professors of religion or neologists.
                This trope of naming towns after specific denominations is echoed in George
                  Wood’s Modern Pilgrims
                  .
            
            The Bible Examiner emphasizes this threat in its
               detailed description of the preachers of Vanity. Hawthorne provides only the names of
               Vanity’s divines, giving readers leeway to identify…Rev. Mr. Clog-the-Spirit and Rev. Dr.
                  Wind-of-Doctrine with preachers in each other’s churches, as Moncure
               Conway later recounted doing after reading Hawthorne’s tale . The Bible Examiner, by contrast, links
               each figure to a specific contemporary doctrine, pinning down the allegorical
               connection, and stemming potential alternative readings of each figure. In the Examiner the Rev. Mr. Bewilderment proves that the Bible, although truly called a
                  Revelation, is nevertheless an unrevealed revelation to man, a doctrine
               opposed to William Miller’s assertion that the Bible is its own interpreter. Several more
               lectures follow, each by divines whose allegorical names point to Adventist disdain
               for their ideas .
            In its final passages, the Bible Examiner's
               reinterpretation of Hawthorne veers well off the original story’s track. The narrator
               begins to see outside his window prophetic natural signs: the stars falling from heaven,
               an angel…flying through
                  heaven,
               blood and fire and pillars of
                  smoke seen in the heavens
                  and in the earth. The passengers pass one man expound[ing] the Book of Daniel, warning them
               to Consider the vision, consider the
                  vision! and another expounding Revelation, warning, Behold, I come quickly
               . Finally, the Bible
                  Examiner's version ends not within sight of the Celestial City, or with
               the steam ferry boat of Hawthorne’s original, but with the narrator’s realization
               that the train has circled fully around, back almost to the City of Destruction. There
               waits Evangelist, who continues to warn the erstwhile pilgrims of the impending
               apocalypse.
            The Bible Examiner rewrites the ending of The Celestial Railroad into an explicitly apocalyptic
               message — a warning that the end of time is near. The final paragraph warns readers
               who might consider the forgoing a
                     dream
                — as Hawthorne ended his Celestial Railroad —
               that I will assure them it is a most
                  perfect reality, saving merely the anticipation of the second personal coming of Christ,
                  which there is reason to believe is just at hand
               . The Bible
                  Examiner then hopes that the brief, cutting, but truly faithful description here given of the journey to
                  the heavenly city by this most deceitful route, which the story has
               identified with specific contemporary theologies and eschatologies, prove the saving of the soul to some who
                  are about to take their seats in the car of Popular
                     Profession. Instead, the final lines urge, they should choose
                  the good old path which,
               again, this revision has explicitly identified with the Millerites castigated
               by Mr. Smooth-it-away in Vanity Fair .
            This most drastic revision of The Celestial Railroad
               exemplifies the antebellum religious press’s relationship with Hawthorne’s text. The
               Adventist pamphlet certainly ran counter
                  to the avowed intentions of Hawthorne — as evidenced by his expressed
               distaste for the pamphlet and piratical
                  system — and makes publication
                  distinctly legible as an independently signifying act, calling attention to the repeated acts of
                  articulation by which culture and audiences are constituted
               . The Bible Examiner
               tract re-authored Hawthorne’s tale, writing a particular denominational
               interpretation into the text. The Bible Examiner
                  version of The Celestial Railroad was popular, and
                  continued in print until at least the 1880s. Clark traces versions of this tract
                  through 1867, and I’ve found advertisements for it in the back of editions of Mary
                  Baker Eddy’s books into the 1880s.
            
         

            Reading Hawthorne’s Reaction
            When, at the end of its introduction to the story, the Bible
                  Examiner notes, The rest
                  is not from Mr. Hawthorne's pen, and may contain sentiments he would not be
                  willing to endorse, it points Hawthorne’s response to his tale’s life in
               the religious press . Garvey notes that [b]eing reprinted was sometimes welcomed as a
                  sign of an author's popularity; at other times authors resented their work being
                  taken without pay or saw it as an even more hostile act
               . The latter describes Hawthorne, who famously
               complained in an April 1844 letter to Horatio Bridge, I continue to scribble tales, with good success so far
                  as regards empty praise…But the pamphlet and piratical system has so broken up
                  regular literature, that I am forced to work hard for small gains
               . Scholars of Hawthorne tend to suppose that
               this complaint alludes to pamphlet
                  forms of The Celestial Rail-road that sprang up
                     after its appearance in the Democratic Review
                  
               
               . These known pamphlet forms
               include the ASSU’s Visit to the Celestial City and other
               pamphlet versions that were printed as close to Hawthorne as Boston and far away as
               London.
            In an October 1843 letter to Nathaniel Hawthorne’s sister, his wife Sophia notes that
               the Sunday School Union had no
                  authority from the power that is for publishing the Celestial Railroad,
                and that her husband was
                  quite surprised to be taken possession of so unceremoniously
               . Those three words, taken possession
                  of, can be read as legal or textual, though it may not have occurred to
               editors within the antebellum climate of reprinting to worry about Hawthorne’s
               pecuniary or legal interests. The Bible Examiner's
               caveat to its reprinting highlights different anxieties. Garvey argues that The phenomenon of reprinting allowed
                  different meanings to become attached to a work . When the Bible Examiner admits that
               Hawthorne’s sentiments may not align with the revised story or that he would
               not endorse its message, it admits that the meaning of Hawthorne’s story had been taken possession of as much
               as the words themselves. 
            If Hawthorne was aware of pamphlet versions of The Celestial
                  Railroad published in Boston and Philadelphia, it seems likely that he was
               aware of some of the many newspaper, magazine, and tract reprintings, several of
               which were published close to him in Salem, Boston, and Cambridgeport. It seems not
               unlikely that he worried over both the material repossession of his words — the
               unauthorized and unpaid reprintings of The Celestial
                  Railroad — and the metaphorical repossession of his name and of his
               story’s meaning and message. The Celestial Railroad, as
               we’ve seen, was co-opted by such ideologically and theologically distinct groups as
               Congregationalists, Methodists, Baptists, Adventists, Quakers, Perfectionists,
               Abolitionists, and others, and said each time to speak for them against all comers.
               Though Hawthorne certainly wanted legal protection and monetary compensation for his
               work, his frustration at being taken
                  possession of was likely more than simply pecuniary. In 1843 Hawthorne was
               still largely unknown. If the tradition
                  that grows around a work's authorship can have an intense effect on how the work
                  is read and understood
               , then denominational re-authorizations of
                  The Celestial Railroad threatened to brand Hawthorne
               in ways he may have found distasteful. 
            There is some textual evidence — small, but telling — that argues this more nuanced
               understanding of Hawthorne’s reaction to The Celestial
                  Railroad in the religious press. Hawthorne made few important changes
               between the story’s original Democratic Review printing
               and the version that appeared three years later in Mosses from
                  an Old Manse. Most of the changes Juxta highlights between the two
               versions are minor. However, when Hawthorne’s narrator meets the two-old fashioned
               pilgrims in Vanity Fair, they introduce themselves in Mosses as Mr. Stick-to-the-right and Mr. Foot-it-to-heaven
                (my emphasis).J. Donald Crowley notes
                  this change, but doesn’t remark on it, in the Centenary edition of Mosses
                  . Mr. Go-the-old-way, whose name was echoed in
               so many paratexts that drew from The Celestial Railroad,
               is no more. 
            
               Here we can see the subtle, but important, change that Hawthorne made to the
                  tale as he edited it for Mosses from an Old Manse in
                  1846. Note that Mr. Go-the-old-way has been replaced in this variant with Mr.
                  Foot-it-to-heaven.
               
            
            Mr. Foot-it-to-heaven’s name contrasts sharply with his predecessor’s: it’s lighter,
               almost jocular, and not as distinct from the ironical names of Mr. Smooth-it-away or
               Mr. Bewilderment. 
            That is, the one significant editorial change Hawthorne made to The Celestial Railroad between 1843 and 1846 unwrote the focal point of
               denominational readings of his story. This changed name perhaps signals Hawthorne’s
               unease with his tale’s career in the religious press. Whatever Hawthorne’s own
               religious opinions, they couldn’t possibly have aligned with all those who claimed
                  The Celestial Railroad for themselves. After the
               publication of Mosses, Mr. Foot-it-to-heaven journeys
               through the pages of secular reprintings, in papers such as Littell’s Living Age
               . Significantly, however, Mr. Go-the-old-way remains in
               many subsequent religious reprintings, in papers like the Christian Secretary (3 Mar. 1848) , Vermont Christian Messenger
               , and in reprintings of the Sunday School Union’s
                  Visit to the Celestial City through at least 1897
                  . In fact, the majority of Celestial Railroad witnesses from the nineteenth century, including those
               published after Mosses, feature Mr.
                  Go-the-old-way rather than his replacement.
            Few scholars have mentioned or commented on this name change. As part of a large
               comparison set in Juxta, however, Mr.
                  Foot-it-to-heaven stands out not as an incidental change between
               Hawthorne’s two versions of the story, but as an anomaly among the twenty-four
               witnesses between Hawthorne’s versions.A side-by-side comparison of the
                  original Democratic Review printing and his 1846
                  edition in Mosses from an Old Manse can be found at
                     http://juxtacommons.org/shares/Jbe2JU. To truly signify, however,
               the name change needed to be considered alongside the many editorial introductions
               and references to the story, the paratexts that constituted the textual network of
                  The Celestial Railroad. Many of these supplemental
               texts echo the language of going the old
                  way, showing the attachment that religious reprinters and commenters had
               to the religious conservatism of Hawthorne’s message in The
                  Celestial Railroad. The more robust textual history provided by online
               archives recontextualizes Hawthorne’s change from Mr. Go-the-old-way to Mr.
                  Foot-it-to-Heaven, foregrounding the cultural and social motivations that
               may have guided his editorial pen. 
            The reprinting history of The Celestial Railroad
               demonstrates a complex relationship between Hawthorne and contemporary print and
               religious cultures. The enthusiastic reception of this story by religious readers
               inducted Hawthorne, perhaps unwillingly, into the canon of texts that defined
               religious communities in the nineteenth century. The keen satire of The Celestial Railroad was
               not anathema to the religious press or religious readers: quite the opposite, in
               fact, as Hawthorne’s satire against the modern and easy Christianity is
               precisely what drew religious readers to the text. Hawthorne’s early reputation, at
               least with certain readers, seems to have been founded on a work that modern readers
               often overlook. Moreover, the history of this short story helps clarify our
               understanding of the antebellum religious press as a tool of both ecumenical outreach
               and fervent denominational debate. The Celestial
                  Railroad was popular for its perceived anti-denominational message, but
               also for its usefulness in denominational debates. The essentially undefined
               antecedents for Hawthorne’s allegorical figures permitted a breadth of interpretation
               across the spectrum of belief, allowing readers, editors, and preachers to create
               sectarian readings with relative ease, and to deploy the story against those
               doctrinal innovators they saw as dangerous to their own, authentic Christian
               faith.
         

            Conclusion
            Ironies abound in this history of Hawthorne’s Celestial
                  Railroad. The tale satirized theological and technological triumphalism,
               yet it circulated via a thoroughly modern mass media. Editors affirmed the eternal
               and universal moral of The Celestial Railroad even as
               they reauthored the story to serve their particular readers. Though the tale’s
               central, ironized symbol of uncritical modernization is the railroad, the story’s
               social textual network likely expanded through the railroad network. When
                  reprintings of The Celestial Railroad are plotted
                  onto Henry S. Tanner’s 1846 Traveller’s Guide or Map of the
                     Roads, Canals, and Rail Roads of the United States
                   the vast majority follow Tanner’s railroad lines,
                  while few appear in those sections of the country without railroads. I have
                  completed some preliminary geospatial work on The Celestial
                     Railroad using ArcGIS to correlate Tanner’s map, nineteenth-century
                  county boundaries, and census reports from 1840 and 1850. This GIS work is not
                  ready for publication, but you can read more about these GIS experiments in the
                  paper I delivered at the 2012 Modern Language Association Convention in Seattle
                     . 
            
            
               Tanner’s 1846 map has been overlaid here with railroad data from William G.
                  Thomas’ Railroads and the Making of Modern America
                  project . The orange triangles represent reprintings of
                     The Celestial Railroad between 1843 and 1861. The
                  yellow circles represent paratexts from the same period. Icons overlap in places
                  with multiple witnesses or paratexts.
               
            
            In other words, nineteenth-century technologies enabled this satire of
               nineteenth-century technology to reach its audiences, even as twentieth- and
               twenty-first century technologies allow modern scholars to rediscover its history of
               reprinting and reauthorship.
            The history of The Celestial Railroad, not unlike the
               history of the digital humanities, is a tale both of technological innovation and
               resistance. Julia Flanders notes similar tensions at the heart of digital humanities
               work: 
                  If the rhetoric at the heart of the
                        digital side of digital humanities is strongly informed by a
                     narrative of technological progress, the "humanities" side has equally strong
                     roots in a humanities sensibility which both resists a cumulative idea of
                     progress (one new thing building on another) and yearns for a progressive
                     agenda (doing better all the time). The theoretical and methodological shifts
                     that constitute disciplinary change in the humanities, when viewed in
                     retrospect, do not appear clearly progressive in the way that sequences of
                     scientific discoveries do, though they do appear developmental: they are an
                     ongoing attempt to understand human culture, from the changing perspective of
                     the culture itself.
                  
               
            
            Modern scholarly readers of The Celestial Railroad
               perhaps share its original readers’ ambivalence. We note the irony of digitizing a
               work that satirizes progressivism while recognizing that digitization allows us to
               recover and share a lost narrative of American literary culture. 
            When storage is cheaper than decision
                  making, Flanders argues, 
                  the rare, the lesser-known, the
                     overlooked, the neglected, and the downright excluded are now likely to make
                     their way into digital library collections, even if only by accident
                  
               . Hawthorne is, of course, a hypercanonical writer, but The Celestial Railroad has been for a century one of his least read and
               least studied works. Through digital archives and textual analysis tools, we have
               learned that The Celestial Railroad should be understood
               as a central text of Hawthorne’s early career. These new tools also shift our
               understanding of Hawthorne’s religious readers, who were far more open to his
               satirical edge than scholars have imagined. If digital scholarship can shift our view
               of Hawthorne, his readers, and the values those readers associated with his stories,
               more discoveries no doubt await scholars of other authors, both canonical and
               non-canonical. As we continue to dig into digital archives in search of bibliographic
               treasure, exciting revisions to our literary history promise to multiply — an outcome
               that should thrill digital humanists and traditional literary scholars alike.
         

            Appendix
            Below is my current bibliography of Celestial Railroad
               reprintings during the nineteenth century. My next task will be a bibliography of
               references to the story, which will be a considerably longer list. Items prefaced
               with an asterisk (*) are new to Hawthorne studies, found mostly through searchable
               online newspaper, magazine, and book repositories, including (in alphabetical order)
               the Access Newspapers Archive (http://access.newspaperarchive.com); Accessible Archives (http://www.accessible.com/accessible/preLog); America’s Historical
               Newspapers (http://www.newsbank.com/readex/?content=96); the American Periodicals
               Series Online (http://www.proquest.com/en-US/catalogs/databases/detail/aps.shtml); the
               Library of Congress’s American Memory Collection (http://lcweb2.loc.gov/amhome.html) and Chronicling America Collection (http://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/); the Making of America Projects at
               Cornell University (http://digital.library.cornell.edu/m/moa/) and the University of Michigan
                  (http://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/moajrnl/); the Gale Group’s Nineteenth Century
               U. S. Newspapers (http://gdc.gale.com/products/19th-century-u.s.-newspapers/); and Google
               Books (books.google.com).

            Newspaper and magazine reprintings of Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The
                  Celestial Railroad:
            
               
                  
                     The Celestial Railroad. United States Magazine and Democratic Review 12 (May 1843):
                     515–523.
               
               
                  * Morning Star (New York) 18:5 (24 May 1843):
                     20.
               
               
                  * Midnight Cry! (New York) 4:20–21 (13 Jul.
                     1843): 156–159.
               
               
                  
                     Signs of the Times and Expositor of Prophecy
                     (Boston) 5:21 (26 Jul. 1843): 161–164.
               
               
                  
                     Cambridge Palladium (Cambridgeport, MA) 1:31 (5
                     Aug. 1843): 1–2.
               
               
                  
                     Christian Advocate and Journal (New York) 17:52 (9
                     Aug. 1843): 205–206.
               
               
                  * Christian Secretary (Hartford, CT) 22:29 (29
                     Sep. 1843): 1, 4.
               
               
                  * Christian Watchman (Boston) 24:39 and 40 (29
                     Sep. and 6 Oct. 1843): 153, 157.
               
               
                  * Jamestown Journal (Jamestown, NY) 18:902 (12
                     Oct. 1843).
               
               
                  * Scioto Gazette (Chillicothe, OH) 44:2249 (18
                     Oct. 1843): 1–2.
               
               
                  * Baptist Banner and Western Pioneer
                     (Louisville, KY) 10:42–43 (19 and 26 Oct. 1843). 
               
               
                  
                     Salem Gazette 42:84 (20 Oct. 1843): 1.
               
               
                  
                     Salem Mercury 4:43 (25 Oct. 1843): 1.
               
               
                  * Vermont Chronicle (Windsor) 18:44–45 (1 and 8
                     Nov. 1843): 173–174, 177.
               
               
                  
                     Gazette and Courier (Greenfield, MA) 52:2700 (14
                     Nov. 1843): 1–2.
               
               
                  * Episcopal Recorder (Philadelphia) 21:40–41
                     (23 and 30 Dec. 1843): 160, 164.
               
               
                  * Republican Compiler (Gettysburg, PA) 26:14
                     (25 Dec. 1843): 1–2.
               
               
                  
                     Baptist Magazine for 1844 (London) 36:7 (Jan.,
                     Feb. 1844): 9–12, 71–76 
               
               
                  * Excerpt. Liberator (Boston) 14:11 (15 Mar.
                     1844): 44.
               
               
                  * Hagers-town Torch Light & Public
                        Advertiser (Hagers-town, MD) 30:21 (21 Mar. 1844): 1.
               
               
                  * Clyde Eagle (Clyde, NY) 1:22 (4 Jan. 1845):
                     1.
               
               
                  
                     Voices of the True-Hearted (Philadelphia) (Nov.
                     1844–Apr. 1846): 119–125.
               
               
                  * Excerpt. Ohio Observer (Hudson, OH) 21:8 (24
                     Feb. 1847): 1.
               
               
                  * Non-slaveholder (Philadelphia) 2:10 (Oct.
                     1847): 228–236.
               
               
                  
                     National Anti-Slavery Standard (New York) 8:24 (11
                     Nov. 1847): 96.
               
               
                  
                     The Friend, A Monthly Journal (London) 6:61 (Jan.
                     1848): 4–8.
               
               
                  * Christian Secretary (Hartford, CT) 26:52 (3
                     Mar. 1848): 1–4.
               
               
                  
                     Vermont Christian Messenger (Montpelier) 4:23 (5
                     Jun. 1850): 1–2.
               
               
                  * Circular (Brooklyn, NY) 2:44 (16 Apr. 1853):
                     175–176.
               
               
                  * Lancaster Intelligencer (Lancaster, PA) 60:3
                     (1 Feb. 1859): 1.
               
               
                  * Littell’s Living Age (Boston) 851 (22 Sep.
                     1860): 740–747.
               
               
                  * Friends’ Intelligencer 17:39–41 (8, 15, and
                     22 Dec. 1860): 620–623, 637–639, 652–655.
               
               
                  * Jefferson County Journal (Adams, NY) (9 Jan.
                     1878): 2.
               
            
            Other notable reprintings:
            
               
                  Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Rail-road
                     (unauthorized pamphlet). Boston: James F. Fish, 1843.
               
               
                  Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Rail-road
                     (unauthorized pamphlet). Boston: Wilder & Co., 1843.
               
               
                  Nathaniel Hawthorne (unattributed). A Visit to the
                        Celestial City. Revised by the Committee of Publication of the
                     American Sunday-School Union. Philadelphia: American Sunday School Union, 1843.
                  
               
               
                  Nathaniel Hawthorne and Anonymous. The Celestial
                        Rail-road; or, Modern Pilgrim’s Progress: After the Manner of Bunyan.
                        Vividly Representative of the Present-Day
                        Professors of Religion. Bible Examiner 12 (February 23,
                     1844).
               
               
                  Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Railroad.
                        Mosses from an Old Manse. New York: Wiley and
                     Putnam, 1846.
               
               
                  Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Railroad.
                        Prose Writers of America, with a Survey of the History,
                        Conditions, and Prospects of American Literature ed. Rufus Wilmot
                     Griswold. Philadelphia: Carey and Hart, 1847.
               
               
                   Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Rail-road
                     (unauthorized pamphlet). Lowell, MA: D. Skinner, 1847.
               
               
                   Nathaniel Hawthorne and Salomon Neitz (trans.). Ein
                        Besuch auf der Eisenbahn nach der Himmlischen Stadt. Philadelphia:
                     T. K. and P. G. Collins, 1853.
               
               
                  * Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Railroad.
                        The Power of Grace; or, Incidents and 
                     Narratives of Wonderful Conversions in Answer to
                        Prayer. New York: C. M. Saxton, Barker, & Co., 1859.
               
               
                  Nathaniel Hawthorne and Anonymous. The Celestial
                        Rail-road; or, Modern Pilgrim’s Progress: After the Manner of Bunyan.
                        Vividly Representative of the Present-Day
                        Professors of Religion. Boston: J. V. Himes, 1860.
               
               
                  Nathaniel Hawthorne and Anonymous. The Celestial
                        Rail-road; or, Modern Pilgrim’s Progress: After the Manner of Bunyan.
                        Vividly Representative of the Present-Day
                        Professors of Religion. Advent Tracts,
                     Western Series 16. Buchanan, MI: W. A. C. P. Association, 1867.
               
               
                  Nathaniel Hawthorne. A Walk Through Vanity
                        Fair,
                     Hawthorne (excerpt). Roses
                        and Holly: A Gift-Book for All the Year. Edinburgh: William P.
                     Nimmo, 1867.
               
               
                  * Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Railroad.
                        A History of the Church of God, from the Creation to A.
                        D. 1885; Including Especially the History of the Kehukee Primitive Baptist
                        Association ed. Elder Sylvester Hassell. Middletown, NY: Gilbert
                     Beebe’s Sons, 1886.
               
               
                  * Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Railroad.
                        The Feast of Fat Things. Middletown, NY:
                     Gilbert Beebe’s Sons, 1890.
               
               
                  * Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Railroad.
                        Capital Stories by American Authors ed. Louis
                     Klopsch. New York: The Christian Herald, 1895.
               
               
                  * Nathaniel Hawthorne (unattributed). A Visit to the
                        Celestial City. Revised by the Committee of Publication of the
                     American Sunday-School Union. Philadelphia: American Sunday School Union, 1897.
                  
               
               
                  * Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Celestial Railroad.
                     Philadelphia: Union Press, 1899.
               
            
         
