Title:  The End of the Irrelevant Text: Electronic Texts, Linguistics, and Literary
               Theory
Volume:  001
Issue:  2
Date:  12 September 2007
Abstract:  
            The close study of literary texts has a long and illustrious history. But the
               popularity of textual analysis has waned in recent decades, just at the time that
               widely available electronic texts were making traditional analytic tools easier to
               apply and encouraging the development of innovative computer-assisted tools. Without
               claiming any simple causal relationship, I argue that the marginalization of textual
               analysis and other text-centered approaches owes something to the dominance of
               Chomskyan linguistics and the popularity of high theory. Certainly both an
               introspective, sentence-oriented, formalist linguistic approach and literary theories
               deeply influenced by ideas about the sign's instability and the tendency of texts to
               disintegrate under critical pressure minimize the importance of the text. Using
               examples from Noam Chomsky, Jerome McGann, and Stanley Fish, I argue for a return to
               the text, specifically the electronic, computable text, to see what corpora,
               text-analysis, statistical stylistics, and authorship attribution can reveal about
               meanings and style. The recent resurgence of interest in scholarly editions, corpora,
               text- analysis, stylistics, and authorship suggest that the electronic text may
               finally reach its full potential.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
             Unfortunately for the history of digital humanities, the advent of widely available
               electronic texts coincided with the Chomsky years in linguistics and the theory years
               in literary studies. Although these orthodoxies rest on very different theoretical
               underpinnings, they both tend to deny the legitimacy of text-analysis and stylistics.
               They de-emphasize the close study of texts and cast doubt on its significance and
               centrality. 
             Chomsky’s mentalist approach, which has dominated American linguistics for more than
               forty years, locates its site of interest in the mind and treats texts and other
               stretches of naturally occurring language almost as irrelevant excrescences on the
               body of the innate language organ. It emphasizes the formal nature of grammar,
               downplays semantics, focuses on competence/deep structure rather than textual domain
               of performance/surface structure, ignores literature, and restricts itself to the
               scope of the sentence. 
             Much high theory is deeply influenced by ideas about the instability of the sign and
               the tendency of texts to disintegrate under critical pressure, ideas most closely
               associated with the late Jacques Derrida. Theory has had almost nothing to say about
               Chomsky, focusing instead on Saussure, a linguist whose ideas are more congenial, at
               least in the sense that they discuss the process of signification at length. Jerome
               McGann, for example, champions the game-like, fundamentally subjective character of . . . criticism
                and asks What if the question isn’t 
                     how could he [the critic] take himself or his ideas seriously
                  but why should he take himself or his ideas seriously?
               . Stanley Fish emphasizes the reader’s role,
               attacking the idea that texts have meaning at all–arguing that the only links that
               exist between the text and its interpretation are those that are fashioned in response to the demands of the reading
                  experience
               . Critical approaches like these and a more general
               distrust of the sign/signified link within literary theory helped to produce a
               climate inhospitable to text-analysis and stylistics. 
             It is not necessary to insist on any direct causal relationship between the hegemony
               of Chomskyan linguistics and high theory and the marginalization of textual analysis
               and other text-centered approaches, but, whatever their other merits, these two
               influential trends have certainly helped to keep the tremendous potential of
               electronic texts for literary study from being realized. Recently, however, there
               have been signs of a resurgence of interest in scholarly editions, corpora,
               text-analysis, stylistics, and authorship that suggest that the electronic text may
               finally reach its full potential. Because the point I want to make is such a basic
               one, I will present only a couple of very simple ways of returning to the text,
               merely mentioning some more sophisticated methods in my conclusion. The nature of the
               methodology is less important than the reestablishment of the text as the central
               focus of inquiry, as one of the most important objects of study. 
         

            Chomsky, Innateness, and the Irrelevant Text
            Let us begin with Chomsky, and one of the most characteristic and important
               principles of his theory: the innateness of linguistic ability. If it is not
               immediately apparent that a belief that human language is largely the result of a set
               of innate mechanisms necessarily devalues texts, an examination of one of the most
               central of Chomsky’s arguments for innateness quickly shows why this is so. In a move
               that harkens back to Plato’s argument for innate ideas, Chomsky argues that language
               learning would be impossible without a rich, specifically linguistic innate mental
               structure. The facts that a native speaker knows about the language, he argues, are
               too complex, too subtle, too regular, and too unpredictable to have been learned from
               the language to which the child has been exposed. Because the speaker manifestly
               knows them, there must be an innate language component that allows the speaker to
                  acquire language (not learn it) with extreme rapidity, without
               explicit instruction, and on the basis of evidence that is inadequate and often
               corrupt. 
             This is not the place to examine all of Chomsky’s arguments (for a thorough and
               careful critique of the innateness hypothesis and various arguments for it, see ). For my purposes, however, I will focus on the last
               argument, that the evidence to which the child is exposed is inadequate and corrupt.
               Although it is increasingly clear that the language children are exposed to is less
               corrupt than Chomsky supposed (why he supposed it rather than examining it is another
               aspect of the devaluation of text), but the more important question for the history
               and future of the study of texts is whether his argument from lack of evidence is
               persuasive, whether it is true that speakers know things for which they have no
               relevant experience. Another way of framing his argument is to say that the
                  texts on the basis of which a child comes to know a language are faulty,
               incomplete, and insufficient. Given that, why study them? 
             One classic and often-repeated kind of evidence for innateness comes from question
               formation in English. How can a child determine the correct form of the question
               version of The man is tall
               ? The simplest rule that the child might
               entertain is that the first verb moves to the front, which correctly gives Is the
                  man tall? But in The man who is tall is in the room, this simple rule
               gives the wrong question form: *Is the man who tall is in the room? (Here, as
               is usual in linguistic discussions, the asterisk marks an ungrammatical form.) The
               correct rule requires that the child analyze the grammatical structure of the
               sentence and apply a more accurate but more complicated rule: move the first verb
               after the first noun phrase of the main sentence to the front . The crucial argument for innateness is that,
               as Chomsky puts it, A person may go
                  through a considerable part of his life without ever facing relevant evidence, but
                  he will have no hesitation in using the structure-dependent rule, even if all of
                  his experience is consistent with the simpler rule . Because all speakers of English arrive at a rule
               for which they often have no relevant evidence, knowledge of grammatical principles
               must be innate.
             In his wonderful book, The Language Instinct
                  Debate, Geoffrey Sampson uses textual evidence from corpora very
               effectively to counter this classic argument for innateness. He presents The subjects who have acted as controls will
                  be paid as his example of a sentence for which the simple rule gives the
               incorrect result. He notes that Blake’s Did he who made the lamb make thee? is an example of counter-evidence
               that most school children will be exposed to, and then finds that 12% of all yes/no
               questions in a 40 million word Wall Street Journal
               corpus from 1987-89 are of a form that would contradict the potentially wrong rule
                  . There is thus no reason to think that
               speakers lack the relevant evidence against the simple form of the question rule, and
               one of Chomsky’s central arguments for innateness loses much of its force. What
               Sampson’s example makes clear is that Chomsky’s reliance on intuition and his
               rejection of textual evidence leads him to base a central premise of his innateness
               hypothesis on the non-existence of sentence types that actually occur fairly
               frequently. 
             In fairness, when Chomsky first presented this argument, there were no huge corpora
               for him to examine, and some of the subtle grammatical facts upon which his arguments
               depend are so infrequent that it would have been quixotic to have searched for
               examples. Yet the grounds for Chomsky’s rejection of corpora and of the evidence of
               texts are more theoretical than practical, so that the subsequent availability of
               huge corpora has had almost no impact on the Chomskyan tradition. 
             A second claim for an innate grammatical principle that can be contested using
               electronic corpora involves the following sentences: 
                  
                     
                        (1)
                        a. John was (too) clever to catch.
                        b. John was (too) clever to be caught.
                        c. John was (too) easy to catch.
                        d. John was (too) easy to be caught.
                     
                  
                  
               
            
             Chomsky argues that an innate Faculty of Language (FL) that is common to the species, assuming states that vary in limited
                  ways with experience
                is required to explain how a person can
               produce sentences like (1a-d), and understand some surprising features of their
               meaning. Chomsky’s important insights about such sentences involve agency and the
               question of what the adjective modifies. As he suggests, with too, they don’t
               catch John in (1a-b) and clever modifies John. It is unclear whether or not
               they catch John in (1c-d) (John was easy for them to catch, so they didn’t
                  bother.), but the catching is easy, not John. We may all agree that
               these are interesting observations, especially because the sentences seem so similar
               in structure, but not everyone agrees that (1d) is deviant, as his proposed innate
               principle requires. Phrases like easy to be caught are so rare that Wall Street Journal corpus and even the 100 million word
               British National Corpus (BNC) are too small to provide sufficient examples for
               analysis, though I did find the following tantalizing parallel to the deviant form in
               1d in Mark Davies new 100+ million word Time Magazine corpus
                  (2007): 
                  The Clinton are just not easy to be
                     caught by a pumpkin head
                  
               . Chomsky’s argument is not tied to any particular verb, however, so that we
               can also consider the exactly parallel sentence with a more common verb: John was
                  easy to find/easy to be found. Chomsky’s argument obviously entails the
               deviance of the passive version of this sentence, but counterexamples to his views
               are too easy to be found in real sentences for them to be taken seriously. My
               preceding sentence violates his claim, as do thousands of sentences that a Google
               search for easy to be found (7/16/06) returns.
             Although Google is neither a good nor a representative corpus, my interest here is
               in naturally occurring texts. Thus it seems reasonable to allow Google’s enormous
               body of texts to act as a corpus, so long as its limitations are acknowledged.
               Chomsky’s argument, remember, is that John
                  is easy to be caught violates an innate principle of grammar, so that the
               presence of large numbers of examples of this construction, even in a relatively poor
               corpus, should count as evidence against his theory.
             Chomsky might reject many of the Google hits as modern, casual examples, ones in
               which performance might not match competence. The search also uncovers
               many examples from standard edited English, however. The fact that these were
               discovered using Google is clearly unimportant, and the relatively long list below
               makes its own point (each was accessed at the listed URL on July 16, 2006): 
                  For nothing is more easy to be found, then
                     be barking Scyllas, ravening Celenos, and Loestrygonians devourers of people,
                     and such like great, and incredible monsters.
                  
               
               
                  And the reason why the MACEDONIANS kept so
                     easily dominion over them was owing to other causes easy to be found in the
                     historians . . . . 
                  
               
               
                  But, he himself was less easy to be
                     found; for, he had led a wandering life, and settled people had lost sight of
                     him. 
                  
               
               
                  Also many precedents of ill success and
                     lamentable miseries befallen others in the like designs were easy to be found,
                     and not forgotten to be alleged. 
                  
               
               
                  It has been said, that he used
                     unprecedented and improper instruments of correction. Of this accusation the
                     meaning is not very easy to be found. 
                  
               
               
                  eaþ-fynde; adj. Easy to be found;
                     facilis inventu:-- Ðá wæs eáþfynde. 
                  
               
               
                  Then a trail on land is not easy to be
                     found in the dark. 
                  
               
               
                  May they bring hither hundreds,
                     thousands for our men: may they bring hidden stores to light, and make wealth
                     easy to be found. 
                  
               
               
                  One of them, she who drank out of the
                     red-head's cup, so fair, and with such a pleasant slim grace, that her like
                     were not easy to be found. 
                  
               
               
                  Mark then the goal, 'tis easy to be found;
                     / Yon aged trunk, a cubit from the ground. 
                  
               
               
                  Besides, there grows a flower in marshy
                     ground, / Its name amellus, easy to be found. 
                  
               
               
                  Avoid the rocks on Britain's angry shore.
                     / They lie, alas! too easy to be found; / For thee alone they lie the island
                     round. 
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Hang on a minute, I hear the reader say. You seem to be telling us
                        that this man who is by common consent the world’s leading living
                        intellectual, according to Cambridge University a second Plato, is basing
                        his radical reassessment of human nature largely on the claim that a certain
                        thing never happens; he tells us that it strains his credulity to think that
                        it might happen, but he has never looked, and people who have looked find
                        that it happens a lot.
                  
                  Yes, that’s about the size of it. Funny old world, isn’t it! 
               
               
            
             One of Chomsky’s standard arguments that might seem to save his innate principle
               from such textual evidence is that there is no necessary connection between our
               knowledge of language (competence), and our ability to use it (performance)  for an extended discussion). And this argument
               shows how central the devaluation of text is to the theory. Yet it seems unreasonable
               to argue that Swift had the innate knowledge that easy to be found
               violates a grammatical principle but lacked the ability to apply this
               knowledge in a formal, edited, poetic context, or that his editors, with the same
               innate knowledge, somehow failed to notice that the sentence is ungrammatical. Errors
               do find their way into print, but the existence of tens of thousands of examples
               (including those with other verbs than found) from the seventeenth century to
               the present both undermines Chomsky’s evidence for this innate principle of grammar
               and supports the usefulness and validity of corpus-based text-analytic methods of
               language study. 
             Needless to say, Chomsky’s theory does not rest entirely on this principle, and it
               could be revised so as to eliminate this knowledge from the claimed competence
               of the English speaker. Yet exceptions to principles of grammar that Chomsky claims
               are universal and innate and uses as central pieces of evidence for the innateness
               hypothesis are so frequent and so easily found (or easy to be found) as to suggest
               that his theory will eventually have to come to terms with them if it is to survive.
               Natural language corpora are becoming so large that they can now realistically be
               used to test the linguist’s intuitions about what sentences are ungrammatical. And it
               will not do to suggest that those who use the deviant passives have a
               different grammar, if the deviance is derived from a principle that is claimed to be
               innate. Corpora can also be used to search for grammatical structures that have not
               yet been integrated into linguistic theory, and so can enrich our understanding of
               human language. They can also be used to investigate the relationship between
               competence and performance, or, perhaps more radically, to evaluate Chomsky’s claims
               about this distinction.
         

            Literary Theory and the Irrelevant Text
             Let us turn now from the world of linguistics to the world of high theory, while
               also keeping in mind the important and foundational position of Derrida’s critique of
               Sassure as a connection between linguistics and theory. Despite the connection,
               however, the devaluation of the text that is associated with literary theory is of a
               very different kind. Rather than turning our attention from texts to the mind as an
               object of study, high theory remains in the world of texts, but casts doubt on the
               usefulness of approaches to the style and meaning of texts that are central to
               textual analysis. 
             I have no quarrel with the playful and ingenious deconstruction of binaries that is
               often found in deconstructive criticism. Nor do I deny the power or value of the
               general poststructuralist critique that dismantles the naive view of the text as a
               transparent conduit for the transmission of messages. I would like to argue instead
               that skeptical doubts about the connection between words and the world are too often
               taken to the extreme, that the seductive lure of skeptical relativism and very
               reasonable distrust of reductive and global claims often push poststructuralist
               arguments past the breaking point. 
             I will sketch out a few of the ways in which returning our attention to the text can
               enhance our understanding and appreciation of literary texts. I will make no attempt
               to be comprehensive, but will instead argue that text-centered approaches, especially
               now that they can be augmented with computational tools, offer a more revealing and
               more productive approach–one that can give access to kinds of information that is not
               available through other means, and can at least begin to reveal how texts are
               structured and how they work.
            
               Jerome McGann, Deformance, and the Almost Irrelevant Text
                Jerome McGann’s Radiant Textuality: Literature after the
                     World Wide Web
                   is an influential, provocative, and valuable book that
                  forces the reader to confront profound and important questions about the stability
                  of texts and the nature of interpretation. McGann uses an experiment involving the
                  scanning and optical character recognition of a Victorian periodical to show that
                  texts are unstable under one kind of machine-assisted reading. He argues
                  that instability is an inherent feature of all texts, that texts are not containers of meaning or data but
                     sets of rules (algorithms) for generating themselves: for discovering,
                     organizing, and utilizing meanings and data
                  . This is a valuable insight–one that helps
                  the reader to see more clearly the kinds of problems that textual editors have
                  long had to deal with (see Peter Shillingsburg’s From
                     Gutenberg to Google, 2007 for an illuminating recent discussion). I
                  have argued elsewhere that McGann overestimates the instability of the text . Here I want to focus on the way it devalues textual
                  evidence and turns the critic’s attention away from the text.
                One consequence of the definition of texts as algorithms for generating
                  themselves is that each generation is potentially unique, a product of the
                  algorithms and the interpreting mind. For McGann, this suggests a recuperation of
                  an old but recently neglected kind of performative criticism that he suggests can
                  open the text to interesting new readings. The performative critic practices what
                  McGann calls deformance by manipulating the order of the textual elements
                  and even changing them. For example, after printing the lines of Wallace Steven’s
                     The Snow Man in reverse order, McGann argues that
                  deformance accentuates the intelligibility of the text and clarifies the secondary status of the
                     interpretation
                  . He then prints only the nouns of the poem,
                  leaving them in roughly their original positions and arguing that doing so shows
                  it to be a noun-heavy and noun-balanced poem. (The word poem here is
                  intended as uncontroversial shorthand for poetic text. Poems are typically
                  more highly structured than prose texts, and provide additional opportunities for
                  deformance, so that it is often important to distinguish them.)
               Having practiced deformance (under the name of text alteration) for twenty-five
                  years, I can hardly object to it in principle. It does seem to me, however, that
                  the practice of textual deformance is most valuable when it is turned back upon
                  the original text as a tool of interpretation (see Hoover (2004a), Hoover (2006)). Printing
                  only the nouns is an effective way of focusing attention on them, and any
                  deformance initially requires close attention to the text. When its aims are a
                  better understanding of the text, it allows the critic to uncover previously
                  hidden relationships among the parts of the text and to examine the nature of its
                  self-generating algorithm. But when the focus is on performing with the poem, on
                  uncovering uncommon critical
                     possibilities
                  , the critic’s attention is turned away from
                  the text. This turn is crucial, I would argue, precisely because the text
                  otherwise exercises a powerful coercive effect on interpretation and limits the
                  critical possibilities. Textual algorithms normally constrain or direct the
                  reader’s activities. Although the algorithms for generating Jane Eyre and Wuthering Heights were
                  written by sisters and published the same year, they are radically different and
                  lead to radically different readings. Even the amount and nature of a text’s
                  instability are at least partly a function of its algorithms.
               There is no space here for an extended argument for textual analysis, but McGann’s
                  deformation of The Snow Man suggests an alternative,
                  text-centered kind of marking that points in a useful direction. Below are The Snow Man and excerpts of about the same length from
                  two other poems with the nouns highlighted:
               
                  Wallace Stevens, The Snow Man, 107 words, 25
                     nouns (23.4 %)
                  
                  Text with selected words highlighted
               
               
                  Carl Sandburg, from Prairie, 112 words, about
                     45 nouns (about 40%)
                  
                  another poem with selected words highlighted
               
               
                  Edna St. Vincent Millay, from Interim, 107
                     words, 10 nouns (9.3%)
                  
                  Millay poem with highlighted words
               
                As these marked excerpts suggest, The Snow Man turns
                  out to be a noun-average poem rather than a noun-heavy one, as I have shown by
                  examining the frequency of nouns in twenty-five roughly contemporary poets .
               A fuller analysis of the number, character, and arrangement of nouns in poems is
                  worthwhile and would almost certainly lead to further insights about the poems
                  (see  for more discussion; also ). Even a brief inspection of these excerpts, however,
                  shows that the nouns in Sandburg’s poem are not only much more frequent than those
                  in The Snow Man, they are much more concrete and
                  specific. They ground and localize the fictional world of the poem much more fully
                  than do the nouns of The Snow Man, and their rural
                  and regional flavor is unmistakable. In Millay’s poem, the nouns are much less
                  frequent than those in The Snow Man, and they seem
                  relatively prosaic. The power of the poem lies elsewhere. 
                Printing only the nouns of a poem in their original positions in the poem can
                  lead to a wider investigation into the kinds, frequencies, and placements of nouns
                  in other poems, via textual or corpus analysis. Such an investigation can tell us
                  a great deal about Stevens’s poem and about modern poetry more generally. Instead,
                  however, McGann turns away from the poem toward his own algorithm, arguing that
                  printing only the nouns enhances the
                     significance of the page’s white space, which now appears as a poetic
                     equivalent for the physical nothing of snow
                  . Rather than focusing on the poem, he bases
                  his reading on the white space of a poem Stevens did not write, white space that
                  is present in any poem deformed in this way, whether or not whiteness or snow is
                  in any way relevant to its interpretation. This kind of argument abandons all hope
                  of persuasion or consensus and turns criticism into a purely subjective and
                  self-indulgent activity. 
               Consider the following deformation of Edgar Allan Poe’s The
                     Raven:
               
                  Poe
                  
                  graphic deformation in black and white
               
               Note how this deformation enhances the significance of the black type, allowing it
                  to appear as a poetic equivalent of the physical nothing of the blackness
                  of the Raven. If you look closely, you can see the raven’s beady eyes peeking over
                  the top of the first line. If you look again, you can see how Poe anticipated the
                  Borg ship from Star Trek: The Next Generation. Being
                  provocative is just not enough, and the black and white nature of most printed
                  text assures that symbolism based on black ink or white paper is unlikely to be
                  more than coincidentally relevant. The currency of ideas still stranger than those
                  in McGann’s book in published literary criticism rather proves than disproves my
                  point.
            
            
               Stanley Fish and the Missing Inuit
               Stanley Fish is another provocative thinker whose provocations radically devalue
                  the text and push the reader away from an important source of insight. Although
                  Fish’s thought has had many phases, I am concerned here with his early and very
                  influential book, Is There a Text in this Class?
                  . There, Fish reports and critiques a comment by Norman
                  Holland about unacceptable readings — a comment based on an unusual interpretation
                  of the following passage from Faulkner’s A Rose for
                     Emily: 
               
                  That was when people had begun to feel
                     really sorry for her. People in our town, remembering how old lady Wyatt, her
                     great-aunt, had gone completely crazy at last, believed that the Griersons held
                     themselves a little too high for what they really were. None of the young men
                     were quite good enough for Miss Emily and such. We had long thought of them as
                     a tableau; Miss Emily a slender figure in white in the background, her father a
                     spraddled silhouette in the foreground, his back to her and clutching a
                     horsewhip, the two of them framed by the back-flung front door. So when she got
                     to be thirty and was still single, we were not pleased exactly, but vindicated;
                     even with insanity in the family she wouldn't have turned down all of her
                     chances if they had really materialized. 
                  
               
                Holland suggests that if a reader believed that the tableau above
                     described an Eskimo, he or she would not be thought of as responding to the story at all–only pursuing
                     some mysterious inner exploration
                  . Fish agrees that the Eskimo reading is
                  unacceptable, but argues that it is unacceptable not because the text does not
                  support it, but because no current interpretive strategy exists for producing such
                  a reading: 
                     While there are always mechanisms for
                        ruling out readings, their source is not the text but the presently
                        recognized interpretive strategies for producing the text. It follows, then,
                        that no reading, however outlandish it might appear, is inherently an
                        impossible one.
                     
                  
               
               He imagines someone finding a letter in which Faulkner says he always believed he
                  was an Eskimo changeling and suggests that Faulkner critics would then transform the text into one informed
                     everywhere by Eskimo meanings.
                  
               
               Fish’s argument is as specious as it is clever. Holland’s example of an Eskimo
                  reading is clearly chosen so as to avoid any resonance with the text: most readers
                  will know only a little stereotypical information about Eskimo culture, and an
                  igloo would not last very long in Yoknapatawpha County. (Eskimo is
                  now normally replaced by Inuit. The changing political status of
                  words like Eskimo is an area in which Fish’s point about the changing
                  meaning of texts is valuable, though not very provocative or controversial.) It
                  might be possible to integrate the (widely misunderstood) practice of wife sharing
                  into the tableau in some bizarre way, but if Fish’s point is only that we are
                  quite adept at finding what we want to find, that is hardly a novel or provocative
                  idea, and is certainly not a critical method that should be encouraged.
                A letter from Faulkner revealing that he always thought of himself as an Inuit
                  changeling is unlikely to be sufficient to support an Inuit reading. How would
                  being a changeling imbue his texts with Inuit meanings in any case? What is
                  signally missing from A Rose for Emily is any actual
                  textual reference to Inuit culture, and Holland’s point is far more specific than
                  the version Fish rejects: being informed by Inuit readings is not much like
                     describing an Eskimo, so that Fish’s imagined letter is simply
                  irrelevant to Holland’s point. (Note that the claim that the meaning is not in the
                  text effectively insulates Fish against this kind of criticism.) If critics really
                  reacted as Fish suggests they would, so much the worse for criticism, but it seems
                  far more likely that, because of the nature of Faulkner’s texts,
                  either such a letter would be rejected as a forgery or critics would wonder why
                  being a changeling had so little influence on his writing. Readings can and do
                  change over time, sometimes radically, and critics like Fish are partly
                  responsible for the current tolerance for a greater distance between the text and
                  its interpretation than might have existed in the past. Still, interpretations are
                  not as independent of the text as Fish suggests, and he ignores the huge overlap
                  between even the most violently contrasting interpretations, the sources of which,
                  given the variety among the interpretive communities that he suggests are
                  responsible for the interpretations, surely include the text. For that matter, it
                  is difficult to imagine the formation of the kind of interpretive community Fish
                  posits in the absence of a body of shared texts.
            
            
               Professor Fish, is there a textbook for this course?
                One of Fish’s most famous examples, Is
                     there a text in this class?, the title of his book, is also deeply
                  problematic. A student who has just taken a class from Fish asks this question on
                  the first day of class of another professor who takes it to be a question about
                  whether there is a required textbook. The student corrects the professor: No, no . . . I mean in this class do we
                     believe in poems and things, or is it just us?
                  . Fish’s insistence on the importance of
                  context for interpretation is valuable, and it provides a welcome change from the
                  single-sentence focus of Chomskyan linguistics. Of central importance here is his
                  claim that we interpret such a sentence by virtue of belonging to an interpretive
                  community in which it makes sense and not by virtue of the meanings of its words
                  or their syntactic relationships. In what follows I will focus on this claim, but
                  also on the question itself and what he has to say about it. 
               Fish discusses the two meanings of the question above and suggests a third
                  possibility — that the student is asking about the location of her misplaced book
                  (my paraphrases follow each one): 
                     
                        
                           Is there a text in this class?1 Is there
                              a required textbook for this course? 
                           Is there a text in this class?2 Will this
                              course assume the meaningfulness of texts? 
                           Is there a text in this class?3 Is my
                              misplaced textbook in this classroom?
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
                He argues that all of these are literal, and that they all arise out of the
                  context, not out of the text. It is a tribute to Fish’s skill at argumentation
                  that the extreme form of his position has been taken seriously. It is apparent,
                  for example, that the words of the sentence and their syntactic arrangement deeply
                  influence all three of these meanings (how did the professor know it was a
                  question?), and that the crux of the matter is the ambiguity of text,
                  in, and class that my paraphrases highlight. Given the importance he
                  places on interpretive communities, it is surprising that Fish refuses to
                  acknowledge one of the largest and most important of the interpretive communities
                  relevant to this example: speakers of English. In that community, there are such
                  things as meanings of words (of course not Platonic forms or Aristotelian
                  categories), meanings that are, as he rightly points out, more or less profoundly
                  affected by the context of use, broadly understood to include things like the
                  other interpretive communities to which the professor and student belong.
               Given Fish’s valuable emphasis on the contextual nature of meaning, it also seems
                  surprising that the text should be denied a part in the creation of that meaning.
                  Fish is surely right that the relationships, contexts, and interpretive
                  communities that surround or constitute his classroom tableau, as well as the
                  personal histories of the student and professor are crucial to the professor’s
                  understanding of the student’s question, and to her ability to produce it. But the
                  question itself is also an important element in the entire exchange. What are
                     your office hours? spoken in the identical context (first day of class, the
                  same student and professor, etc.) obviously means something very different and
                  calls for a radically different set of possible answers. However problematically,
                  the sources of difference must include the language of the question. The practice
                  of holding office hours, their nature, their typical format and scheduling and
                  their institutional status–all of their meaning in the academic interpretive
                  community–is partially dependent on the words office and hours and
                  how those words are used, both in English generally, and within that community. To
                  put it another way, one of the chief ways one becomes a member of an interpretive
                  community is by learning to understand and respond to its texts appropriately.
                But let us return to the text. Fish suggests that, while none of the meanings is
                  the only literal one, Is there a required textbook for this course? is
                     more normal than Will this course assume the meaningfulness of
                     texts? (he does not further discuss the third meaning). He argues that the
                  first meaning has a broader context of understanding (the participants need only
                  know roughly what is normal in the context of the first day of class), and the
                  second a narrower, more specialized one (the participants need to know something
                  about Fish’s literary theory). The fact that the student and the professor could
                  only have come to the required knowledge through reading and listening to Fish’s
                  ideas, however, makes his cavalier neglect of the words of the text seem little
                  more than a debater’s trick.
               But if we use corpora to investigate the crucial phrase text in this class
                  and some variants of it, we gain access to evidence about how that huge
                  interpretive community called speakers of English actually uses the phrase.
                  Unfortunately, the phrase is not common enough for the BNC to be of much use,
                  though the fact that the only instance of text in this class in the BNC is
                  a reference to the title of Fish’s book is significant, as will become clear
                  shortly. Turning again to Google (search for text in this class, 7/20/06),
                  we find that nearly 90% of about 31,200 uses of the phrase are direct references
                  to Fish’s book, and only about 6% mean Is there a required textbook for this
                     course? (My counts are based on a manual examination of 500 hits taken from
                  throughout the 1,000 that Google provides; the results should be taken as
                  suggestive rather than in any way definitive.) This proportion is a tribute to the
                  importance of the book since 1980. A search for text for this class returns
                  about 18,300 hits, almost all of which mean Is there a required textbook for
                     this course? Here are the frequencies of some related phrases, with those
                  already discussed repeated for clarity:
               
                  
                     text for this class
                     18,300
                  
                  
                     text in this class
                     31,200
                  
                  
                     texts for this class
                     890
                  
                  
                     texts in this class
                     200
                  
                  
                     text for this course
                     81,600
                  
                  
                     text in this course
                     750
                  
                  
                     texts for this course
                     31,100
                  
                  
                     textbook for this class
                     19,600
                  
                  
                     textbook in this class
                     110
                  
                  
                     textbooks for this class
                     450
                  
                  
                     textbooks in this class
                     20
                  
                  
                     textbook for this course
                     102,000
                  
                  
                     textbook in this course
                     80
                  
                  
                     textbooks for this course
                     93,200
                  
                  
                     syllabus for this class
                     10,300
                  
                  
                     syllabus in this class
                     50
                  
                  
                     syllabus for this course
                     52,700
                  
                  
                     syllabus in this course
                     100
                  
               
               Currently, it would seem, text in this class is quite an unusual way of
                  indicating textbook for this course, the meaning that Fish suggests is the
                  most normal. The preposition for is normal while in is unusual:
                  overall, not counting text for/in this class, phrases with for are
                  almost 200 times as frequent as those with in. Furthermore, course
                  and textbook are more frequent than class and text. The
                  professor’s initial interpretation is (obviously) a possible one, and it may be
                  more normal now than in 1980 because of the influence of the book. The context in
                  which the question occurs is part of what makes it possible, but the evidence of
                  usage (the actions of an enormous interpretive community) confirm that the form of
                  the question is highly relevant to its interpretation and to the context in which
                  it is used. And even if the evidence presented here is not accepted as definitive,
                  it must be remembered that Fish provides no evidence at all for his claims about
                  the three possible meanings for the question. His assertions are based purely on
                  intuition.
            
            
               William Golding, Stanley Fish, and the Significance of Shrinking Sticks
                Finally let us consider Fish’s famous attack on stylistics, What is Stylistics and Why are They Saying Such Terrible Things About
                     It?, chapter two of Is There a Text in This
                     Class?
                  . I do not want to rehash this old debate, but rather to
                  discuss one central literary example he raises. Fish rejects M. A. K. Halliday’s
                  analysis of William Golding’s second novel, The
                     Inheritors, and specifically the link that Halliday asserts between the
                  linguistic characteristics of the text and its interpretation. The Inheritors is told from the point of view of a
                  Neanderthal named Lok, as his people are invaded and destroyed by more
                  modern humans, and our sentence for discussion appears in bold type in the
                  following passage from the novel:
               
                  
                     The man turned sideways in the bushes and looked at Lok along his shoulder.
                        A stick rose upright and there was a lump of bone in the middle. Lok peered
                        at the stick and the lump of bone and the small eyes in the bone things over
                        the face. Suddenly Lok understood that the man was holding the stick out to
                        him but neither he nor Lok could reach across the river. He would have
                        laughed if it were not for the echo of the screaming in his head. The stick began to grow shorter at both ends. Then it
                        shot out to full length again.
                     The dead tree by Lok's ear acquired a voice.
                     
                        Clop!
                     
                     His ears twitched and he turned to the tree. By his face there had grown a
                        twig: a twig that smelt of other, and of goose, and of the bitter berries
                        that Lok's stomach told him he must not eat. 
                  
                  
               
               As this brief excerpt shows, the novel’s limited point of view presents
                  difficulties of interpretation for the reader: Lok does not know what bows and
                  arrows are and cannot (yet) imagine one person attacking another, but Golding must
                  make us see that the man has just shot a poisoned arrow at him. Halliday’s
                  analysis argues that the reader’s difficulty is at least partly explained by the
                  peculiar Neanderthal notion of agency, in which a stick might change length by
                  itself, and by the novel’s limited vocabulary, in which there are no arrows or
                  arrowheads, no bows or the drawing of them, and no poison, but rather a
                     twig,
                  a lump of bone,
                  a stick, and bitter berries. Fish rejects Halliday’s claim that the
                  unusual features of the text force the reader to reinterpret The stick began to
                     grow shorter at both ends as the drawing of the bow:
               
                  
                     The link between the language and any
                        sense we have of Neanderthal man is fashioned in response to the demands of
                        the reading experience; it does not exist prior to that experience, and in
                        the experience of another work it will not be fashioned, even if the work
                        were to display the same formal features. In any number of contexts, the
                        sentence the stick grew shorter at both ends would present no
                        difficulty for a reader; it would require no effort of reinterpretation, and
                        therefore it would not take on the meaning which that effort creates in
                           The Inheritors.
                     
                  
               
               Fish may be right that a reader will not necessarily understand this sentence to
                  mean that a bow has been drawn without the context in which it occurs, but my
                  experience has been that the passage alone is sufficient context for many readers.
                  (It seems pointless to quibble that he has misquoted the sentence; if the text is
                  not the source of the meaning, that should be irrelevant in any case.) But in any
                  context, the sentence shapes any normal reader's interpretation in very definite
                  ways–simply by virtue of its grammatical and lexical characteristics and the
                  grammar and lexicon of English that the reader has learned. The reader must find
                  some way of assimilating the fact that the stick changes length by itself, and
                  most readers will reinterpret this sentence by adding the agency that Lok does not
                  understand.
               I have suggested that this sentence might seem relatively normal in a description
                  of a magic trick or a campfire , but an
                  examination of its occurrences in large corpora suggests further ramifications
                  that I had not considered: grow shorter is essentially an oxymoron, and so
                  might be expected to be uncommon. The metaphor of becoming larger is
                     growing is a cognitively grounded one in which increasing in size is
                  modeled on growth, our preeminent natural example of increase in size, and one
                  that we have all intimately experienced. Inanimate objects do not generally
                  increase in size without an external cause, and the best examples for the metaphor
                  are glaciers, rivers, lakes, lava flows, avalanches, and objects like snowballs
                  rolling down hills, balloons, or crystals. The best examples of decrease in size
                  are compression, shrinking, erosion, melting, and deflation.
                Without stick the phrase grow shorter seems quite ordinary, in
                  spite of being an oxymoron, and there are ten examples of a form of grow
                  followed by shorter in the BNC: 
                     
                        The architecture of triticale was altered so that it would grow
                           shorter
                        new selection pressure, and will be pushed towards growing shorter
                           coats again. 
                        Nevertheless, I worry about you as the days grow shorter
                        As the days grew shorter, the Rectory colder, the pleasure they
                           took
                        emotional and intellectual life as the autumn days grew shorter 
                        [estimates of] around 2,000 million years, have been growing shorter
                           anyway 
                        all of them found their attention span had grown shorter 
                        [nylon cords] may be showing signs of old age, knotted and growing
                           shorter 
                        The stick began to grow shorter at both ends 
                        The stick began to grow shorter at both ends.
                     
                  
               
                It seems quite significant that two of the ten examples even of this relatively
                  ordinary phrase are quotations from The Inheritors.
                  Only the first two of the ten use grow in the biological sense. In all the
                  others grow can be replaced by become and only the sentence from
                     The Inheritors describes an object changing size
                  in real time. In comparison, there are thirty-nine examples of a form of
                     grow followed by longer in the BNC. Perhaps surprisingly, only
                  nine of these refer to biological growth, and none of the thirty-nine describes an
                  object changing size in real time. (Surprises are the norm when reading a
                  concordance , ). Phrases
                  with forms of become instead of grow are even less frequent.
               A Google search for forms of grow shorter (7/20/06) returns tens of
                  thousands of hits, but an examination of several hundred of them suggests that
                  things that grow shorter tend to fall into a few main categories: 
                     days and other periods of time, cycles, hospital stays
                     articles of clothing, hair, body parts and plant parts (become shorter
                        over time, or from one generation to the next)
                     temper, patience
                     meetings, lectures, speeches, phone calls, letters, lists, sentences,
                        words
                     distances
                     fuses, candles, cigarettes, cigars, wicks
                  
               
                It is easy to see that the predominant meaning of grow shorter is
                     become shorter, that the process of shortening is typically one that
                  takes place in stages (especially for physical objects), and that many of the
                  things that become shorter are abstract. By far the most frequent item that grows
                  shorter is days, as the BNC list above also suggests (grow shorter
                  returns more than 100,000 hits; days grow shorter returns more than
                  55,000). When physical objects actually diminish in size, they are usually being
                  consumed by fire. Finally, there is a smattering of examples that are relevant to
                     The Inheritors: those that belong to the realms of
                  fantasy and magic, including transformation stories and role-playing games.
                  Textual evidence shows that even the relatively ordinary grow shorter is
                  significantly constrained, especially when the subject of the verb is a physical
                  object and the change is taking place in the present, in real time. And this
                  evidence supports Halliday’s claims about the oddness of Golding’s sentence and
                  suggests a cause for the reader’s reaction.
               Returning to the full sentence makes this point more forcefully. A Google search
                  for the stick began to grow shorter at both ends (7/20/06) returns only
                  eight hits, all quotations from The Inheritors, and
                  dropping at both ends returns four additional slightly variant quotations.
                  A more recent search (7/2/07) returns twenty-one hits, but all are still from the
                  novel, as are the eight additional hits returned by dropping at both ends.
                  Many six-word sequences from novels will return only quotations as hits, however,
                  so that it seems reasonable to expand the search by focusing on the crux of the
                  sentence: stick grew shorter. This returns only four additional hits: one
                  is a paraphrase of Golding, two are duplicates in which a walking stick is worn
                  away on a long journey, and in the other the stick shortens as it burns. There is
                  one example of [observed my searing] stick grow shorter, which refers to
                  smoking a cigarette. There are no hits for stick grows shorter, but an
                  earlier search (12/22/05) returned one example referring to cigarette smoking. A
                  search for stick grew longer returns only one hit, in a history of hockey,
                  where it describes the use of successively longer sticks, but there were three
                  other interesting hits in my earlier search, one a dream sequence in which a sharp
                  stick threateningly lengthens toward the dreamer’s face and two pieces of fantasy
                  fiction, one of which involves the explicit use of magical dust. Fish’s claim that
                  Golding’s sentence would present no difficulty in any number of contexts
                  begins to seem quite doubtful, and a text-analytic corpus approach both provides
                  unexpected insights and gives us access to evidence about how sentences are
                  used–evidence that seems far more reliable than that of unaided intuition.
               A much larger corpus would be useful in examining how and what Golding’s sentence
                  means, but the examples I have found suggest that sticks grow shorter only in
                  extremely limited contexts outside Golding’s novel, either in relatively prosaic
                  contexts where they are burnt up or wear away, or in the fantastic contexts of
                  dreams and magic. Golding’s sentence has precisely the effect Halliday claims for
                  it: it pushes us into a (necessarily fantastic) Neanderthal world in which
                  inanimate objects are not really inanimate, in which Lok’s feet are clever
                  and can see, in which logs might crawl off on business of their own. In which
                  passages like this make sense: 
                     
                        
                           The stone is a good stone, said Lok. It has not gone away. It
                              has stayed by the fire until Mal came back to it.
                        
                        He stood up and peered over the earth and stones down the slope. The
                           river had not gone away either or the mountains. The overhang had waited
                           for them. Quite suddenly he was swept up by a tide of happiness and
                           exultation. Everything had waited for them: Oa had waited for them. Even
                           now she was pushing up the spikes of the bulbs, fattening the grubs,
                           reeking the smells out of the earth, bulging the fat buds out of every
                           crevice and bough. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               Part of the power of the stick began to grow shorter at both ends is in the
                  shape of Lok’s incomprehension. For Lok, the whole world is alive, so that a stick
                  that changes length is perfectly comprehensible. Readers of the novel, which is
                  full of passages like the one above, come to see this animistic view as no mere
                  personification, but rather as an integral part of Lok’s world view, his mind
                  style. They also comprehend what he does not, until it is too late–the murderous
                  agency of his enemy, the bender of the bow.
               It is true that an appropriate context is required to interpret Golding’s
                  Neanderthal world, as Fish so forcefully argues, but to focus only on the
                  interpretive community as a source of possible interpretations of texts is not
                  only to ignore the creative acts of the writers who created those texts, but also
                  to deny ourselves access to the most crucial element of the context in which a
                  reader interprets The Inheritors: the novel itself.
                  Any theoretical position that ignores, devalues, or rejects the text merely
                  encourages sloppy thinking and foolish interpretations. 
            
         

            Conclusion
            It is time for a return to the text, specifically the electronic, computable text, to
               see what scholarly digital editions, corpora, text-analysis, statistical stylistics,
               and text-alteration can reveal about meanings and style. Scholarly digital editions
               deepen our understanding of texts even as they problematize them, especially by
               providing easy access to multiple versions of texts. Corpus analysis can reveal
               hidden semantic prosodies and
               multi-word meaning structures that have eluded thousands of years of textual study
                  , and can clarify and confirm the meaningfulness of a
               text’s vocabulary. It can even be used to fine-tune a translation by selecting words
               with appropriate frequencies and contexts . Contra
               Chomsky, McGann, and Fish, we can Trust the Text
               . Corpora can also provide usable norms for stylistic
               analysis and genre definition , and can show that authentic
               texts offer a surer basis than introspection for linguistic analysis. While
               recognizing the contribution of the reader, text-analysis can reveal kinds and levels
               of meaning that are otherwise unrecoverable , and
               statistical stylistics and authorship attribution can provide powerful new tools for
               understanding the statistical basis of style , , , , , , . Finally, even the easy malleability of electronic
               texts can be put to more constructive uses: altering a literary text is often the
               most effective way of understanding it , . There is much to be done, and many more ways of doing it
               than I have described, but the stage seems finally set for a much fuller realization
               of the value of electronic texts, for the end of the irrelevant text. 
         
