Title:  Tenure, Promotion and Digital Publication
Volume:  001
Issue:  1
Date:  3 April 2007
Abstract:  
            This is a discussion of the impact of Digital
                  Humanities Quarterly's launch on humanities scholarship.
         
Full Body Text: 
The launching of an online journal like Digital Humanities
               Quarterly represents much that is positive about the current status of our
            community and much that still must be accomplished. It is satisfying to see a totally
            online scholarly publication, especially one that seeks to fill the niche created 40
            years ago by Computers and the Humanities, a repository for
            information on the evolving relationship between humanistic endeavors and computer
            technology. That the technology this new journal employs is also the one that it studies
            can be counted as a step forward. At the same time, however, the absence of parallel
            publications in other sectors of humanities research is a measure of the distance still
            to be traveled before computer publishing is regarded as fully equal to the book and the
            print journal.
Underlying the status of online publication as an inferior medium is probably the
            concern on the part of potential contributors that appearance in electronic media is not
            as highly regarded by the gatekeepers of tenure and promotion as the traditional
            hard-bound book and the article offprint, at least in the humanities. In the survey of
            attitudes among chairs and deans of all academic disciplines I organized in 1980, long
            before even the Internet had developed, much less the World Wide Web and the widespread
            availability of personal computers and laptops, the opinion of only half the respondents
            was in favor of treating online publication, even with all the traditional safeguards of
            peer review and editorial control, as earning the same credit toward tenure and
            promotion as was provided by traditional publication. How much the balance has tilted in
            favor of the newer technology has not (to my knowledge) been measured recently. A study
            of language departments conducted by the Modern Language Association is mentioned below. 
This reluctance to provide wider and less costly access to humanities scholarship
            represents a disjuncture with the expectations of the potential audience for this
            information. The generation of students in our graduate schools today has already become
            completely at ease with computers and online communication. Even in their non-academic
            activities, theses students rely increasingly on computers for access to information of
            almost every sort. In their academic activities they download electronic information to
            such an extent that their instructors must plead for at least the partial use of print
            media. Now, with the drive promoted by Google to scan the contents of several major
            university and public libraries, the time is drawing close when very few reasons will
            remain to argue the superiority of books and print journals over online databases. Thus
            the arguments for directing publishing scholars toward the devious route of publishing
            new material in print, only to have it then scanned for online access become
            increasingly illogical. 
The time it will take for the academic establishment to recognize the value of online
            publication is a function of its willingness to accept the replacement of a system that
            has seemed to operate relatively well until now. Books and print articles have been the
            stairs leading to the tenure, promotion, higher salaries and reduced teaching loads that
            are the system’s rewards for scholarly industry. When deans and even chairs are
            incapable of evaluating the content of such publications, they have been able to rely on
            the number of a candidate’s publications, their substance, the prestige of their
            publishers and (to a limited extent in the humanities) the number of times they are
            cited elsewhere. 
With understandable ergophobia, these administrators do not eagerly anticipate learning
            a new system without these comforting means of measuring accomplishment. The latest
            newsletter of the Modern Language Association announces that 40.8% of departments in
               doctorate-granting institutions report no experience in evaluating refereed articles
               in electronic format, and 65.7% report no experience in evaluating monographs in
               electronic format. How daring must a pioneering candidate for tenure and/or
            promotion be to risk career advancement in this dangerous environment? 

            Digital Humanities Quarterly therefore strikes out a new
            path for humanities scholarship. The journal’s long-term success may well establish a
            pattern followed by humanities journals devoted to topics other than the application of
            the technology. If so, future issues may need to consider the consequences of that wider
            adoption of this publication mode. And future articles in this space can consider the
            implications of our impact on the evolution of academe.
