Title:  Aporias of the Digital Avant-Garde
Volume:  001
Issue:  2
Date:  12 September 2007
Abstract:  
            This article maps two divergent trajectories within a narrowly defined sphere of
               short-form, time-based digital media created between 1995 and 2005. These works are
               considered in relation to the historical avant-garde - particularly the Structural
               film movement of the 1960s and 70s - and analyzed as responses to a range of cultural
               concerns specific to the digital age. The analysis identifies movement toward two
               terminal points: first, a mode of remix-based montage inspired by open source
               programming communities and peer-to- peer networks; and second, the emergence of a
               mode of imaging termed the digital analogue, which foregrounds the material
               basis of digital production.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            The title of this article refers to Hans Magnus Enzensberger's 1962 essay The Aporias of the Avant-Garde
               , a cautionary tale and critique of the dangers that
               arise from tying the ideology of the avant garde to radical social agendas.
               Enzensberger warns against the pretensions of movements like Futurism that were so
               easily swept up into the political ideology of fascism, and the avant-garde's general
               tendency to slip toward variously doctrinaire forms of political sloganeering. As
               Enzensberger argues, an avant-garde that is unconscious of its aporias — its internal
               contradictions and obfuscations — is even more dangerous than the reactionary
               politics that inevitably surface to resist it. Criticism about digital media, which
               has too often strayed into the realm of the utopian, would do well to heed such
               warnings. And while my present argument is largely framed in optimistic terms, it is
               particularly important to recognize the limitations of contemporary avant-garde media practices,
               given the largely hostile political and economic climate in which they have emerged. 
            As lines between categories of digital art making continue to blur, it is also
               necessary to re-examine outmoded distinctions between the practices and tools of
               cinema, video, music, animation, graphic design and motion graphics. Just as digital
               practitioners move fluidly across these boundaries, theorists and historians of new
               media must develop similarly mobile strategies of critical practice unencumbered by
               the burden of past media and analytical paradigms. Whereas the Modernist avant-garde
               privileged materiality as a means of exploiting the formal potentials of medium
               specificity, the privileged objects in this essay preserve a relation to the material
               world that grounds them historically. Ultimately, it is not an avant-garde free of
               contradictions that we seek, but one that illuminates the position of digital media
               in relation to systems of control — including the rules of representation,
               technology, and history. 
            To do this, we will focus on a small number of short-form, time-based, digital media
               — a disparate array of music videos, short films and motion graphics created during
               the past ten years. Despite the fact that the work under consideration here has
               rapidly proliferated and resonated with many of the key theoretical issues in cinema
               and visual culture studies of the past three decades, it has been largely neglected
               by theorists and critics of digital culture.Of course there are notable
                  exceptions, especially Holly Willis' New Digital Cinema: Reinventing the
                     Moving Image
                  . This is as good a time as any to acknowledge my
                  profound indebtedness to Holly Willis' thoughtful engagement with this body of
                  work during her four year tenure as editor-in-chief of Res Magazine
                  and co-curator of the ResFest, a traveling festival responsible for promoting and
                  exhibiting some of the most interesting short form media of the past decade. Also
                  of interest is Andrew Darley's Visual Digital Culture: Surface Play and
                     Spectacle in New Media Genres
                  , which dealt with a previous generation of music
                  video, and Scott Bukatman's Matters of Gravity: Special Effects and
                     Supermen in the 20th Century
                  , which is particularly useful for its commentary on
                  the problematic role of pleasure for academics who are concerned with popular
                  media. Part of the reason for this neglect is practical. The works
               themselves are often ephemeral or difficult to access and they tend to occupy a
               liminal position between what is called experimental or avant-garde
               film and video, and the equally broadly defined field of practice termed new
                  media. These works therefore do not fit into any consistent curricular or
               publishing niche, are rarely a part of mainstream culture, do not receive theatrical
               distribution or broadcasting, and are often regarded with suspicion as proper objects
               of study within an academic context.The primary cultural vehicles for this work
                  have been limited to festivals, trade publications and specialty DVD releases,
                  such as the US's Res/fest; the UK's onedotzero and
                     Ninjatune; and Japan's Gas TV.
               Nonetheless, I will argue that much of this work may be productively understood as a
               processing ground for some of the most compelling issues in contemporary digital
               culture.
            I am particularly interested in these works' expression of the status of narrative,
               of relations between technology and material culture, and of emergent conceptions of
               space, time, and bodies. As a point of entry, I will ask whether this work may be
               meaningfully understood in relation to the historical avant-garde, particularly the
               Euro-American Structural film movement of the 1960s and 70s. I do not, however, wish
               to spend much time justifying my use of the term avant-garde, which admittedly carries specific historical connotations
               that are not all applicable to the present discussion.I would argue that this
                  term is capacious and porous enough, even acknowledging its previous uses, to
                  suggest a type of media art practice that is formally or politically experimental,
                  innovative or provocative and I ask the reader's indulgence in accepting this as
                  an operational definition of avant-garde
                  media art. Instead, I will focus on two primary vectors of consideration.
               The first is the movement toward what may be termed open source video
               authoring, modeled after the combined practices of open source programming
               communities and peer-to-peer file sharing networks. The second is the emergence of
               what I call the digital analogue, a mode of representation that foregrounds
               material aspects of production seemingly in defiance of the conventional wisdom that
               digital media are characterized by dematerialization and disconnection from the
               physical world. 
            Because the title of this essay features the rather glaring oxymoron digital
                  avant-garde, it may be useful to define these terms in isolation in order to
               frame the use I hope to make of them in juxtaposition. The term digital rarely
               denotes a set of cohesive practices. Digital media are notoriously hybrid, often
               bringing together images, sounds, and objects that are computer-generated or mediated
               with others that originate in the analogue, photochemical, or textual worlds. There
               is, however, a certain utility to digital as a historicizing term,
               particularly as it implies its own eventual obsolescence. I am less interested,
               therefore, in defining digital culture in terms of technology than in
               attempting to identify the social practices and preoccupations that are particular to
               the digital age. One of the things at stake within the consumer culture that
               surrounds digital media is the growing invisibility of its underpinning technology.
               Given the current movement toward ubiquitous computing and wireless networks, this is
               of particular relevance; even flat panel monitors and microprocessors that are
               embedded in everyday objects seem to negate the physical infrastructure of the
               computer and by implication, its socio-industrial base. 
            For the purposes of this essay, the avant-garde may be defined as a
               non-singular and contradictory range of minor practices that are dialectically
               related to — i.e., both resistant to and constitutive of — dominant media systems.
               These works are characterized by multiplicity, micro-politics and formal
               experimentation, and perhaps most disquietingly, they are often exo-commercial — that
               is, positioned in a marginal but necessary relationship to the economically
               sustaining infrastructure of the entertainment and advertising industries. This
               working definition is indebted to David James' work on American avant-garde film of
               the 1960s, which debunks the old avant-garde / commercial binary as both false and
                  misleading.See David James, Allegories of Cinema: American Film in
                     the Sixties
                  . At the level of both institutions and
               individuals, James argues for a historical model that acknowledges the fundamentally
               cross-pollinating relationship between commercial and experimental film practice. 
            My desire to reclaim the concept of the avant-garde for the digital age stems from a
               firm belief in the relevance of media to politics and culture. I see great potential
               benefit in developing a critical apparatus for understanding these exo-commercial
               practices as embedded in a broader context with economic and social implications.
               Holly Willis has further argued for the value of seriously considering these works as
               symptomatic indicators of cultural obsessions: 
                  Despite the general dismissal of these
                     works, many music videos, as well as design shorts, offer a compelling
                     examination of some of the central issues that we face as a culture, and
                     indeed, one might argue that these rather disparate artworks offer a map of
                     contemporary anxieties, fascinations and concerns.
                  
               What is ultimately at issue in both digital and avant-garde is
               our ability to relate these terms to the needs and struggles of everyday life. Put
               more simply, the goal is to ascribe relevance to particular practices of digital
               culture in a historical context. Thus, I believe it is possible to deploy the term
                  avant-garde with respect for its historical specificity, but at the same
               time, to make a claim for its continuing usefulness in discussing contemporary art
               practices that have evolved in parallel with commercial-industrial media. 
         

            Digital Ontology
            Within visual culture, digital imaging has come to signify an ontological shift away
               from the indexical trace of the photograph. Where photochemical imaging could lay
               claim to a direct relation to the physical world, both conventional wisdom and
               everyday experience suggest that digital images more commonly function as hybrid
               constructions of the world they purportedly represent. Although the problematic of
               representing reality long predates the appearance of digital technology, the early
               1990s marked a point of no return for the representational capacity of images. In his
               1991 book Representing Reality, documentary film theorist Bill Nichols
               offered this almost sheepish disclaimer: 
                  [through digital sampling] The image
                     becomes a series of bits, a pattern of yes/no choices registered within a
                     computer's memory […] There is no original negative […] against which all
                     prints can be compared for accuracy and authenticity. There may not even be an
                     external referent. The implications of all this are only beginning to be
                     grasped. They clearly set a historical framework around the discussion
                     presented in this book, which continues to emphasize the qualities and
                     properties of the photographic image. 
                  
                The previous year, in his influential book on 19th century visual culture
                  Techniques of the Observer, Jonathan Crary noted that digital
               imaging constitutes a categorical break from the photographic processes that were
               developed in the early 19th century. With digital imaging, Crary asserts, vision is
               relocated to 
                  a plane severed from a human observer […]
                     Most of the historically important functions of the human eye are being
                     supplanted by practices in which visual images no longer have any reference to
                     the position of an observer in a real,
                     optically perceived world. If these images can be said to refer to anything, it
                     is to millions of bits of electronic, mathematical data.
                  
                The problem with digital images, as Crary defines them, is that they are not
               linked in an indexical relationship to the real
                  world (which he revealingly equates with the optically perceived world).From my perspective, both
                  Nichols and Crary choose highly unfortunate terms for describing the
                     real world. Where Nichols writes about the historical world; Crary opts for optically perceived world, both of which introduce more
                  complications than they dissolve. What is at stake here are not merely the
               technical affordances of competing technologies of vision but a philosophical
               metaphor describing the way we attain knowledge about the world. But in
               characterizing the ontological shift represented by digital imaging in terms of loss,
               it is all too easy to find ourselves in a nostalgic desire for the prelapsarian
               authenticity of the photograph — a concept that is itself dubious at best.
            In his essay Avant-Garde as Software, Lev Manovich
               extends this loss to the failure of the avant-garde to sustain the convergence of
               formal and political interests: 
                  The old media avant-garde came up with
                     new forms, new ways to represent reality and new ways to see the world. The new
                     media avant-garde is about new ways of accessing and manipulating information
                     […] The new avant-garde is no longer concerned with seeing or representing the
                     world in new ways but rather with accessing and using in new ways previously
                     accumulated media.
                  
               Manovich aptly describes the development of database structures and recombinant
               media that are crucial to networked culture. However, his model overlooks the
               potential of this new media avant-garde to engage new ways of seeing the world that
               are rooted not in optical perception but in the harnessing of data flows. This shift,
               summarized by Peter Weibel as a move from
                  the ruins of representation to the practices of processing
               , highlights the need for rethinking networks in
               epistemological terms. This article aims to position the functioning of digital
               networks as not merely a vehicle for the transmission of data, but also a means of
                  seeing and understanding the world. At stake in this investigation is an
               emergent understanding of the ways media practitioners are enacting new forms of
               networked subjectivity and creativity that are characteristic of an open
                  source authoring mode. These networked practices should not be uncritically
               privileged — they are as readily deployed for evil as for good — but I want to probe
               the transformative impact of networks on historical avant-garde tactics of
               appropriation and recombination. 
         

            Modernism and Avant-Garde
            In her book The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist
                  Myths, Rosalind Krauss challenges the discourse of originality on which
               the concept of the Modernist avant-garde was based, arguing that the actual practice of vanguard art tends to reveal that 'originality'
                  is a working assumption that itself emerges from a ground of repetition and
                  recurrence. Indeed, she argues, originality and repetition are often bound
               together through shared formal and structural constructs, and she identifies one such
               construct — the grid — as a privileged technique of spatial organization within the
               painted modernist frame. For Krauss, photography provided the final seeds of
               destruction of originality as the sine qua non of modernist art.
               Her argument turns approvingly to the photographic work of Cindy Sherman and Sherrie
               Levine as marking a break with the modernist notion of origin, moving instead into an
               era characterized by the postmodernist discourse of the copy. Now, the operative
               question is whether the discourse of the copy that so aptly described the
               Appropriationist movement of the 1980s (of which Levine and Sherman were a part)
               still applies to digital media. 
            In digital media, the act of copying has moved from figure to ground, whether at the
               level of the individual pixel, the sample, or the peer-to-peer network. In other
               words, the status of the copy is no longer at stake — it is as much of a given to
               digital composition as brush strokes are to painting. To further update Krauss' take
               on the dynamic interplay between originality and repetition, we must revisit her
               privileging of the grid as a structuring framework. The grid, for Krauss, marked
               Modern art's categorical withdrawal from representation and mimesis. 
                  Flattened, geometricized, ordered, it is
                     antinatural, antimimetic, antireal. It is what art looks like when it turns its
                     back on nature. In the flatness that results from its coordinates, the grid is
                     the means of crowding out the dimensions of the real and replacing them with
                     the lateral spread of a single surface
                  
               Krauss goes on to ruminate on the irony of the avant-garde artist turning,
               again and again, in a celebration of his own originality to the form of the grid for
               its realization: 
                  That so many generations of 20th-century
                     artists should have maneuvered themselves into this particular position of
                     paradox — where they are condemned to repeating, as if by compulsion, the
                     logically fraudulent original — is truly compelling 
                  
                She further argues that nothing less than the collusion of museums,
               historians, and makers of art has served to continually assert the superiority of
               originality over repetition in modern art, a conundrum that was left to postmodernism
               to outstrip.
            Within digital media, however, it seems clear that the two-dimensional X-Y axis of
               Krauss' modernist grid has given way to work that places equal if not greater fetish
               value on the Z-axis, and the possibility, if not the imperative, of composing in
               depth using 3-D modeling software, video game engines, immersive and telepresent
               technologies, mobile media, etc. In his book Snap to Grid, Peter
               Lunenfeld identifies the two-dimensional grid as the enemy of the digital designer,
               whose first act upon opening an application is to turn off the snapping function so
               as not to be constrained by the quantum logic of arbitrarily imposed Cartesian
               coordinates . In the work under consideration here, it
               is possible to identify two responses to this tendency that suggest alternatives to
               the privileging of the Z-axis. Within the realm of the digital analogue, there
               is frequently a gravitation toward work that foregrounds the tension between flatness
               and depth, a kind of resistance to immersion that arguably un-privileges
               three-dimensionality. And in the zone of networked communication, a figurative Z-axis
               may be understood to signify the dimensional structure of the Internet or the
               datasphere of wireless media that concerns practitioners of mobile and distributed
               media. 
         

            Open Source Paradigm
            Within the realm of what may be termed open source video — i.e., re-edited
               videos that are distributed online and via file-sharing networks — it is possible to
               view the rhizomatic structure of the Internet as a corrective to the Cartesian
               coordinates of three-dimensional space. This is particularly realized in the
               structure of global peer-to-peer distribution networks, which can no longer be
               regarded as external and posterior to the digital artwork itself. Instead, I believe
               we are witnessing a transformation of the digital artwork's position as fundamentally
               entangled with circuits of replication, recombination, dissemination, and along with
               them, endless potentials for productive mutation. Both Lunenfeld and Manovich have
               described this transformation as a shift to information-based aesthetics, impacting a broad base of digital practices
               from art and architecture to film and computational media. When addressing works that
               emerge from the informational space of the network, we are dealing not with originals
               and reproductions but memes and mutants — circuits of data flow and transformation
               that assert their own ontological status. Perhaps most importantly, we must address
               these networks in both material and functional terms, as cultural formations that are
               the products of material and ideological necessity and not merely passive conduits
               for data. 
            
               
               
               Image of the Beatles performing, with a placard reading DJ Danger Mouse positioned in front of the drum
                  set
            
            A recent cultural object to emerge from this space is the Grey Video,
               which was created and released anonymously in October 2004, only to be shut down by
               the record label EMI as part of its continuing efforts to enforce control over their
               copyright of the Beatles' White Album. The background to this story is
               widely known: on February 24, 2004, a group called Downhill Battle organized a
               day-long electronic civil disobedience action called Grey Tuesday. Downhill Battle
               sought to protest the legal action taken by EMI to suppress a remix by DJ Danger
               Mouse that combined rhythm tracks from the Beatles' White Album with
               vocal tracks from Jay-Z's Black Album to create the underground
               sensation, the Grey Album. During the 24 hours of Grey Tuesday, over
               100,000 copies of the Grey Album were reportedly downloaded from
               hundreds of sites across the Internet and an estimated million more copies were
               traded over file sharing networks. At the same time, hundreds more websites
               demonstrated their support by converting their home page color palette to all grey.
               Although its impact was largely symbolic, Grey Tuesday is still regarded as the most
               successful instance of organized civil disobedience against the music industry. Nine
               months later, the Grey Album was followed by the Grey
                  Video, which was created and released anonymously by the design firm Ramon
               & Pedro. The official
               Grey Video website was predictably shut down within a few weeks of its
               launch, although the video continues to circulate on mirror sites and peer networks
               across the Internet. 
            The Grey Video begins with a performance by the Beatles before a live
               television studio audience. Just moments into the song, images of the rapper Jay-Z
               begin to encroach on the performance and his own lead vocals are added to the
               background music of a cut-up Beatles song. Images of bumbling and ineffectual
               broadcast engineers may be understood as a metaphorical jab at the RIAA, who are
               powerless to recover control of the images being disseminated, first as Jay-Z's image
               appears on one and then all three television monitors in the control booth and later
               as the musical remix causes a breakdown of both artists' performance. As Ringo's drum
               kit is replaced by a set of turntables and the words DJ Danger Mouse, the vestigial musicians Paul and George are
               perfunctorily replaced by dancers, and John performs a virtuosic break dance
               punctuated by a protracted round of spinning on his head and a screen-exiting
               backflip that leaves the singer's signature mop-top wig lying symbolically on the
               stage. On one level, all of this amounts to little more than a parodic gesture, but
               the electronic civil disobedience of Grey Tuesday and the visuals of the obviously
               hastily produced Grey Video eloquently speak both to consumer
               frustrations with increasingly restrictive copyright laws and to the growing power of
               peer networks to subvert their enforcement. 
            Apart from the barely noticeable R+P logo that flashes on screen at the end of the
               video, Ramon & Pedro nowhere acknowledge responsibility for the Grey
                  Video, which was made with no possibility of direct profit for the design
               team. Indeed, a disclaimer at the head of the video announces that it was made as an
               experiment and not for commercial purposes. But the video was also made in full
               knowledge that the official site would be shut down and trusting in the hope that a
               decentered grassroots network would step in and take over distribution of the video.
               I don't necessarily want to offer Ramon & Pedro as outlaw media hackers — they
               are rather savvy entrepreneurs who understand the economy of value in viral marketing
               and the power of aligning themselves (albeit slightly disingenuously) with the
               anti-industry, anti-commercial sentiments of today's remix culture. Taken in
               aggregate, however, I believe the Downhill Battle protest, coupled with the
               widespread, illicit circulation of the Grey Video is exemplary of a
               mode of practice that is defined by the logic of the open source network at the level
               of production, distribution, and reception. Another direct legacy of Downhill
               Battle's Grey Tuesday action is the group's own spinoff organization, The
               Participatory Culture Foundation, a non-profit advocacy group which seeks to create
               tools that facilitate the conjunction of culture and politics.The group's
                  initial software release, Democracy Player, is a free, open source program that
                  supports a democratic vision of Internet-based television: http://www.getdemocracy.com. 
               As legal and cultural struggles over copyright and control of the internet continue,
               the networks and tools of such organizations, along with widespread cultural
               practices based on participation and collective action, offer crucial sites of
               potential resistance. 
         

            Digital Resistance? 
            Among the most vocal advocates of the concept of a digital avant-garde that is
               directly engaged in resisting corporate domination of media is the Critical Art
               Ensemble (CAE), which argues unabashedly for work that places a high value on experimentation and on engaging the unbreakable link
                  between representation and politics.
               This position, of course, grows increasingly ironic in light of the case
                  mounted by the Justice Department against CAE member Steve Kurtz as retaliation
                  for the group's activism with regard to biotechnology. In their 2002
               manifesto Digital Resistance, CAE elaborate on their call for a
               critically engaged electronic civil
                  disobedience
               
                  Electronic Civil Disobedience and Other Unpopular Ideas was also
                  the title of CAE's previous book . that explicitly
               works to bridge the formal and political dimensions of avant-garde practice. CAE
               argues that, just as capitalism has become increasingly nomadic, mobile, dispersed
               and electronic, artists and activists must respond in kind: modeling forms of digital
               resistance that are equally liquid, but preferably operating by means that are less
               compatible with the status quo functioning of the entertainment industries: 
                  After all, an avalanche of literature from
                     very fine postmodern critics has for the past two decades consistently told us
                     that the avant-garde is dead and has been placed in a suitable resting plot in
                     the Modernist cemetery alongside its siblings, originality and the author. In
                     the case of the avant-garde, however, perhaps a magic elixir exists that can
                     reanimate this corpse
                  
                The elixir they refer to is digital technology and the increasing dependence
               of late capitalist economics on global communication networks and their vulnerability
               to cultural hacking. As CAE insists, The avant-garde
                  today cannot be the mythic entity it once was. No longer can we believe that
                  artists, revolutionaries, and visionaries are able to step outside of culture to
                  catch a glimpse of the necessities of history as well as the future. In
               practical terms, CAE propose cellular constructions
                  aimed at information disruption in cyberspace. They thus advocate hacking
               as both an art form and political weapon, which points to the importance of thinking
               not just in terms of media objects and practices but also of their evolving contexts
               of distribution and exhibition. Unfortunately, the vocabulary of Hollywood film
               distribution obscures the functioning of networks and communities — some physical,
               some online or virtual — within which digital files are copied, reproduced, and
               traded. Within such a network, distinctions between viewers and producers are
               irretrievably blurred, and the one-way logic of television broadcasting and
               theatrical distribution becomes the multi-directional, many-to-many dialogue of the
               BitTorrent network. But how might this abstract cultural transformation manifest
               itself in terms of actual production? Part of the answer may be found in the
               extraordinary proliferation of remix-based videos currently in circulation via the
               internet and peer-to-peer networks.
         

            Remix as Politics
            
               
               
               TV image of George W. Bush
            
            Mike Nourse's short remix video Terror Iraq Weapons is one of many
               short, remix videos that appeared during the lead-up to the 2004 American
               presidential election. The video was created by means of executing a single
               algorithm: each occurrence (or variation) of the words terror,
               Iraq and weapons was extracted from a single speech by President George W. Bush
               and grouped in the order in which they occurred. Nourse's deceptively simple conceit
               poses a surprisingly effective critique of both the Bush campaign's mendacious
               association of al Qaeda's attack on the World Trade Center with the regime of Saddam
               Hussein and the central canard of the administration's advocacy of war, namely the
               existence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq prior to the American military
               onslaught in 2003. At the same time, Nourse's video invites us to think about the
               functioning of the news media as a passive echo chamber for campaign and
               administration talking points. The low-tech simplicity of Nourse's process invites
               viewers to imagine creating their own variations on this project, transforming
               virtually any electronic broadcast into potential raw materials for re-editing and
                  redistribution.Robert Greenwald's well-meaning but overwrought documentary
                  about Fox News, Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch's War on Journalism
                  , performs a similarly manipulative rhetorical
                  maneuver in illustrating its critiques against the network with rapid fire montage
                  sequences culled from hundreds or perhaps thousands of hours of recorded
                  broadcasts. The result is a kind of temporary, rhetorical assault that might seem
                  discursively dishonest and unconvincing to anyone who is not already aligned with
                  the film politically. For me, what makes Outfoxed interesting is Greenwald's
                  decision to release his original interview materials into the public domain to be
                  freely used by others — which again underscores the importance of the peer network
                  over the individual artwork as a primary site of political resistance.
            
            Nourse's deployment of an explicitly algorithmic process also exemplifies one aspect
               of art production in the database age by emphasizing the importance of keywords as a
               means of understanding and reprocessing the content of media broadcasts. The
               attribution of metadata, such as keywords, to any media set constitutes a similar
               process — the distillation of key concepts from a field of possibilities. The result,
               as with the information-handling capacity of a database system, is to amplify the
               power of recombination and use of the data set, in this case, turning media consumers
               into producers of alternative or resistant meanings.I view the linguistic
                  mutation of Nourse's video as distinct from other appropriative practices in
                  politically engaged documentary and avant-garde film, such as Emile de Antonio's
                     In the Year of the Pig (1968) or Charles Ridley's Panzer
                     Ballet (1940), in which propaganda images are given oppositional
                  meanings through reediting and recontextualization. Nourse's video and many
               others like it, including Lenka Clayton's qaeda quality question quickly
                  quickly quiet (2002), operate in a specifically linguistic realm, with
               almost total disregard for the visual. Clayton's film, which has also been released
               in audio-only format on LP (thereby underscoring its relation to DJ culture), takes
               every one of the 3814 words in Bush's infamous Axis of
                  Evil State of the Union speech and simply re-edits them into alphabetical
               order. In both Nourse's and Clayton's videos, the image of the president jumps
               spastically around the screen, enslaved by the syntactic rearrangement taking place
               in the verbal register. This welcome reversal of the usual image-sound hierarchy has
               its most disruptive impact on the performative aspects of the political speeches,
               whose constructed inflections and cadences are simultaneously subverted and revealed
               by the imposed structure of the re-edit. 
         

            Structural Film as Archetype 
            This type of algorithmic manipulation strongly resembles the Euro-American Structural
               film movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s, which was associated with filmmakers
               such as Michael Snow, Hollis Frampton, Ernie Gehr, Paul Sharits, Joyce Wieland, and
               Peter Kubelka, and which finds an active legacy in the continuing work of filmmakers
               such as James Benning, Su Friedrich, Morgan Fisher, and Martin Arnold. Although
               highly influential among experimental filmmakers, this work was deservedly criticized
               for its makers' decision to pursue a set of artistic interests that were
               fundamentally apolitical and inward-looking, even in the midst of the cultural
               turmoil surrounding the Vietnam war and civil rights movements. For David James, this
               movement aligns seamlessly with the conceptual and minimalist movements in the art
               world — posing an institutional critique of the art world's persistent effacement of
               the materiality of its objects. Pure film,
               as James calls it, constituted cinema's response to Clement Greenberg's call for
               medium specificity, drawing attention to the surfaces and planes of the film image
               and its unique, artistic properties by using techniques such as scratched emulsion,
               loop printing, and mathematically derived editing structures. 
            Structural film is often misunderstood as a fundamentally reductive and solipsistic
               practice when, in fact, much of the most interesting work is engaged in broader
               questions of historiography, narrative, memory, perception, and cognition in the
               cinematic processing of space and time. Ernie Gehr's work is exemplary in this
               regard, fulfilling both the rigid structural impulse of the movement's most extreme
               adherents, while simultaneously engaging in broader philosophical, historiographical,
               and perceptual concerns. Likewise, Morgan Fisher's body of work, which offers
               cinema's most esoteric and monomaniacal examination of the processes and mechanics of
               the cinematic apparatus, also constitutes one of its most erudite commentaries on
               otherwise too-easily-suppressed aspects of the Hollywood film industry. 
            While Structural film has been largely regarded as a footnote within film studies, it
               has resonated with remarkable tenacity in certain sectors of digital media art.
               Lunenfeld's decision to include a chapter on Structural filmmaker Hollis Frampton in
                  Snap to Grid, for example, has been much commented upon as a
               bizarre anachrony in a book ostensibly devoted to digital culture and design. But
               Lunenfeld's gravitation toward work by Frampton and other Structuralists is not
               merely idiosyncratic. The majority of Structural films are themselves mathematical or
               algorithmic in conception — characteristics that are consonant with the workings of
               digital media. Indeed Lunenfeld argues, the ascendancy of the digital image has rendered
                  experimental film ripe for a renaissance […] the experimental cinema can serve as
                  a model for computer-inflected art. I believe, in fact, that the most interesting
                  new media works aspire to the condition of the experimental cinema without quite
                  realizing it.
               . In her book New Digital
                  Cinema, Holly Willis likewise identifies Ernie Gehr's Structural classic
                  Serene Velocity (1970) as a key progenitor of digital media's
               fascination with space as our era's
                  primary focus of concern, noting that Serene Velocity was
               created within a few months of the prototype network that would become the Internet. 
            A somewhat more literal case in point may be found in the work of artist Barbara
               Lattanzi, who has created a series of image processing systems called idiomorphic software, which function as handlers
               for online media.
                  http://www.wildernesspuppets.net
                These include EG Serene, which is named after Ernie Gehr's
                  Serene Velocity and which takes any piece of Quicktime video and
               provides controllers that allow users to approximate the editing patterns found in
                  Serene Velocity (1970)The system works with any piece of
                  video footage but Lattanzi recommends using content such as pornography,
                  surveillance footage, or home movies.; and HF Critical Mass,
               which operates on the same principle in order to mimic the editing of Hollis
               Frampton's Critical Mass (1971).Another example is Japanese
                  filmmaker Sueoka Ichiro, who has completed a series of short films and
                  gallery-based installations titled Requiem for Avant-Garde
                     Film. Sueoka's body of work includes titles such as A Film in
                     Which There did NOT Appear Sprocket Holes, Edge Lettering without Dirt
                     Particles, which references George Landow's Film in Which There
                     Appear Sprocket Holes, Edge Lettering, Dirt Particles and etc. (1966,
                  16mm, 4mins, US); A flick film in which there appear Liz and Franky is
                     composed under the score of ARNULF RAINER by P. Kubelka on NTSC (2000),
                  which uses footage of Elizabeth Taylor from Elephant Walk (1954)
                  and Frank Sinatra from Come Blow Your Horn (1963) to substitute for
                  the alternating white and black frames of Kubelka's Arnulf Rainer
                  (1960); and Studies for Serene Velocity (2003), which offers a
                  direct homage to Ernie Gehr's Serene Velocity, exploring the length
                  of a hallway through rapidly varying focal lengths. Lattanzi's
               tongue-in-cheek homage to Gehr and Frampton, whose obsession with film's materiality
               represents the apotheosis of cinematic medium specificity, highlights a key
               distinction between film and digital media. Structural filmmakers' fetishistic
               relationship to their apparatus of production is largely denied to makers of digital
               media, whose creative interactions largely take place within the domain of software
               and therefore rarely reference the role of the computer as object-machine. Lattanzi's
               work instead places its emphasis on interface over physicality and on constructing
               systems that handle and reconfigure pre-existing media into new patterns. Idiomorphic
               software offers users a form of empowerment and control that is of an entirely
               different order than conventional interactive narratives. It also suggests ways to
               talk about the specificity of digital media that do not simply replicate the
               formalist impulses of Structural film. 
         

            The Digital Analogue 
            
               
               
               Image showing a sample of Virgil Widrich's work, appearing to be of folded
                  paper with the faces of Cary Grant and Grace Kelly displayed in a structure
                  resembling an automobile.
            
            Although materiality is often elided within digital media, the physicality of film
               images remains a source of explicit fascination for certain media artists. Perhaps
               the most remarkable of these is Austrian experimental filmmaker Virgil Widrich. Along
               with the filmmakers Peter Tscherkassky and Martin Arnold, Widrich is part of a third generation of Austrian experimental
               filmmakers who all share an obsessive interest in fragmenting and decomposing film
               frames and working with movement and repetition within the frame. Until recently,
               Widrich was the only one of the three to work digitally. Both Arnold and Tscherkassky
               have prided themselves on rejecting digital technology, even as they create works
               that are deeply connected to the logic of digital media in their use of repetition
               and recombination. Widrich's work is additionally provocative in its return to paper
               as a substrate for moving images. In the last few years Widrich has completed two
               films — Copy Shop (2001) and Fast Film (2003) — that
               are based on a method of production that requires thousands of digital video frames
               to be printed out on paper, folded, torn, and then re-animated. On one level, this
               work constitutes a return to primitive cinema, the kind of frame-by-frame, hand-made
               production described by Lev Manovich as characteristic of digital cinema In
                     The Language of New Media
                  , Manovich somewhat ominously predicts a day when
                     given enough time and money, one
                     can create what will be the ultimate digital film: 90 minutes, 129,600 frames
                     completely painted by hand from scratch, but indistinguishable in appearance
                     from live photography.
                — but on another level, it demonstrates a process that calls an unusual
               degree of attention to the material substrate of cinema. The result for viewers is an
               acute awareness not only of the materiality of the film they are watching but also of
               the layering of moments in time that is allegorized through the production process. 
            
               Fast Film also presents an extreme and literal use of intertextuality,
               in which characters from nearly three hundred different films move seamlessly through
               a single narrative space. The film suggests a re-assertion of the individual subject
               as the associative consciousness of the narrative and assures that each viewing
               experience will be different, as viewers recognize different clips, characters and
               moments from each sampled film. The structure of Fast Film is that of
               a recombinant database that serves as both homage and parody in its affectionate
               pillaging of Hollywood history. Arguably, it is the anxiety attending the ethereality
               of digital technology that occasions this extreme foregrounding of material processes
               — namely the crazy, obsessive work of printing, numbering, folding, tearing and then
               re-photographing tens of thousands of film frames. Another factor is our immersion in
               an era when questions of copyright and intellectual property have moved from the
               expert discourses of litigation and technology into the forefront of many people's
               everyday lives.Ironically, Fast Film shares a material mode of
                  production with the films in the Library of Congress' Paper Print Collection. This
                  collection was responsible for the preservation of about 3000 films made prior to
                  1912 when printing images on rolls of paper was the only way to register a
                  copyright; and while the nitrate originals have long since disintegrated or
                  combusted, the paper prints have remained in good condition. A related area to
                  consider are the continuities with the paper base of early computing, including
                  the Turing machine and the punch card-based Hollerith machine. 
            
            Widrich's rejection of the ease of digital compositing in favor of laboriously
               captured, printed, torn and folded origami animations provides part of the
               justification for its existence. This labor, in fact, gives the lie to contemporary
               discourses about the ease and simplicity of digital piracy and the lack of creativity
               among those who remix copyrighted materials. The underlying labor is self-consciously
               referenced only once in the film, when a train chase ends by plummeting off the side
               of a cliff. After plunging downward through space, the animated cutouts crash through
               the Mardi Gras cemetery scene from Easy Rider. The chaotic trains
               puncture this moment of relative calm, burrowing down through the film plane into a
               thick stack of animation cells as if descending through the earth's core. In this
               moment, Widrich lays bare the part of his filmmaking process that would ordinarily be
               suppressed. We may view this as a return to Krauss' modernist grid, which has been
               deliberately tipped over and laid on its side along the Z-axis, while a similar
               violence is done to the frame — that other inviolable rectangle of modern art: nearly
               every image is torn, folded, sawed or crinkled and thereby committed to a new context
               before being rephotographed. Fast Film is perhaps the quintessential
               instance of the digital analogue — a small but growing subset of work that
               attempts to renegotiate the basic terms of digital representation as something that
               requires attention to the material substrates of even the most ephemeral practices.
            
         

            Against Convergence; For Syncretism
            It is a truism of the digital age that media have lost their specificity, that art
               history's cherished formal properties have been consigned to the dustbin of history,
               replaced by elaborately sequenced but otherwise undifferentiated combinations of
               zeroes and ones. The rhetoric of digital convergence began in the research
               laboratories at Xerox PARC in the late 1960s and has been a powerful trope of digital
               culture ever since. The concept proved agreeable to the computer and entertainment
               industries as they sought to articulate a vision of technology to consumers eager to
               purchase each successive generation of media technologies en route toward one vast
               interoperable digital system. Convergence also works effectively at the level of
               practice by describing the multifunctional software tools used by digital designers
               who often move fluidly across boundaries of sound and image editing, visual effects,
               CGI, interface design, and animation. Finally, convergence offers a useful model for
               understanding what is happening at the corporate level through mergers and the
               vertical conglomeration of media and technology industries. 
            For some theorists, however, convergence marks a dangerous turn away from the
               specificity of individual media. Friedrich Kittler, in Gramophone, Film,
                  Typewriter
               , describes the situation with what seems to be a rising
               sense of panic: 
                  Before the end, something is coming to
                     an end. The general digitization of channels and information erases the
                     differences among individual media. Sound and image, voice and text, are
                     reduced to surface effects, known to consumers as interface. […] And once
                     optical fiber networks turn formerly distinct data flows into a standardized
                     series of digitized numbers, any medium can be translated into any other. […] a
                     total media link on a digital base will erase the very concept of
                     medium
                  
                For Kittler, these undifferentiated streams of digital information threaten to
               obviate not only discrete media, but the human bodies once capable of perceiving
               them. The euphoric dissolution of media and bodies resonated in digital theories of
               the late 1990s that emphasized the transition from atoms to bits, and the celebratory
               figuring of digital media as ethereal, disembodied, cyber. The ideology
               of dematerialization — what Lunenfeld calls vapor theory — divorces the products and practices
               of digital culture from their position in history and in the socially and materially
               grounded circumstances of their construction. 
            According to this model, not only is it impossible for non-specialists to
                  understand the workings of digital technology, but a concomitant
                  myth of transparency identified
               by Laura Marks renders the material substrates of computer technology
                  invisible.Another way to think about this is in terms of a
                  shift, which has roughly straddled the turn of the 20th - 21st centuries, from a
                  culture that was defined by visuality — e.g., the image saturation of television,
                  movies and advertising — to one that is on its way to being defined, if not by
                  invisibility, then by the tension between visibility and invisibility as
                  intangible global networks and an information economy continue to serve as a
                  staging area for cultural anxieties. This is perhaps most painfully apparent in
                  the practice of color-coded terror alerts which seek to articulate the nation's
                  fear of invisible sleeper cells and international terror networks in the
                  visible register. The promise of transparent, ideally functioning
               technology, Marks argues, taps into latent desires for virtual immortality. When we
               are reminded of the physicality of computers (e.g., via their propensity for
               crashing), we are also reminded of their imminent obsolescence and with it our own
               mortality. As a corrective, Marks suggests looking for digital artworks that refer to the social circumstances in
                  which they were produced, or that draw attention to the physical platforms on
                  which they were built
               . For Marks, one such response lies in the fetishization of
               older, deliberately low-tech art forms such as ASCII art that draws attention to the
               physical shapes of letters on the printed page.Indeed a sub-genre of
                  ASCII-based videos has appeared in recent years including the Beck video for
                     Black Tambourine directed by Associates in Science; the all
                  ASCII short film The Case of the Eidetic Child directed by Ryan
                  McGinness and panOptic; and Yoshi Sodeoka's ASCII Bush, which
                  converts George H.W. Bush's 1991 and George W. Bush's 2003 State of the Union
                  addresses into online ASCII files; http://www.turbulence.org/spotlight/ASCII_BUSH/. 
            
            Another alternative to the homogenizing effect of convergence may be found in the
               language of cultural anthropology. The term syncretism, which is used to describe the
               layering of cultural practices brought about by colonialism or immigration — the
               pantheistic worship of Catholic saints in the Santeria religion, for example — may
               also be repurposed to designate the layering of technological practices within
               digital culture. Unlike convergence, a syncretic relationship does not imply the
               erasure or collapse of distinct practices. Rather, it describes the combination of
               disjunctive elements into a functional relationship that bears the continued traces
               of each object's former existence. One consequence of the rhetorical shift from
               convergence to syncretism is the potential foregrounding of historicity. Where
               convergence tends to be ahistorical, syncretism emphasizes the temporal gaps between
               objects and artifacts that remain embedded in their historical and cultural moments —
               not simply in a technological register, but in terms of their original cultural
               resonance. The concept of technological syncretism, then, permits an understanding of
               digital media with respect for the material elements of which they are constituted.
               The hybrid works examined here announce a relationship to their medium that invites
               us to ask the right questions about how they are constructed and about
               the potential relevance of medium specificity for understanding their importance.
               Arguably, it is through the foregrounding rather than the effacement of the material
               substrates underlying certain instances of digital media, that we find the most
               suggestive and historiographically relevant traces. 
         
