Title:  Automatic
               Identification of Rhetorical Elements in classical Arabic Poetry
Volume:  017
Issue:  2
Date:  7 July 2023
Abstract:  
            
            A novel, rule-based, automatic framework for identifying rhetorical elements in
               classical Arabic poetry is described. Since rule-based approaches have well-known
               limitations, it is proposed as an interim solution until a sufficient quantity of
               annotated text has been amassed with which to train a machine-learning algorithm. The
               manual process of identifying rhetorical features in classical Arabic poetry is both
               time-consuming and requires high-level expertise in Arabic literature. Hence, an
               automatic recognition system will solve this challenge. Automatic identification is,
               however, challenging, mainly because there is no existing annotated corpus with which
               to train a machine-learning-based classifier. The framework proposed here combines
               natural language-processing techniques with a rule-based reasoning approach, and will
               continually improve as more examples become available. It is intended as an initial
               step toward building the essential annotated corpus. Its focus is 20 rhetorical
               elements, all of importance according to classical Arabic rhetoricians, and it
               achieves the extremely encouraging result of an overall F-measure of 0.902.
         
Full Body Text: 


            1. Introduction
            Rhetoric, balāgha in Arabic, is the art of
               persuasion as well as affectation through language. It is the means of conveying an
               idea in the most effective and convincing way, and with the most emotional impact
                  . In Arabic criticism, the term balāgha refers both to figures of speech (such as simile) and
               stylistic — including embellishing — elements (such as paronomasia) that are
               used by critics to analyse the aesthetic value of an artistic expression; mainly in
               classical Arabic poetry and the Qurʾān .
            Since the ninth century CE, study of rhetoric has been stimulated by an increased
               interest in understanding the structure and development of poetry as well as by the
               need to rationalise the aesthetic implications of the theological postulate of the
               uniqueness (iʿjāz) of the Qurʾān .
            Despite the great potential for study of rhetoric for so wide a range of research
               priorities both in and beyond itself, it remains lamentably neglected in modern
               research. Whereas there has been extensive research into Greek and mediaeval European
               rhetoric, there is nothing comparable for that of Arabic-Islamic texts, despite their
               high level of sophistication and their derivation from a major world civilisation.
               Among many factors which may explain this is the very large number of the rhetorical
               elements. In late rhetorical anthologies from the seventeenth-eighteenth century CE,
               their number is about one hundred and eighty. Identifying these elements in the
               thousands of classical Arabic poems that have been preserved from the pre-Islamic to
               the later Islamic periods, is a hard, if not impossible, mission. Tracing the
               development of rhetoric in this poetry is one way of understanding its development
               through ages. This is done by analysing their use in different poems during different
               periods, which is a lengthy and demanding undertaking far beyond a scope of a single
               study or researcher.
            In order to make this feasible, our Arabic Rhetoric Identifier (known as the REI) had
               to be developed.
                  https://arabic-rhetoric.haifa.ac.il/
                The REI was created by a team led by A. Hussein and T. Kuflik. Its purpose is
               to enable researchers to annotate manually the rhetorical elements in Arabic poetry,
               and compile them into a database of rhetorical elements in classical Arabic poetry
               between the 5th and 16th centuries CE. The canon comprises 26,925 classical Arabic
               poems, only 75 of which have, to date, been manually analysed. The main challenges to
               researchers are the time-consuming nature of manual annotation and the high level of
               expertise required to identify and comprehend the properties of each element [see,
               for example, the elements in 7, 19, 20]. While automating this process is thus very
               necessary, it is also extremely challenging.
            While there are many modern studies of rhetorical usage in non-Arabic literatures,
               there is a lacuna in the modern era in Arabic literature (see, for example, Western
               literature’s rich bibliography in comparison with its scarce listing for metaphor and
               metonymy in the Bibliography of Metaphor and Metonymy
               
                  https://benjamins.com/online/met/
               ). Scholars of classical Arabic poetry agree that the differing use of
               rhetoric is the main reason for the development of Arabic poetry in its different
               periods [16; cf. chapters 1, 2]. Badīʿ — literally
                  the new style (or the novel, original, extraordinary style) — was the
               term used by Arabic rhetoricians to describe the sophisticated use of some rhetorical
               elements in this poetry, a use which renders the literary text differently
               sophisticated and differently aesthetic. In short, scholars agree that rhetoric was
               used in pre- and early Islamic poetry (5th-8th centuries CE), although it was
               considered more important in the ʿAbbāsid era (750–1517 CE). The badīʿ is the major element which distinguishes ʿAbbāsid
               from pre-ʿAbbāsid poetry — although which figurative speeches in badīʿ style and how they were used to make this difference
               remains unresolved.
            Despite the importance of badīʿ, studies which
               discuss it are few and incomplete (, cf. pp.
               28-41): 
                  Most discuss badīʿ in separate and randomly
                     chosen verses rather than in complete poems. Considering this style in complete
                     poems gives a far more accurate picture of the nature of badīʿ in classical Arabic poetry.
                  Since the main hypothesis of modern research (and of classical scholars) is
                     that badīʿ is more important in
                        ʿAbbāsid than in the pre-Islamic era, modern studies focus on
                     the badīʿ of this poetry in the later
                     period.
               
            
            As far as we know, there are no comparative studies that analyze the development of
                  badīʿ from one period to another, other than
               those recently conducted by one author of this article ,
               and by Wolfhart Heinrichs in 1994 . Our approach is
               that the essence of badīʿ in classical Arabic
               periods, especially in ʿAbbāsid and pre-ʿAbbāsid times, cannot be described without
               identifying and analysing the rhetorical elements in complete poems. There are some
               180 rhetorical elements described in classical books on rhetoric . The number of classical Arabic poems, from the pre-Islamic
               era until the most recent pre-modern period, is enormous, making manual rhetorical
               analysis for the entire corpus a mission impossible. For this reason, Hussein and
               Kuflik began developing a system that will automatically analyse several rhetorical
               elements in an existing corpus of some 26,000 poems
                  https://arabic-rhetoric.haifa.ac.il/
                (in development so access is currently restricted). This corpus includes
               poetry from pre-Islamic times to the Mamluk era, which ended early 16th century. All
               the poems were entered manually into the system by students of Arabic language and
               literature, according to printed versions of the poems. This article reports on the
               automatic analysis of 20 rhetorical elements. A manual analysis by A. Hussein of
               several poems in the present corpus showed these to be the main, recurrent rhetorical
               elements in the pre- and early Islamic period, including the ʿAbbāsid poetry in its
               first four centuries (that is, until the twelfth century CE). In addition, most of
               these elements (nos. 1, 2.3, 3.3, 10, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19-20) are discussed in the
               first and oldest books on Arabic rhetoric, while the others (the rest of the 180
               elements) appear only as later developments and feature in later rhetoric books.
               These were the two reasons for focusing on these elements in the present study. 
            The classical automation approach uses text-mining and machine-learning techniques to
               identify rhetorical elements in the text. This approach requires collecting a large
               set of examples for each rhetorical element, and training a machine-learning-based
               classifier to recognize them. As we did not have an annotated set of examples, our
               first task was finding a way for assembling a sufficient number of analyzed poems to
               train a classifier. Our proposal aims at automating this step by proposing a
               framework to identify individual rhetorical elements in classical Arabic poetry by
               combining natural language processing (NLP) techniques with a rule-based approach.
               This framework has been evaluated on a small set of Arabic poems, and results have
               been extremely encouraging.
            The development of this automatic framework will make a vital contribution to the
               study of rhetoric in classical Arabic poetry. It will enable automatic recognition of
               the 20 selected rhetorical elements in a vastly larger corpus (26,925 poems) that
               cannot be handled manually. Analyzing the rhetoric in a corpus of this size will
               yield better understanding of the development of rhetoric in Arabic poetry from the
               pre-Islamic period to the 16th century CE.
            It is nonetheless important to note that rule-based systems have their own
               limitations , including the need for continuous
               maintenance and updating by experts – as demonstrated by this research. This is why
               we see it as an interim approach until sufficient sets of examples are available for
               training state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms for the task.
            Another challenge is the imprecise nature of such systems. Not only do they tend to
               misclassify examples, they also miss relevant elements (false negatives) and suggest
               wrong elements (false positives). Even the current framework, which achieved,
               overall, extremely encouraging results, had widely differing success rates for
               different elements. There is more work to do to ensure a success rate closer to
               100%.
            This paper is structured as follows. Section 2, which follows this introductory
               section, gives background and reviews related work. Section 3 describes the features
               of classical Arabic poems. Our framework is delineated in Section 4, together with
               the NLP tools and resources used in its implementation. The dataset, experiments and
               results are described in Section 5, and Section 6 discusses the study’s implications
               and limitations. Conclusions and future work are considered in Section 7.
         

            2. Background and Related Work
            Over the years, considerable research efforts have been invested in developing
               methods and tools for NLP of Arabic. NLP of Arabic poetry, and, especially,
               identifying characteristics in this poetry, remain challenging.
            Previous studies have focused on a range of aspects — morphology, morphological
               decomposition, morpho-syntactic analysis, sentiment analysis, semantic analysis and
               many others. One main research avenue is morphological analysis of Arabic texts, for
               which several tools exist. Among them are AlKhalil Morpho Sys 2 , MADA , MADA+TOKAN
                  , MADAMIRA ,
               ASMA , MAGEAD , BAMA , SAMA , SALMA , Arabic Sentence-level  and ArSenL .
            Of these, AlKhalil2  is the most recent and seems
               to be the best. It is an Arabic morpho-syntactic analyzer with a large database,
               which it uses to segment and then analyze partially or totally vocalized Arabic
               words. For each, the resulting analysis is derived as a set of features — prefix,
               stem, type, pattern of word, root, part of speech (POS), lemma, pattern of lemma and
               suffix. It outperforms BAMA and SAMA, achieving coverage of over 99%, as well as
               performing better in identifying various features, including those determined in the
               word context: the lemma, the stem and the diacritized form. This, therefore, was the
               tool used in our study.
            ArSenL  is a large sentiment lexicon for Arabic, which
               uses different approaches linked to the English SentiWordnet (ESWN). It has 154,396
               entries, each referring to a single Arabic word, and each consisting of eight fields
               — Arabic morphologic lemma (1), POS (2), positive sentiment score (3), negative
               sentiment score (4), confidence (5), Arabic WordNet (AWN) offset (6), sentiment
               WordNet offset (7), and AWN lemma (8). An example is: 
                  Two entries in ArSenL. NIL = not in language
                  <imobiyriyAliy~_1; a;0;0.125;50; NIL;02746897; NIL
                     zrAEap_1; n;0;0;100;100861982;00916464; ziraAoEap_n1AR
                Given its large lexicon, it was selected for our study.
            Another tool that we used was the Arabic WordNet (AWN) (, , ) based on WordNet ,
               which are, respectively, lexical resources in standard Arabic and English. The Arabic
               WordNet is a large lexical database, comprising nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs,
               grouped in sets of cognitive synonyms, each expressing a distinct concept .
            Hussein conducted pioneering manual studies to learn the use of rhetorical elements
               in classical Arabic poetry. These studies are few in number and deal with a very
               small corpus. In , he focuses on the use of a single
               rhetorical figure, the intellectual trope or majāz
                  ῾aqlī (an important rhetorical element neglected in modern research) in
               one pre-Islamic wine poem. He explains in detail the idea of the majāz ῾aqlī, and discusses its semantic aspects in
               classical Arabic poetry, as shown in an incident concerning wine in a poem composed
               by Abū Dhu᾿ayb al-Hudhalī (d. ca. 648 CE). In another study , he examines other rhetorical techniques and their use by
               Hudhalī poets in describing the element of wine. He suggests that rhetorical elements
               should be studied in as many classical Arabic poetry themes as possible. He also
               investigated  rhetorical texture in two traditional
               tripartite poems — one dating from the pre-Islamic period, composed by ʿAlqama l-Faḥl
               (d. ca. 603 CE), the other from the early ʿAbbāsid era, composed by Bashshār b. Burd
               (d. 784 CE). The two have the same structure, address the same themes and comprise
               virtually the same number of verses. A key question concerns the rhetorical figures
               each poet uses, which leads to a broader question: How different was the badīʿ (rhetorical) style in the poetry of the two
               eras, assuming that each poem is representative of its time?
            Abuata and Al-Omari  adopt the same rule-based
               approach as us for computerized analysis of Arabic prosody. They introduce an
               algorithm to determine the correct metre for a given Arabic poem and to convert the
               poem into metric writing.
            A new way of recognizing the characteristics of classical Arabic poetry is presented
               by . The authors focus on rhythm, which is
               considered the crown of this type of poetry. A stylistic study of Arab-American
               poetry  attempts to analyze and describe the major
               features of this poetry, written by prominent Arab poets who immigrated to America
               during the 19th century. It examines their poetry according to linguistics, grammar,
               lexicon and rhetoric .
            A study of NLP for Arabic metaphors in  presents
               the challenges central to developing a computational NLP-based system for classical
               Arabic, Modern Standard Arabic and Dialect Arabic. It also highlights the main
               problems of translating Arabic metaphors into other languages.
            This article proposes a method for supporting the study of rhetoric in Arabic
               literature. It demonstrates and evaluates an automatic rule-based framework for
               recognizing its 20 most important rhetorical elements, previously identified by
               experts in a time-consuming process. As we have seen, a wide variety of tools enables
               analysis of Arabic texts, and has paved the way for the present study — the first to
               examine automatic identification of rhetorical elements in classical Arabic
               poetry.
         

            3. Features of classical Arabic Poems
            Style is very much more salient than content in the historical development of the
               Arabic literary register, especially in classical Arabic poetry, where rhetoric is a
               primary feature. The development of rhetoric in literary texts, however, is
               significantly under-researched. Study of rhetoric and its development in practice are
               important not only for literary and critical studies, but also have considerable
               implications for our understanding of other fields of knowledge. The dense use of
               periphrasis in poems in one period, for example, followed by its relative
               displacement by simile in the next and by metaphor in the one after that may indicate
               and/or reflect cognitive-linguistic changes in Arab communities over time .
            Classical Arabic poetry is built of consecutive verses (lines in a poem), with each
               verse divided into two parts (hemistiches), the so-called ṣadr
                  -صدر and ʿajuz-عجز, respectively. This
               is an example of a verse:
            
               A classical Arabic verse
               
                  ولا عيب فيهم غير أن سيوفهم - بهن فلول من قراع
                        الكتائب
                  There is no fault in them, excepting that their swords have suffered dents
                     in clashes with battalions
               
            
            Of the 180 rhetorical elements in Arabic poetry , we focus
               on the 20 most frequently used. In the following, we bring brief definitions,
               sometimes with simple examples. Detailed definitions, including detailed examples,
               are found in the Appendix (9.1):
            
               1. Simile (تشبيه): comparing
                  directly two objects; indicating that A is similar to B.
               We have divided the following eight elements (nos. 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 3.1, 3.2,
                  3.3, 4, 5) into four main groups(nos. 2–5), according to the identification
                  method:
               2. Repetition1 (تكرار1),
                  comprising three minor elements: 
                     2.1. Repetition (تكرار):
                        repeating the same word/s at least twice in the same verse while preserving
                        the same meaning and the same grammatical structure and context (such as
                           we are here; we are here).
                     2.2 Ploce (ترديد):
                        repeating the same word at least twice in the same verse; having the same
                        meaning, but with a different grammatical structure/context (such as we
                              are here; they are here
                        ).
                     2.3. Perfect Paronomasia/Perfect Pun; also Complete
                        Paronomasia (جناس تامّ): Two words that are
                        repeated in the same verse, each having a different meaning. The different
                        meaning is a main difference between repetition and paronomasia.
                  
               
               3. Repetition2 (تكرار 2),
                  comprising three minor elements: 
                     3.1. Extraction/Etymology (اشتقاق): Mentioning a personal name and another verb derived
                        from this name — such as Ṣāliḥ (personal
                        name) and ṣaluḥa (becoming
                        good).
                     3.2. Semblance (مشاكلة): A
                        word is used in a certain, actual (often non-metaphoric) sense; it is then
                        repeated in another, non-actual (often metaphoric) sense within the same
                        verse (such as we breathe the fresh air
                           outside; while you remain in your room breathing the data from your books).
                     3.3. Free paronomasia (جناس
                           مطلق): two words mentioned in the same verse, derived from the
                        same root, or they look as if they have derived from the same root, and they
                        have different meanings (such as fiḍḍa
                           (silver) and faḍāʾ
                        (space). 
                  
               
               4. Repetition3 (3تكرار), echoing
                  the rhyme at the beginning of the line (رد الاعجاز على
                     الصدور): the final word in a verse is repeated (with the same meaning
                  or with different meanings; with the same form or in a derivative form) anywhere
                  in the first hemistich of the same verse or as the first word in the second
                  hemistich such as (A....//....A; or ..../A....A).
               5. Repetition4, key words (كلمات
                     مفتاح): a root that is repeated in more than one verse in the same
                  poem.
               6. Flowing (اطّراد): praising a
                  person by noting the names of his father and grandfather/s. The word ibn (the son of) separates the names (A is
                        the son of B the son of C....).
               7. Afterthought/Retraction (رجوع): mentioning one thought, then negating it in the same verse
                     (the abodes have not been changed through ages. Nay, I see that they have
                     been totally demolished).
               8. Catchword Verbal (تشابه الأطراف
                     اللفظي): A verse opens with the same rhyming word which closed the
                  previous verse ((1) A…. B; (2)B….C; (3)C….D).
               9. Distribution Characters/Alliteration (توزيع) 
                     9.1. Distribution Characters/Alliteration 1 (توزيع 1): a single vowel or consonant is included
                        in each word of a given verse.
                     9.2. Distribution Characters/Alliteration 2 (توزيع 2): a certain vowel or consonant is
                        repeated in all or most words of an entire poem. 
                  
               
               10. Hemming (تصريع): the two
                  hemistiches of a given verse end with the same rhyming letters.
               11. Unraveling (توشيع): the verse
                  ends with a general word in the dual form, followed by two single words that
                  specify the two objects constituting this duality (I am suffering from
                        two different situations: fear and hope).
               12. Counterchange (عكس, تبديل):
                  two or more words appear in a certain order and are repeated in the same verse in
                  reverse order (AB...BA).
               13. Repartee (مراجعة): a
                  conversation between different persons/objects in the same verse or in several
                  verses in the same poem (He said.... I replied....).
               14. Rhyming – in general – homoeoteleuton (سجع), dividing discourse into periods with similar-sounding last
                  syllables. It is said to be: 
                     14.1. Congruent (مُوازَن):
                        the verse includes several phrases; their final words agree in measure and
                        rhyme.
                     14.2. Terminal (مُطَرَّف):
                        as in 14.1, but with the final words agreeing in measure only.
                     14.3. Tucking (تشطير): each of the two
                        hemistiches in a verse is divided into two phrases that share the same
                        rhyming letters. The rhyming letters in the phrases of the second hemistich
                        differ from those in the first (A..A // B..B).
                      14.4. Embroidery (ترصيع):
                        each word in the first hemistich shares the same rhyming letter (and
                        sometimes the same measure) with its equivalent word in the second hemistich
                        (ABCD//ABCD).
                  
               
               15. Verbal Congruence (مناسبة
                     لفظيّة): the second hemistich includes a phrase that rhymes with an
                  equivalent phrase in the first hemistich. The two phrases often open the two
                  hemistiches.
               16. Paronomasia/Pun (جناس), using
                  or suggesting in a single verse words that differ in meaning but are phonetically
                  and/or graphically alike or almost alike. 
                     16.1. Conjunct Paronomasia (جناس مركب
                           - مَرْفُوّ): the paronomasia consists of two parts: a single
                        word (the first part) and two words (the second part) which, when combined,
                        are similar phonetically and graphically to the first part of the
                        paronomasia (amradā (beardless) and
                           am radā (or a death?).
                     16.2. Tipped Paronomasia (جناس ناقص -
                           مُطَرَّف): one of the matching words of the paronomasia is
                        longer than the other with at least one initial consonant (badā
                        appear and abadā
                        ever).
                     16.3. Tailed Paronomasia (جناس ناقص -
                           مُذيَّل): one of the matching words of the paronomasia is
                        longer than the other with at least one ending consonant (qanā
                        lances and qabābil
                        squadrons of horses).
                     16.4. Consonantal/Distorted Paronomasia (جناس محرف): the two matching words differ only in
                        their vocalisation (and of course their meaning) (ʿabra
                        a tear and ʿibra
                        a lesson).
                     16.5. Substitutive or Variant Paronomasia (جناس التصريف): the two matching words have a
                        single differing consonant (ilḥāḥ
                        insistence and ilḥāf
                        importuning).
                     16.6. Metathetic/Reverse Paronomasia (جناس مقلوب): all or some of the letters of one of the two
                        matching words is in reverse order (sāqin
                        cup-bearer and qāsin
                        cruel).
                      16.7. Graphic Paronomasia (جناس
                           تصحيف): The two matching words, when written, are shaped alike,
                        differing only in their dots which, in the Arabic script, differentiates
                        some letters from others (ḥabs حَبس
                        to restrain and jins جِنس
                        type).
                  
               
               17. Negative Antithesis (طباق
                  سلب): a word is introduced and then negated with a negation particle
                     (A and not A (I know and I do not know)).
               18. Positive Antithesis (طباق
                     إيجاب): two different words that have contrary meanings (new
                  and old).
               19. The Satirist’s Feint (تأكيد الذّم بما
                     يشبه المدح): Criticising an attribute in an individual, then
                  exempting this by alluding that a positive attribute will be noted. The poet,
                  however, disappoints expectations by referring to another negative feature rather
                  than a positive (he has no good attribute, except of being the
                     worst person in universe).
               20. The Encomiast’s Feint (تأكيد المدح بما
                     يشبه الذّم): praising an attribute in an individual, then exempting
                  this, alluding that a negative attribute will follow. Here too, expectation is
                  disappointed with another positive feature, instead of the expected negative
                     (they have no fault, except their swords which they broke on the heads of
                     their enemies).
            
         

            4. Tools and Methods
            For the purpose of the study, a dataset of annotated poems was built. A set of 20
               rhetorical elements was selected and the poems were annotated accordingly. The
               individual properties of each rhetorical element must be understood to create an
               automatic process that will recognize them. This identification requires different
               kinds of resources and techniques. Some features can be detected by applying
               one-to-one string-matching procedures, others by using Arabic morpho-syntactic
               analysis to tease out the ingredients of each word (e.g., root, stem), others
               still with sentimental analysis, which requires resources such as sentiment lexicons. 
            Working with only a small number of annotated poems, we were unable to use any
               classical machine-learning technique to identify these elements automatically, so our
               approach was rule-based.
            A prototype of a rule-based system was built for automatic identification of these
               elements. The dataset, tools and methods are now described.
            
               i. Poems Dataset
               Over the years, we collected a repository of classical Arabic poetry
                     https://arabic-rhetoric.haifa.ac.il/ – link to the system
                  comprising 26,925 poems by 675 different poets. It includes pre-Islamic poetry,
                  written before 622 CE; work by poets who lived in the pre-Islamic and early
                  Islamic periods, known as mukhaḍrams; that of
                  poets who lived in the Umayyad era (661-750 CE); and of Abbasid poets who lived
                  after 750 CE. For the purpose of this study, 75 poems, composed according to the
                  classical Arabic meters called the Khalīlian meters, and comprising an average 27
                  verses each, were collected and manually analyzed to identify their rhetorical
                  elements. The poems were chosen to cover two main periods: the Abbasid (between
                  the 8th and 10th centuries CE) and pre-Abbasid eras (poets who lived between the
                  6th and 8th centuries CE). The poems of the first period are often shorter than
                  those of the second, and therefore their number is greater: 48 poems in comparison
                  with 29 from the first era (five pre-Islamic poems, seven poems which were
                  composed by poets who lived in pre-Islamic times, but whose lifetimes extended
                  into the early Islamic [mukhaḍrams poets], and 17
                  poems from the Umayyad era). The number of verses in the poems in the two main
                  eras is, however, to some degree balanced. It comprises 887 verses from the
                  Abbasid period and 752 from the pre-Abbassid (140 pre-Islamic verses, 232 mukhaḍrams, and 380 Umayyad).
               From these poems, 20 different rhetorical elements were selected and manually
                  annotated. (See Appendix 9.3 for the exact number of examples in each
                  dataset.)
            
            
               ii. NLP Tools and Data Sources
               This subsection describes the NLP tools and data sources, and the techniques
                  applied in the framework.
               
                  
                     AlKhalil2, The AlKhalil2  was chosen because of its large database and
                     because it is a morpho-syntactic analyzer of standard Arabic words out of
                     context. The system analyses either partially or totally vowelized words. We
                     used their morphological features, including prefix, stem and type of word, all
                     of which are very useful in identifying most of the rhetorical elements. It is
                     important to note, however, that AlKhalil2 was designed for modern Arabic
                     whereas the classical Arabic poetry with which we worked differs from modern
                     Arabic. As a first step, we report on evaluating it on our corpus and then
                     discuss its implications.
                  
                     ArSenL Sentiment Lexicon, The ArSenL  was selected for its large sentiment lexicon
                     (154,396 entries). They comprise the eight fields shown in our background
                     section — positive sentiment score (3), negative sentiment score (4) and AWN
                     lemma (8). When the AWN lemma includes NIL (i.e., not in language), we
                     interpreted the morphological word in the first field according to the
                     Buckwalter Arabic Morphological Analyzer  to
                     retrieve the Arabic word-form. Where the field AWN lemma included a valid
                     offset (i.e., not NIL), we retrieved the Arabic word from AWN . The final step was calculating the objective score
                     of each word, which is the sum of the fields of positive and negative sentiment
                     scores. It should be noted that most words scored neutral.
                  
                     Arabic WordNet. We used the AWN source code to
                     retrieve Arabic words from sentiment lexicons (described below).
                  
                     Buckwalter Arabic Morphological Analyzer
                      helped build a sentiment lexicon (tool 2),
                     because entries in ArSenL  contain fields that
                     include NIL. This tool was used to convert Morphologic Arabic words to Arabic
                     words (e.g., <imobiyriyAliy~ to إمبيريالي).
                  
                     Arabic Sentiment Lexicon. We developed an Arabic
                     sentiment lexicon, comprising 8,765 positive words and 9,813 negative words, in
                     three phases. The first phase involved automatically retrieving Arabic words
                     and their sentimental polarities from ArSenL ,
                     using the Buckwalter Arabic Morphological Analyzer  and AWN . The
                     second phase manually retrieved Arabic words and their polarities from another
                     lexicon , and the final phase was
                     manually enriching the lexicon with Arabic words and their polarities from the internet.
                        https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D9%82%D8%A7%D8%A6%D9%85%D8%A9_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%A7%D9%86%D9%81%D8%B9%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%A7%D8%AA_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B9%D8%A7%D8%B7%D9%81%D9%8A%D8%A9
                     
                  
                  
                     Arabic Sentiment Analyser. We developed a word
                     polarity-based Arabic Sentiment Analyzer using the lexicon described above (see
                     Figure 7). 
                        Step 1 was building a lexicon of sentiment words. It comprised two
                           text files — the first file consisting of positive words, the second of
                           negative. In addition, we manually created a text file of negative
                           words.
                        Step 2 was building an Arabic Sentiment Analyzer based on polarity.
                           Text verses were inputted, each verse devoted to one word in all its
                           possible forms. (All words in each verse appear without diacritics
                           because the lexicon includes words without diacritics.) The analyzer
                           checks each word in the verses. Should it appear in one of the lexicons,
                           its polarity value is set according to that lexicon. If, however, there
                           is a negation particle before the word (in Arabic, they are mainly
                              بلى, ليس, لكن,لم، لا، لن), its
                           polarity is assigned the opposite value of the lexicon. The analyzer then
                           calculates the final sentiment of the input: if the number of positive
                           words is greater than that of negative words, the analyzer returns a
                           value of 1; if negative words comprise the greater number, it returns -1;
                           where they are equal, it returns 0 (i.e., neutral). This serves to
                           identify the Satirist’s and Encomiast’s Feints (see Figure 6).
                     
                  
                  
                     Arabic Lexicon for Antithesis. We developed an
                     Arabic lexicon for words with contradictory meanings. It comprises 453 pairs of
                     opposites, compiled in two stages. First was retrieving English words and their
                     opposites from the internet (
                     ), and using the AWN Browser 2.0.1 to
                     get their Arabic opposites and synonyms. Second was manually enriching these
                     opposites with Arabic words and their synonyms .
                  
                     Graphical User Interface (GUI) (see Figures 2 and 4).
               
            
            
               iii. Rhetoric Elements Identification Framework and Prototype
               We created a user-friendly system that integrates the NLP tools described above
                  with a rule-based elements identification mechanism for automatic identification
                  of rhetorical elements. The GUI and the algorithms are from NetBeans IDE 8.0.1
                  using Java platform JDK 1.8. The source codes of the first six tools were also
                  implemented in Java. Figure 1 presents the abstract process of rhetorical element
                  identification on a complete poem, line by line, while Figures 1 & 5 show the
                  process of identifying a rhetorical element. Figure 1 shows the overall abstract
                  process of line by line analysis while Figure 5 shows an example of identifying
                  one specific rhetorical element – Simile (as there are different
                  implementations for different rules).
               
                  Abstract framework for rhetorical element identification. The process starts
                     with selecting a poem and a rhetorical element. The system analyses the poem
                     line by line to identify the rhetorical element.
                  Flowchart of steps in poem breakdown
                  
               
               The Graphic User Interface (GUI) for identifying
                  rhetorical elements is shown in Figure 2. The
                  process is as follows (see Figure 3): 
                     Activate the system (1), and select a poem (2).
                     Select a rhetorical element from the 20 in the GUI.
                     Run the tools to identify the selected element for each verse. If more
                        than one element is chosen, repeat the process for each
                     The color-coded results are visualized (3).
                  
                  
                     The main Graphic User Interface (GUI). The selected poem is on the left.
                        Each button on the right is responsible for identifying a rhetorical
                        element, color-matched to the poem’s text.
                     Dashboard of the Graphic User Interface, showing menu
                        options.
                     
                  
                  
                     Illustration of the automatic annotation framework — from when the user
                        initiates the process (1) to the desired result (3).
                     Flowchart showing annotation workflow
                     
                  
               
               We also created a GUI for the Arabic Sentiment Lexicon Tool, enabling building of
                  the lexicon and interpreting the morphology of words (Figure 4). 
                     GUI for building the lexicon user file and interpreting the morphology of
                        words.
                     Pop-up window labeled Arabic Sentiment Lexicon is
                           Based On: ArSenL_v1.0A.txt
                     
                  
                  
                     Rhetorical element identification process example: Simile. The process is
                        repeated for each word in a line, following a set of conditions that refer
                        to the start of the word or whether it is one of a set of predefined words.
                        If needed AlKhalil is consulted for morphological analysis and the results
                        are further checked.
                     Flowchart of decision tree
                     
                  
                  
                     Rhetorical element identifying process example, Satirist’s Feint and
                        Encomiast’s Feint: The process starts with checking the sentiments of the
                           ṣadr and ʿajuz, word by word, and then combining the results.
                     Flowchart
                     
                  
                  
                     Identifying a words’ sentiment.
                     Flowchart
                     
                   Another essential component enabled us to identify the emotions
                  expressed by words (Figure 7), and, when needed, to
                  calculate the overall emotion expressed by a complete line (Figure 6). 
            
            
               iv. Identifying Rhetorical Elements (Rules)
               The individual properties of each rhetorical element must be understood to create
                  an automatic process capable of recognizing them. This identification requires
                  different kinds of resources and techniques. Some features can be detected by
                  applying one-to-one string-matching procedures, others by using Arabic
                  morpho-syntactic analysis to tease out the ingredients of each word (e.g.,
                  root, stem), others still with sentimental analysis, which requires resources such
                  as sentiment lexicons. Next, we describe the rules we applied to identifying each
                  rhetorical element, how we applied them, and the tools we used. 
                     1. Simile (تشبيه). This can appear with and without word tokens. The
                        latter is not included in our system. This rhetorical element is identified
                        in two steps. The first identifies it by full word tokens in one of four
                        groups (see also Figure 5): 
                           1.1. Words starting with the tokens مثل,
                                 فمثل, ومثل ,كالـ for which the system searches.
                           1.2. Words starting with the simile tokens كأن, فكأن ,وكأن. Each word is analyzed using the
                              AlKhalil2  tool. If the type of the
                              word is a حرف مشبّه بالفعل (particle
                              that resembles the verb; a group of particles including إن – أن / كأن – لكن / ليت – لعل) and the
                              word is one of the three tokens mentioned above, it is considered a
                              simile.
                           1.3. All word tokens كما, كأنما, وكما, فكما,
                                 وكأنما فكأنما. The system searches for whole tokens. For
                              each, vocalization (تشكيل) is
                              removed, and it is then checked as to whether it is equal to one of
                              the tokens. Where a match is found, it is a simile.
                           1.4. Verb tokens ظن, خال, حسب, شبه
                              are analyzed using the AlKhalil2 
                              tool to retrieve type and root. If its type is a verb and its root is
                              equal to one of the tokens, it is a simile.
                         The second step is identifying similes by the letter k- كـ. Each word is analyzed using AlKhalil2  to check whether it is a prefix. If the
                        prefix is equal to كَ: حرف التشبيه, it is a
                        Simile. 
                     2. Repetition 1-4 (تكرار). These rhetorical elements are identified by two tests.
                        The first is when two identical words appear in the same verse. This is
                        Repetition. The second is finding the same stem in more than one word, with
                        different predefined prefixes. We exclude words of the following types: {
                           حرف جر- preposition, حرف نداء – interjections, حرف عطف – copulative particle, and particles that indicate
                           حرف نصب – accusative, حرف نفي – negation, حرف
                           جزاء – compensation, حرف عطف –
                        disjunctive, and حرف جزم – apocopative,
                           أداة شرط - conditional particle}. Such
                        particles are frequently repeated in poetry and are not, therefore,
                        considered part of the text’s rhetorical texture. To exclude these words, we
                        analyze every word in the verse using AlKhalil2  to determine its type. Where the type
                        matches one of those mentioned above, the word is excluded. These tests also
                        eliminate words used in the flowing
                        rhetorical element no. 6 identifications. To identify
                        Repetition1-4-type (see Appendix 1) rhetorical elements, contextual
                        association is also needed — for example, Semblance (مشاكله). At this point, however, it is sufficient to recognise
                        repetition of the same word without reference to context.
                     3. The Flowing (اطراد) is when the word بن appears at least twice in the same
                        verse.
                     4. Afterthought/Retraction (رجوع) is when the first word in the second part
                        of the verse matches one of the predefined negation words — وما - and it is not, بلى - yes, it is!, وغير
                           – but it is.
                     5. Catchword Verbal (تشابه الاطراف اللفظي) is when the last word in a verse
                        reappears as the first word of the following verse.
                     6. Distribution Characters/Alliteration
                           (توزيع). Type 1 is when the same
                        consonant appears in all or almost of all words of a given verse. Type 2 is
                        when the same consonant appears in all or most of the verses in the poem.
                        The vowels ا, و, ي are ignored.
                     7. Hemming (تصريع) compares two-word suffixes — the last word in the first
                        and second parts of the verse.
                     8. Unraveling (توشيع) is when the verse ends with a phrase containing a noun
                        in dual form (مثنى), followed by two
                        singular nouns connected with the particles wa or fa (and). Each
                        word in the second part of the verse is analyzed with AlKhalil2  to check whether it is dual
                        form.
                     9. Counterchange (عكس
                           وتبديل) is when two sentences are composed of the same words,
                        but in reverse order.
                     10. Repartee (مراجعة) is when two consecutive verses contain a reported
                        conversation. The system finds this by searching for the word said
                        and its derivatives.
                     11. Rhyming – in general – homoeoteleuton
                           (سجع) is when the concluding syllables
                        (the end of two parts) in two sentences within the same verse end with the
                        same consonants. Where they sound similar, it is a sajʿ. 
                     12. Verbal Congruence (مناسبة لفظيّة) is when the first and second parts
                        of the poem contain individual words in the same locations that resemble one
                        another, either in terms of their suffix (their final letter) or in their
                        metrical pattern, or in both.
                     13. Paronomasia (جناس) comprises seven types that are identified in two phases.
                        First, the prefixes and suffixes of each word are removed, and then the
                        letter, vocalization and type of word-pair are examined.
                     14. Negative Antithesis (طباق سلب) is when two words (the same words or
                        words that are derived from the same root) are repeated, and a negation
                        particle precedes one of them.
                     15. Positive Antithesis (طباق إيجاب) is identified using our Arabic Lexicon of Opposites, which lists words and
                        their opposites. It searches for words and their opposites within the same
                        verse.
                     The following two rhetorical elements are based on sentiment analysis. To
                        identify them, we used an Arabic Sentiment
                           Analyser.
                     16. The Satirist’s Feint (تأكيد المدح بما يشبه الذّم) searches each verse
                        for predefined terms — , ان ريغ , أن ريغ ان ىوس , أن
                           ىوس , أن لاإ ,. Where found, the sentiment values of the words
                        that precede and follow the term are calculated separately. When both values
                        are positive, it is a Satirist’s Feint.
                     17. The Encomiast’s Feint (تأكيد الذّم بما يشبه المدح) is calculated as
                        above. When both sentiment values are negative, it is an Encomiast’s
                        Feint.
                  
               
            
         

            5. Experiments and Results
            This section first describes the study that evaluated the suitability of AlKhalil2
               for our task, and then the datasets, the process of defining the rules and testing
               the framework. Figure 8 illustrates the evaluation
               process.
            
               i. Dataset
               As noted, we used a dataset comprising 75 classical era Arabic poems, composed by
                  35 poets (see Appendix 2 for the names and numbers of poems).
               We divided these poems into two datasets: a training set (77%) and a test set
                  (23%) (Appendix 2 shows details of poems and rhetorical elements in each). All
                  were then manually annotated by an Arabic literature researcher. Each poem
                  consists of several verses that include different rhetorical elements (see
                  Appendix 4). It is important to note that we used only the training set for
                  developing the rules for identifying the different rhetorical elements, while the
                  test set was used to test the system. The experimental results described later
                  refer to the automatic analysis of examples that were set aside and not used for
                  training (development of rules).
               The datasets are small because of the intensive manual effort required in
                  annotation. There is, thus, only a modest number of manually tagged poems, each
                  containing a modest number of rhetorical elements. Rules for identifying elements,
                  which were not found in any of the poems (see Appendix 9.4), were defined by
                  creating a second dataset of verses from poems in which they are featured (, , ). 
                     The evaluation procedure: defining and testing rules to build algorithms
                        with maximum success.
                     Flowchart
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ii. Procedure
               The procedure (Figure 8) was: (1) defining identification rules by studying the
                  training set; (2) testing the system on the training set to debug, correct,
                  improve and refine the rules, repeating the process until results could not be
                  improved further; (3) finally, we applied the resulting rule-based system to the
                  test set, that had been set aside and not used for training, and measured the
                  results with precision, recall and F1 measures .
            
            
               iii. Evaluating AlKhalil2
               Given the potential language differences, we first evaluated the suitability of
                  AlKhalil2 as an NLP tool.
               We thus selected eight poems from our 75 poems by different poets, regions and
                  times, used AlKhalil2 to analyze them, and checked the results manually. Overall,
                  the results were good, but far from perfect (Table 1 presents the results).
               Overall, AlKhalil2 correctly analyzed 74.2% of the words. It did not analyze 25.8%
                  or analyzed them wrongly. The majority of the unanalyzed/wrongly analyzed words
                  are either proper names (places, plants, tribes or given names) unknown to the
                  system, or words which are incompletely or improperly vocalized. By improperly we
                  mean one of four possibilities: (1) a consonant of the given word has no
                  diacritics (i.e,, is not vocalized); (2) the Sun letters (t, th, d, dh, r, z, s, sh, ṣ, ḍ, ṭ, ẓ, n), that follow
                  the definite article al-, are not vocalised with
                  the shedda mark (indicating that a consonant is
                  duplicated); (3) the tanwīn al-fatḥ is typed over
                  the vowel ā instead of over the preceding
                  consonant (such as  كتاباً  instead of كتابًا meaning a book in the accusative form);
                  both ways of putting the tanwīn are possible in
                  Arabic, however, in AlKhalil2 the second way is preferred); (4) the rhyming
                  letter, in the accusative form, is often suffixed to the ā vowel, which is a prolongation of the fatḥa (such as akala is written a
                     akalā; the verb means to eat).
               
                  AlKhalil2 performance on classical Arabic poetry
                  
                     Poem Details
                     Number of Words
                     Correct
                     Incorrect
                  
                  
                     Imruʾ al-Qays poem no. 8
                     194
                     131 (67.5%)
                     63 (32.4%)
                  
                  
                     Al-Aʿshā Maymūn 78
                     224
                     153 (68.3%)
                     71 (31.7%)
                  
                  
                     Abū Dulāma (1)
                     116
                     84 (72.4%)
                     32 (27.6%)
                  
                  
                     Al-Najāshī l-Ḥārithī 41
                     116
                     85 (73.2%)
                     31 (26.7%)
                  
                  
                     Jarīr 11
                     195
                     173 (88.7%)
                     22 (11.3%)
                  
                  
                     Ibn Qays al-Ruqayyāt 50
                     207
                     135 (65.3%)
                     72 (34.7%)
                  
                  
                     Dīk al-Jinn al-Ḥimṣī 38
                     86
                     72 (83.7%)
                     14 (16.3%)
                  
                  
                     Al-Namir b. Tawlab 34
                     195
                     156 (79.9%)
                     39 (20%)
                  
                  
                     Total
                     1,333
                     989 (74.2%)
                     344 (25.8%)
                  
               
               AlKhalil2 wrongly identifies this ā as the dual
                  pronoun ā. In addition, in poetry, because of
                  metric considerations, sometimes the masculine y
                  and feminine t prefixes, from the imperfect verb
                  in the two forms tafaʿʿala and tafāʿala (known as forms 5 and 6), are omitted (i.e.,
                     yatafaʿʿal and tatafaʿʿal can become tafaʿʿal;
                  while yatafāʿl and tatafāʿal becomes tafāʿal). In
                  these cases, AlKhalil fails to analyse the verb. Most can be addressed by a manual
                  revocalisation or retyping. In any case, while the percentages 25.8 and 8.4 make
                  AlKhalil2 less than perfect, its results were currently good enough for us
                  (especially since it was the best tool we had).
            
            
               iv. Framework Evaluation Results
               The overall results were quite good: overall precision of 0.918, recall of 0. 902
                  and F measure of 0.906. They are presented in Table
                  2. The results differ greatly, with extremely successful identification of
                  most of the elements, but relatively lower success levels in identifying Negative
                  Antithesis, Positive Antithesis and the Satirist’s and Encomiast’s Feints. These
                  differences are further discussed later.
               We measured the success rate in identifying each rhetorical element separately,
                  other than for Repetition1, Repetition2, the Satirist’s Feint and the Encomiast’s
                  Feint (the results are presented in Table 2).
                  Elements 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 (Repetition1) were treated as a single element since
                  their classification is based on the same general rule with only minor differences
                  — in 2.1, the word is repeated in the same context; in 2.2, two words with the
                  same meaning are repeated in two different contexts; 2.3 resembles 2.2 but the
                  meaning of the repeated words differs.
               
                  Results of the rhetorical element identification system. T= true; F= false;
                     P = positive; N = negative.
                  
                     
                     Precision
                     Recall
                     F1
                  
                  
                     
                        Simile (التشبيه)
                     0.916
                     0.891
                     0.904
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition1 (التكرار)
                     0.962
                     0.838
                     0.896
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition2 (الاشتقاق)
                     0.902
                     0.925
                     0.913
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition3 (رد الاعجاز على
                           الصدور)
                     0.941
                     0.941
                     0.941
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition4 – Key Words
                     
                     1
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Flowing (الاطراد)
                     1
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Afterthought/ Retraction (الرجوع)
                     1
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Catchword Verbal (تشابه الاطراف
                           لفظي)
                     1
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Distribution Characters/Alliteration 1 (التوزيع)
                     1
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Distribution Characters/Alliteration 2 (توزيع 2)
                     1
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Hemming (تصريع)
                     1
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Unraveling (توشيع)
                     1
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Counterchange (عكس
                        وتبديل)
                     1
                     0.8
                     0.889
                  
                  
                     
                        Repartee (مراجعة)
                     1
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Rhyming – in general – homoeoteleuton (سجع)
                     1
                     0.875
                     0.933
                  
                  
                     
                        Verbal Congruence (مناسبة
                           لفظيّة)
                     0.778
                     0.875
                     0.824
                  
                  
                     
                        Paronomasia (جناس)
                     0.857
                     0.75
                     0.8
                  
                  
                     
                        Negative Antithesis (طباق
                        سلب)
                     0.636
                     1
                     0.777
                  
                  
                     
                        Positive Antithesis (طباق
                           إيجاب)
                     0.551
                     0.457
                     0.5
                  
                  
                     
                        Satirist’s, Encomiast’s Feint
                        تأكيد الذّم بما يشبه المدح
                        تأكيد المدح بما يشبه الذّم
                     
                     0.818
                     0.692
                     0.75
                  
                  
                     Average
                     0.918
                     0.9o2
                     0.906
                  
               
               Rhetorical elements 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 (Repetition2) are also based on the same main
                  rule with minor differences. Rhetorical elements 19 and 20 (Satirist’s Feint and
                  the Encomiast’s Feint ) are treated as one, since they follow the same rules other
                  than their difference in polarity. Table 3 shows the true positives, false
                  positives and false negatives derived. There were relatively high numbers of false
                  positives and false negatives for only two of the rhetorical elements — Positive
                  Antithesis (طباق إيجاب) and Paronomasia (جناس).
               
                  Success rate. T= true; F= false; P = positive; N = negative
                  
                     
                     T-P
                     F-P
                     F-N
                  
                  
                     
                        Simile (التشبيه)
                     33
                     3
                     4
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition1 (التكرار)
                     26
                     1
                     5
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition2 (الاشتقاق)
                     37
                     4
                     3
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition3 (رد الاعجاز على
                           الصدور)
                     16
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition4 – Key Words
                     
                     45
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Flowing (الاطراد)
                     3
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Afterthought/ Retraction (الرجوع)
                     5
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Catchword Verbal (تشابه الاطراف
                           لفظي)
                     8
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Distribution Characters/Alliteration 1 (التوزيع)
                     5
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Distribution Characters/Alliteration 2 (توزيع 2)
                     56
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Hemming (تصريع)
                     5
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Unraveling (توشيع)
                     14
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Counterchange (عكس
                        وتبديل)
                     4
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Repartee (مراجعة)
                     7
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Rhyming – in general – homoeoteleuton (سجع)
                     21
                     0
                     3
                  
                  
                     
                        Verbal Congruence (مناسبة
                           لفظيّة)
                     7
                     2
                     1
                  
                  
                     
                        Paronomasia (جناس)
                     18
                     3
                     6
                  
                  
                     
                        Negative Antithesis (طباق
                        سلب)
                     7
                     4
                     0
                  
                  
                     
                        Positive Antithesis (طباق
                           إيجاب)
                     13
                     16
                     19
                  
                  
                     
                        Satirist’s, Encomiast’s Feint
                        تأكيد الذّم بما يشبه المدح
                        تأكيد المدح بما يشبه الذّم
                     
                     9
                     4
                     2
                  
               
            
         

            6. Discussion
            Our results demonstrate that the system performs extremely well for most rhetorical
               elements — Repetition4, Flowing, Afterthought/Retraction, Catchword Verbal,
               Distribution Characters/Alliteration, Hemming, Unraveling and Repartee (Table 2). This can be explained by the fact that
               identifying these elements requires checking the words and their occurrences without
               analysis or consideration of context. This means that identification of these
               rhetorical element is not conditioned by recognition of the context in which they
               appear, so the system does not need to understand the meaning of the verse to decide
               whether these elements are present. For example, opening a verse with the same word
               in which the previous one ended (the rhetorical element known as the Catchword
               Verbal) can be noted without understanding the content of the verses in which they
               appear.
            Other rhetorical elements proved more challenging with errors in their
               identification. We conducted error analysis for each, and suggest possible solutions
               to improve results. This remains for future study.
            While the framework’s identification of Simile and Repetition2 is high (precision =
               0.916; recall = 0.925; F1= 0.913), we assume that the second test in Simile
               identification (that is, by the prefix ka- which is
               the particle of simile meaning like. The word after it is in the genitive) can
               be upgraded by considering context. Using the AlKhalil2, we encountered situations
               where a word could be segmented into multiple forms — one of the forms with the
               simile particle ka-, and the other with the ka- as part of the word. The word كواعب, for example, can be analysed in multiple forms, one of them with
               the simile ka-: ka-wāʿib; i.e., similar to a
                  person who takes everything), but considering the context of the verse (which
               describes women), the word should not be understood as a simile; the k is part of the word kawāʾib (pl. of kāʿib) which means
                  girls with swelling breasts. Moreover, identification of Counterchange,
               Rhyming and Paronomasia can be improved when we have sufficient poems containing
               them, allowing definition of appropriate rules. The current set is drawn from the
               scarce appearances of these rhetorical elements in the training set.
            Identification of Repetition1 and Repetition3 is very good but can be further
               improved by considering context. Because the false negative rate for Repetition1 is
               high, we must add an option for removing them. Negative Antithesis identification,
               too, can be bettered by adding negation words, with further study needed to resolve
               situations where a word appears between the negation word and that which is repeated
               — for example, in poem Al-Najāshī 62:
            
               A passage from Al-Najāshī 62
               
                  وَمَا زَالَ مِنْ هَمْدَانَ خَيْلٌ تَدُوسُهُمْ *** سِمَانٌ وَأُخْرَى غَيْرُ جِدّ
                     سِمَانِ
                  The horses of the Hamdān tribe continued to trample upon them. These include
                     both fat and not-fatted horses.
               
            
            Identifying the Satirist’s and Encomiast’s Feints was less successful for several
               reasons: (1) a word may have positive and negative polarity, which requires
               contextual analysis (that is, guessing the verse’s meaning according to its other
               content). (2) The lexicons include words retrieved from non-formal sources, such as
               Twitter, requiring creation of a richer lexicon based on formal language. (3) The
               poet sometimes boasts of negative qualities or facts, as if they are positive (e.g.,
                  His sword is dripping blood in war means he is a warrior), which
               requires consideration of context. And (4) ambiguous words can be misclassified,
               again requiring attention to context. Lowest of all in performance is identification
               of Positive Antithesis, largely because the Arabic Lexicon for
                  Antithesis which we built is insufficient. Since false negatives rate high
               in this poetry, a new, richer Arabic Lexicon for
                  Antithesis, based on formal language, must be created.
            The diacritical text in which classical poems are usually written increases the
               accuracy of text analysis, reducing, as it does, the number of possible segmentations
               for each analyzed word. When this same text is inputted into the framework without
               diacritics, results are poorer. The AlKhalil2 tool returns all possible diacritical
               options for the word.
            As in any study, ours has limitations, some of them indicated above. The first is its
               relatively small number of poems — 75 of the total 26,925 classical Arabic poems in
               the canon. The second is that some of these 75 are written without diacritics. And
               third is that the AlKhalil2 misses small parts — for example, the word كَتَيْسِ in the verse:
            
               A classical Arabic verse, read by AlKhalil2
               
                  مِكَرٍّ مِفَرٍّ مُقْبِلٍ مُدْبِرٍ مَعًا *** كتيس ظِبَاءِ الْحُلَّبِ
                     الْغَذَوَانِ
                  Ready to charge, ready to fell, advancing, retreating equally well; [its speed]
                     like [that of] a lively buck-gazelle that feeds upon the ḥullab trees, rock brought down from on high by [a raging]
                     torrent.
               
            
            This leads to a fourth limitation and is directly related to AlKhalil2 performance on
               classical Arabic poetry that is far from its performance on modern Arabic. Adapting
               it to classical Arabic poetry is an idea for future research.
            Finally, the lack of a large annotated corpus forced us to apply a rule-based
               approach that is limited by the examples annotated to date, and considered by the
               developers. The rule-based approach is a well-known method that was used in early
               days of expert systems. It has numerous limitations, as it depends heavily on manual
               encoding of reasoning rules. It also applies only to instances for which rules were
               explicitly written, and thus needs ongoing maintenance . This is a major limitation, especially given the small dataset we used. The
               process we followed exemplifies both the benefits of the approach as well as its
               limitations (also shown in the analysis above). Still, as noted, we see this as an
               interim solution, despite our very encouraging results. There remains great diversity
               between different rhetorical elements. We continue to strive for better results that
               ensure high quality results, even even sacrificing precision (accepting false
               positives) in order to increase recall (reducing, even eliminating false negatives).
               We thus suggest its use only until a sufficiently large dataset of annotated poems is
               available for training machine-learning classifiers for the task.
         

            7. Conclusion and Future Work
            Identification of rhetorical elements in classical Arabic poetry is a time-consuming
               process. It requires many resources, and high-level Arabic literature experts. A new,
               automatic, rule-based mechanism for their identification is proposed in this article,
               and its use with 20 elements is demonstrated as a case study. For most, the
               framework's performance is very high.
            Further work is needed in several areas. One is addressing the study’s limitations,
               presented in the Discussion, and exploring the suggested solutions, such as including
               a significantly larger number of manually analyzed poems in the system. Another is
               improving the performance of the current framework by adding rules to identify missed
               elements, ignore misidentification and generally upgrade results. A third direction
               is building Arabic Sentiment Lexicons based on formal words, which will manually
               enrich the Negation Word Lexicon and include context-based analysis.
            This study selected 20 rhetorical elements for identification. The automatic
               identification of some of them (such as the Positive Antithesis, the Satirist’s Faint
               and the Encomiast’s Feint) can be improved by developing the existing program. There
               are others still to add — among them, Metaphor (the most challenging rhetorical
               figure), Periphrasis, Exaggeration and types of Paronomasia that we have not
               addressed — which require resources such as antonym lexicons and context-based
               analysis. One major impediment is that identifying these elements depends mainly on
               semantics: the system must be capable of recognising the semantic meaning of a
               word/expression/phrase in order to identify some of these rhetorical elements.
               Automatic identification of elements not addressed in the present research and the
               improving automatic identification of those that are, are left to future
               research.
            The present system may also be used for identifying and studying rhetoric in the
               modern Arabic poetry. For this, poems from the 19th-21st centuries should be added to
               Hussein and Kuflik’s existing system. Since most rhetorical elements in Arabic
               culture have equivalents in other literatures (the simile for example is also used in
               English, German, Chinese and more), the system can be adapted, modified and improved
               to identify and analyze rhetoric in non-Arabic literatures. Global use will enable
               in-depth comparisons of rhetorical fabrics across literatures and cultures.
            Finally, we note that the proposed approach is generic, and the same framework may be
               applied to any kind of literature. The issue is not the framework’s generality but
               the expertise, time and effort required for defining rules. We thus reiterate that
               the suggested approach may be used as an interim solution when there are insufficient
               examples of rhetoric elements to train a classical machine-learning algorithm.
         

            Appendices
            
               Appendix 1: Definitions of the 20 Rhetorical Elements (based mainly on )
               The definitions, most examples and verse translations (sometimes with
                  modifications) are taken mainly from Cachia . It is, to
                  the best of our knowledge, the only existing bi-lingual dictionary for Arabic
                  rhetoric. As the author indicates in the introduction to the book’s
                  English-language edition, each rhetorical element has been given an English name
                  although in some cases the Arabic element cannot be translated (p. 3). Where there
                  is an identical or very similar rhetorical element in English, the English term is
                  adopted. Where there is no or only partial equivalence, the term is translated by
                  Cachia to reflect the meaning of the Arabic. The explanations of the terms clarify
                  what it is intended by them.
               
                  1. Simile (تشبيه) The indication, by the use of the word like
                        (similar) or some such word (مثل، كأن، كأنما،
                        كما، كـ، شبه، حسب، خال), whether an object or condition explicitly
                     or implicitly shares an attribute with another. The former object or condition
                     is the tenor or primum compartionis, the
                     latter is the vehicle or secundum
                        comparationis. This is an example from the Syrian poet Abū Tammām
                     (d. 846 C.E.): 
                        خَلَطَ الشجاعةَ بالحَيَاء فأصْبَحا ... كالحُسنِ شِيبَ
                           لِمُغْرَمٍ بدلالِ
                        He mingled bravery (shajāʿa) with reticence (bi-l-ḥayāʾi) so that it seemed like (ka-) beauty (l-ḥusni) joined to coquetry
                           (dalāli) in a lover’s eyes
                  
                  2. Repetition1 (تكرار
                        1) This comprises two minor rhetorical elements: 
                        2.1. Repetition (تكرار ) is use of the same word or words, more than once,
                           in the same form, and with the same meaning and context for the sake of
                           emphasis in description, praise or another purpose. This example is from
                           ʿAbd al-Ghanī al-Nābulsī (d. 1731 C.E.): 
                              والجِسْمُ والجسْمُ قدْ أوْدَى السّقامُ بهِ ...
                                 والجَفْنُ والجفنُ طولَ اللّيل ما هَجَعا
                              
                              My body (wa-l-jismu) — My body (wa-l-jismu) is reduced by languor, My eyes (wa-l-jafnu) —my eyes (wa-l-jafnu) have known no sleep all
                              night
                        
                        2.2. Ploce (ترديد) uses the same word more than once, each time with a
                           different application or context (sometimes it is a different grammatical
                           context; that is, each of the two repeated words is attributed to a
                           different subject/object/pronoun etc.). This, from Sayf al-Dawla, Emir of
                           Aleppo (d. 967 CE), describes a slave-girl whom he was sending to a
                           fortress to protect her from the jealousy of his other favorites: 
                              رُبَّ هَجْرٍ يَكونُ مِنْ خَوْفِ هَجْر وفِراقٍ
                                 يكونُ خَوْفَ فِرَاق ...
                              A break (hajr)
                              may be due to the fear of a break (hajr), And parting
                                 (firāq) be caused by the fear of
                                 parting (firāq).
                        
                        2.3. Perfect Paronomasia/Pun (جناس تامّ; also Complete
                              Paronomasia) is the use in a single context of two words
                           pronounced and written exactly alike but carrying different meanings.
                           This example is from the poet Abū Tammām: 
                              مَا مَاتَ مِنْ كَرَمِ الزَّمَانِ فإنَّهُ ...
                                 يَحْيَا لَدَى يَحْيَى بْنِ عَبْدِ الله
                               All generosity that have perished is still living (yaḥyā) in the court of Yaḥyā the
                              son of Abdallah
                        
                     
                  
                  3. Repetition2 (تكرار2) This comprises three minor rhetorical elements:
                        
                        3.1. Extraction (اشتقاق; also Etymology) draws
                           from a personal name an idea that serves the poetic motif, satirical,
                           panegyric, erotic or other. This example, from Abū l-Ḥasan ʿAlī ibn
                           Muḥammmad al-Anṭākī (d. 988 C.E.), is to a patron called Ṣāliḥ: 
                              يا صالِحَ الخيراتِ ما صَلَحا ... إلا لك
                                 التأييدُ والأمْرُ
                               O Şāliḥ, [the name of the patron], the
                              patron of all bounties, the two virtues of ordering and being obedient
                                 befit (ṣalaḥa) only your personality
                        
                        3.2. Semblance (مشاكلة) replaces the denotative of an object or action with
                           another word for reasons of contextual association. An example from Abū
                           Tammām: 
                              والدّهْرُ ألأَمُ مَنْ شَرِقْتَ بِلَومِهِ ...
                                 إلا إذا أشَرَقْتَهُ بكَريمِ
                               Fate is the vilest of all that chokes you
                                 (shariqta) with vileness,
                              Unless you choke it (ashraqtahu) with [the succour of] a generous man
                        
                        3.3. Free Paronomasia (جناس مطلق) uses or suggests in one context
                           words that differ in meaning but are phonetically and/or graphically
                           alike or nearly alike — that is, matching words differ in their letters
                           and vocalisation but have at least two radical consonants in common,
                           sometimes falsely making them appear derivatives from the same root.
                           (Sometimes they do derive from the same root). For example: 
                              ذَهَبٌ حَيْثُما ذَهَبْنَا ودُرٌّ ... حيْثُ
                                 دُرْنا وفضّةٌ في الفضَاءِ Gold
                                 (dhahab) wherever we go (dhahabnā), pearls (durr)
                              Wherever we roam (durnā), and silver (fiḑḑa) even in space
                                 (fī l-faḍāʾ)
                        
                     
                  
                  4. Repetition3 (تكرار
                        3) This echoes the rhyme at the beginning of the line
                        (رد الاعجاز على الصدور). It takes two words
                     — which are identical in pronunciation and meaning, or almost alike in
                     pronunciation but not in meaning, or derived (either genuinely or apparently)
                     from the same root — placing one near the beginning of the discourse and the
                     other at its end. This example is from Ibn al Fāriḍ (d. 1235 C.E.): 
                        يا ساكنِي البطْحاء هلْ من زورةٍ ... أحْيا بها يا
                           ساكنِي البطْحاءِDesert dwellers
                           (yā sākinī l-baṭḥāʾi), will you not
                        allow one visit That I may live by it, O desert
                           dwellers (yā sākinī
                        l-baṭḥāʾi)?
                  

                  5. Repetition4 — Key Words (كلمات مفتاح) We suggest a new rhetorical
                     element, in which a root is repeated in different verses of the same poem.
                     While this includes Repetition1 and 2 (repetition, ploce, extraction/etymology,
                     semblance and paronomasia), we identify it in all verses of the poem.

                  
                        6. Flowing (اطراد) This features in a single verse the given
                           personal name of the individual praised, as well as the name of his
                           father and grandfather and that of the tribe, all in the appropriate
                           order. This example is from Ibn Durayd al-Azdī (d. 933 C.E.): 
                              عِيادُ بْنُ عَمْرو بْنِ الحَلِيسِ بن جابِرِ
                                 بْنِ زَيْدِ بْنِ مَنْظُورِ بْنِ زَيْدِ بْنِ وارثِ
                               ِʿIyād, the son of (bnu) ʿAmr, the son of (bni) al-Ḥalīs, the son of (bni) Jābir, the son of
                                 (bni) Zayd, the
                                 son of (bni) Manẓūr, the son of (bni)
                              Zayd, the son of (bni) Wārith (the u and
                              the i at the end of the word indicate
                              two different grammatical forms — nominative for the first, and
                              genitive for the second).
                        
                     
                  7. Afterthought (رجوع; also translated as Retraction) This reverses an earlier statement. The first word in
                     the second part of the verse usually matches one of the predefined words
                        {بل, بلى, ليس, لكن, نعم. لم، لا، لن}. This
                     example is from the pre-Islamic poet Zuhayr ibn Abī Sulmā (d. 609 C.E.): 
                        قِفْ بالدِيار التي لم يَعْفُها القِدَمُ ... بَلَى
                           وغَيّرها الأرواحُ والدَّيمُ Halt by a deserted abode that
                        age has not obliterated (lam
                           yaʿfihā l-qidamu)–
                        Nay (balā), that winds
                        and rain have altered!
                  
                  8. Catchword Verbal (تشابه الأطراف اللفظيّ) This is of two types. We consider one
                     type only — the verbal — which corresponds to anadiplosis, gradatio,
                     reduplication. It starts each of a succession of verses with the preceding
                     rhyme word, for example, from the poetess Laylā l-Akhyaliyya (d. 700 C.E.):
                        
                         إذا نَزلَ الحجّاجُ أرْضًا مريضةً ... تَتَبَّعَ
                           أقْصَى دائها فشفاها شَفاها من الدّاءِ العُضال الذي بها ... غُلامٌ
                           إذا هَزٌ القَناةَ سقاها سَقاها فَرَوّاها بشرْبٍ سِجالُها ... دِماءُ
                           رجالٍ يَحْلِبونَ ضَراها
                         Whenever al-Ḥajjāj visits a sick land, He treats its illness
                        and cures it (shafāhā);
                        It is cured (shafāhā)
                        of its chronic disease By a warrior who always shakes his spear, and
                           quenches the land’s thirst (saqāhā);
                        He quenches the land’s thirst (saqāhā) by drinking buckets of the blood of his
                        enemies.
                  
                  9. Distribution Characters (توزيع; also Alliteration) 
                        9.1 Distribution Characters/Alliteration
                              1 (توزيع 1) This
                           distributes to the poet or speaker the same consonant or vowel in every
                           word of a verse. The programme checks for such a letter. This verse is by
                           Ṣafiyy al-Dīn al-Ḥillī (d. 1349 C.E.): 
                              محمدُ المُصطَفى المُختارُ مَنْ خُتِمَتْ ...
                                 بمجدِهِ مُرْسَلو الرَّحْمَنِ للأُمَمِ
                               Muhammad the favourite and choices from all His creations.
                              One who is the last of the messengers of the Merciful God to the
                              nations (the translation lacks starting each word with the m
                              consonant).
                        
                        9.2 Distribution Characters/Alliteration
                              2 (توزيع 2) This type
                           distributes the same consonant or vowel in every word or most words of
                           the entire poem. The programme checks, and we choose to record how many
                           times the top three letters appear.
                     
                  
                  10. Hemming (تصريع) This is when the end of the first hemistich matches
                     the end of the verse in meter and final vowel. The following verse is by Abū
                     Nuwās (d. 814 C.E.) 
                        دَعْ عَنْكَ لَوْمِي فأنّ اللَّوْمَ إِغْراءُ ...
                           وَداوِني بالّتي كانَتْ هيَ الدّاءُ
                         Censure me not, for censure but tempts me
                           (ighrāʾu); cure me rather with the cause
                        of my ill (al-dāʾu).
                  
                  11. Unraveling (التوشيع) This is use of a noun in dual form near the end of
                     the second hemistich, followed by two single words specifying what constitutes
                     this duality, the second being the rhyme word. An example from Mayyās
                     al-Mawṣilī (no date of death is given): 
                        أبيتُ في لجَج التّذْكارِ منْكَ وبي ... حالان
                           مخْتَلفانِ اليَأسُ والأمَلُ لا يَهتدي لي طيْفٌ مُذْ هجرْتَ ولا ...
                           يَزُورُني المُسلْيان الكُتْبُ والرُّسُلُ أسائلُ الدّارَ مِنْ وَجْدي
                           عليْكَ فلا ... يُجيبُني المُقْفران الرّبْعُ والطللُ
                         I spend the night importuned by memories of you, and in me Are
                           two opposite conditions: despair and hope. No
                        phantom finds its way to me since you deserted me, Nor am I visited by
                        the two comforters: letters and messengers. My
                        passion for you makes me question the site where I have halted, but I
                        get no answer from either of the two desolate spots: the old
                           encampment and its half-obliterated traces.
                  
                  12. Counterchange (عكس
                        وتبديل) This is repetition of words in a different order. It
                     is of two kinds: (1) a hemistich is recast to complete the verse without any
                     change in meaning, and (2) a hemistich or part thereof is re-arranged to
                     produce a different meaning. يا بَدَني يا بَدَني بالفِراقِ مُتْ كمدا مُتْ ... كمَداً بالفراقِ
                           فارَقَني مَنْ أحبُّ واحزَني ... واحزَني مَنْ أحبُ فارَقَني
                        Body of mine, now we are parted, die of grief! Die of grief now we are
                        parted, o body of mine! He has left me, whom I love – O
                        wretchedness! Wretchedness, he whom I love has left me!
                  
                  13. Repartee (مراجعة) This is a reported conversation, combining pithy
                     expression, subtle ideas, elegant composition, and flowing diction. This
                     example is from the poetry of the Egyptian Ibn Maṭrūḥ (d. 1251 C.E.): 
                        سَألتُ مَنْ أمْرَضَني ... في قُبْلَةٍ تشْفي
                           الألْمْ فقال لا لا أبداً ... قُلتُ له نَعَمْ نَعَمْ 
                         I asked of him who caused my languor for a kiss to ease the pain.
                        He answered, No, no,
                           never! (faqāla: lā lā
                           abadan)
                        I insisted, Yes, oh yes!
                           (qultu lahu: naʿam naʿam)
                  
                  14. Rhyming – in general – homoeoteleuton
                        (سجع) When the discourse is divided
                     into sections with similar-sounding last syllables, it is said to be: 
                        14.1. Congruent
                           موازَن when the final words agree in
                           measure as well as in rhyme, or
                        14.2. Terminal
                           مطرف when they have rhyme but not
                           measure in common. An example of congruent rhyming from the Qur`ān
                           88:13-14: 
                              فيها سررٌ مرفوعة وأكوابٌ موضوعة
                               In it are thrones that are raised (marfūʿa), and goblets placed ready (mawḑūʿa). An example of terminal rhyming from
                           al-Waʾwāʾ al-Dimashqī (d. 995 C.E.): قُمْ يا غُلامُ إلى المُدام ... قُمْ داوِني منِها
                                 بِجام Up, boy! To the wine
                                 (al-mudām), Medicate me with a silver goblet (bi-jām)
                        
                        14.3. Tucking
                           تشطير. The division of each hemistich
                           into rhyming parts, but with different rhymes in each hemistich
                           (producing the arrangement bbaa, where a is the rhyme common to
                           all verses of the poem). An example from Abū Tammām in praise of the
                           caliph al- Muʿtaşim bi-llāh (re. 833-842 C.E.), playing on the literal
                           meaning of the honorific title: تَدْبيرُ مُعْتَصِم
                              بالله مُنْتقِمٍ ... للهِ مُرْتقبٍ في الله مُرْتغِبٍ  He revenges
                              [his enemies by the help of] God (bi-l-lāhi
                                 muntaqimin), and acts while finding refuge in God
                                 (tadbīru muʿtaṣimin) He
                              places his hope in God (fī l-lāhi
                                 murtaghibin), waiting to meeting Him (li-lāhi murtaqibin)
                        
                        14.4. Embroidery
                           ترصيع– Making every word in a hemistich
                           or prose versicle agree in rhyme and possibly in measure, as well as in
                           grammatical case with the correspondingly placed word in the next
                           hemistich or versicle [Qurʾān 82: 13]: 
                              إنّ الأبْرارَ لَفي نَعيم, وإنّ الفُجّارَ لَفي
                                 جَحيم
                               The (inna) righteous (abrāra) are in (la-fī) bliss (naʿīmin),
                              and the (wa-inna) ungodly (al-fujjāra) are in (la-fī) hell (jaḥīmin)
                        
                     
                  
                  15. Verbal Congruence (مناسبة لفظيّة) Verbal congruence is the use of two words or
                     sets of words cast in the same metrical pattern. It is of two varieties:
                     perfect and imperfect. In the first, congruent words or versicles rhyme with
                     one another. In the second, they do not. We focus on one of them: the verbal
                     congruence perfect. An example of perfect verbal congruence, nūru l-ghayāhibi (the light of
                        darkness) and jammu l-mawāhibi
                        (abounding in gifts) from ʿAbd al-Ghanī
                     al-Nābulsī: 
                        نُورُ الغَياهِبِ في يَوْم الوَغى بَطَلٌ ... جمُّ
                           المواهِبِ بَحْرُ الجُودِ والكَرَمِ
                        He is a light in darkness (nūru l-ghayāhibi), a hero on the day of strife,
                        Abounding in gifts (jammu
                           l-mawāhibi), a sea of bounty and generosity
                  
                  16. Paronomasia/Pun (جناس) This is use or suggestion in one context of words that
                     differ in meaning but are phonetically and/or graphically alike or nearly
                     alike. They are of seven main types: 
                        16.1. Conjunct Paronomasia (جناس
                              مركّب - مَرْفُوّ) A paronomasia in which a single word
                           is matched by a combination of more than one. An example from Ibn Nubāta
                           (d. 1366 C.E.), in which amradā, beardless youth , is matched by am radā, or
                              death:
                           
                              قمراً نَراهُ أمْ مليحا أمْرَدَا ... ولِحاظُه
                                 بينَ الجَوانِحِ أمْ رَدَى
                              Is it a moon that we see, or a handsome beardless
                                 youth (amradā)? Is it
                              his glances [wreaking havoc] in my breast, or is it
                                 death (am radā)?
                        
                        16.2. Tipped Paronomasia (جناس ناقص - مُطَرَّف) A paronomasia in
                           which one of the matching terms is longer than the other by at least one
                           initial consonant. An example from Ibn al-Fāriḑ (d. 1235 C.E.): 
                              إنْ كانَ فِراقُنا مع الصُبْح بَدا لا أسْفَرَ
                                 بَعْدَ ذاكَ صُبْحٌ ... أبَدا
                              If with the dawn your parting must occur
                                 (badā), Then may no dawn hereafter ever (abadā) break
                        
                        16.3. Tailed Paronomasia (جناس ناقص - مُذَيَّل) A paronomasia in
                           which one of the matching terms is longer than the other by one or more
                           terminal consonants. An example by Ḥassān ibn Thābit (d. 674 C.E.):
                              
                              وُكنّا متى يَغْزُ النّبيُّ قَبيلَةًٌ ... نَصِلْ
                                 جانِبيْها بالقنا والقنابِل
                              Whenever the Prophet attacked a tribe, We struck both flanks
                              with lances (qanā) and with squadrons of horse
                                 (qanābil)
                        
                        16.4. Consonantal Paronomasia (جناس مُحَرَّف; also Distorted Paronomasia) A paronomasia in which the two
                           matching terms consist of the same letters in the same order, differing
                           only in vocalization. An example from Sharaf al-Dīn al-Anṣārī (d. 1264
                           C.E.): 
                              لِعَيْني كُلّ يَوْمٍ ألفُ عَبْرَه ... تُصيّرُني
                                 لأهْل العِشْق عِبْرَه
                               My eyes shed every day a thousand tears
                                 (ʽabra) So that to my lovers
                              I have become an object lesson (ʽibra)
                        
                        16.5. Substitutive and Variant
                              Paronomasia (جناس تصريف
                           ) A paronomasia in which one of the matching terms has one letter –
                           initial, medial or terminal – which differs from the corresponding letter
                           in the other term, or is similar or close to their points of emission but
                           does not differ in its dots (so that it belongs to a different or the
                           same phonetic category). An example from Abū Firās al-Ḥamdānī (d. 968
                           C.E.): 
                              تَعِسَ الحَرِيصُ وَقَلَّ ما يأتي بِهِ ...
                                 عِوَضًا عنِ الإلْحاحِ وَالإلْحافِ Wretched is the
                              miser, and he seldom gets a return for his insistence (ilḥāḥ) and importuning (ilḥāf)
                        
                        16.6. Metathetic Paronomasia (جناس مقلوب; also Reverse
                              Paronomasia) A paronomasia in which the two matching
                           terms consist of the same letters, without addition or omission, but in
                           different orders. An example from Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad al-Bakrī (d.1060
                           C.E.): 
                              قلتُ مستعطفاً لساقٍ سقاني ... من طلا نِيلِ
                                 مِصْرَ أعذبَ كاسِأنتَ عندي أعزّ منه ولكنْ ... قلبُه ليّنٌ
                                 وقلبُكَ قاسِ
                               Pleadingly, I said to a cupbearer (sāqī) who poured out to me of the liquor of
                              Egypt’s Nile (nīl) a most limpid cup: You are dearer to me than it,
                              and yet its heart is soft (layyin; the y in Arabic
                              is written like the ī. Without the
                              diacritics, the word layyin looks
                              like līn), but yours is cruel (qāsī)
                        
                        16.7. Graphic Paronomasia (جناس تصحيف) A paronomasia such that, when
                           written, the two matching terms are shaped alike, differing only in their
                           dots (which, in Arabic script, differentiate many letters from one
                           another). An example: 
                              إنْ كان شرْعُ هواك أطْلَقَ أدمُعي ... فوَكيلُ
                                 شوْقي عاجزٌ عن حَبْسهأوْ كان منكَ الطَّرْفُ أسْهَرَ ناظِرِي
                                 ... فَلِكُلّ شَيْءٍٍ آفَةٌ مِنْ جِنْسِه
                               Though the law of your love set free my tears, Yet is the
                              advocate of my yearning incapable of restraining
                                 it (ḥabsihi حبسه) And,
                              if your eyes deprive mine of sleep [It is admitted that] all
                              things are vulnerable to kindred ill (jinsihi جنسه)
                        
                     
                  
                  17. Negative Antithesis (طباق سلب) Combining the object (word) and its opposite in
                     Arabic literature produces two main kinds of antithesis — positive and
                     negative. Our focus was the negative, which is considered a type of Repetition,
                     with the opposite word preceded by a negation article {لا, ما, لم, لن, ليس, لات, غير}. This example is from the poem by
                     al-Buḥturī (d. 898 C.E.) between the phrases knowing and not
                        knowing: 
                        يقيّض لي من حيث لا أعلم النوى ... ويسري إليّ الشوق من
                           حيث أعلم
                         Separation is predestined to me from a source that I
                           do not know (lā aʿlamu); But I
                        feel the longing of a source that I do know (aʿlamu).
                  
                  18. Positive Antithesis/Oxymoron (طباق إيجاب) This is when words and their
                     opposites appear in the same verse. Opposites formed by negation words are not
                     positive antitheses. An example from Ibn Nubāta: 
                        دعوتُ ألْفاظ المَليح وكأسَه ... فنعمْتُ بينَ حديثه
                           وعَتيقه
                         I call forth the fair one’s conversation and his cup, and so delight
                        in his present discourse (ḥadīthihi) and old wine (qadīmihi).
                  
                  19. The Satirist’s Feint (تأكيد الذّم بما يشبه المدح) This either (a)
                     denies that the subject has any praiseworthy quality, or (b) ascribes to the
                     subject a pejorative attribute then, after exempting him/her from it or
                     rectifying it, names another pejorative attribute. An example from al-Nābulsī:
                        فإن مَنْ لامَني لا خيرَ فيه سِوَى
                           ... وصفي له بأخس الناس كًلّهِمِ My reprover has no good qualities except (lā
                           khayra fīhi siwā)
                        being the vilest among all people (akhassa l-nāsi kullihimi).
                  
                  20. The Encomiast’s Feint (تأكيد المدح بما يشبه الذّم) This either (a)
                     denies that the subject has any pejorative attributes, then exempts him/her
                     from that denial, as if reversing it, a praiseworthy quality. Or (b) ascribes
                     to the subject a praiseworthy quality then, after an exempting or rectifying
                     word, names another praiseworthy quality. The following example is from the
                     pre-Islamic poet an-Nābigha l-Dhubyānī (d. ca. 604 C.E.): 
                        ولا عَيْبَ فيهم غيرَ أنّ سُيوفَهُمْ ... بهنّ فلولٌ
                           مِنْ قِراع الكَتائبِ There is no fault in them, excepting
                        that their swords — have Suffered dents in clashes with
                        battalions.
                  
               
            
            
               Appendix 2: Poets and Number of Poems
               
                  
                     Name of Poet
                     Number of poems in training set
                     Number of pomes in text set
                  
                  
                     Al-Buḥturī
                     3
                     
                  
                  
                     Ibn al-Rūmī
                     7
                     1
                  
                  
                     Abū Tammām
                     9
                     1
                  
                  
                     Al-Mutanabbī
                     2
                     
                  
                  
                     Dīk al-Jinn al-Ḥimṣī
                     10
                     
                  
                  
                     Al-Najāshī al-Ḥārithī
                     2
                     
                  
                  
                     Al-Kumayt ibn Zayd
                     2
                     
                  
                  
                     Ibn Qys al-Ruqayyāt
                     2
                     
                  
                  
                     Al-Ṭirimmāḥ b. Ḥakīm
                     2
                     
                  
                  
                     Jarīr
                     2
                     
                  
                  
                     Al-Farazdaq 
                     3
                     
                  
                  
                     Abū Dhuʾayb al-Hudhalī 
                     2
                     
                  
                  
                     Bashshār b. Burd
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     Al-Aʿshā Maymūn
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     Imruʾ al-Qays
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     Mulayḥ b. al-Ḥakam
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     Abū Arāka
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     Ayman b. Khuraym
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     ّTaʾabbaṭa Sharran
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     Dhū l-Rumma
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     ʿUbaydallāh b. al-Ḥurr
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     ʿImrān b. Ḥiṭṭān
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     Qaṭarī b. al-Fujāʾa
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     Yazīd b. Mufarrigh al-Ḥimyarī
                     1
                     
                  
                  
                     Al-Nābigha l-Dhubyānī
                     
                     1
                  
                  
                     Rabīʿa b. Maqrūm
                     
                     1
                  
                  
                      Al-Namir b. Tawlab
                     
                     1
                  
                  
                     Al-Ḥakam b. ʿAbdal
                     
                     1
                  
                  
                     Abū Dulāma
                     
                     2
                  
                  
                     Anonymous (Abbasid poet)
                     
                     1
                  
                  
                     Al-Ḥamdawī
                     
                     3
                  
                  
                     Abū Nuwās
                     
                     1
                  
                  
                     Muḥammad b. Yasīr al-Riyāshī
                     
                     1
                  
                  
                     Abān al-Lāḥiqī
                     
                     1
                  
                  
                     ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd al-Lāḥiqī
                     
                     1
                  
                  
                     Total count
                     58
                     17
                  
               
            
            
               Appendix 3: Number of Rhetorical Elements in the Training and Test
                  Datasets
               
                  
                     Elements
                     Appearances in the sets
                     Training set
                     Test set
                  
                  
                     
                        Simile
                        تشبيه
                     
                     290
                     37
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition1 (تكرار) 
                     196
                     31
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition2 (اشتقاق) 
                     247
                     40
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition3 (echo
                        رد الاعجاز على الصدور) 
                     131
                     17
                  
                  
                     
                        Repetition4 – Key Words كلمات مفتاح
                     
                     66
                     45
                  
                  
                     
                        Flowing (اطراد) 
                     5
                     3
                  
                  
                     
                        Afterthought (رجوع) 
                     5
                     5
                  
                  
                     
                        Catchword Verbal (تشابه
                           الاطراف اللفظي) 
                     4
                     8
                  
                  
                     
                        Distribution Characters1/Alliteration 1
                           (توزيع 1) 
                     5
                     5
                  
                  
                     
                        Distribution Characters2/ Alliteration2
                           (توزيع 2) 
                     174
                     51
                  
                  
                     
                        Hemming (تصريع) 
                     5
                     5
                  
                  
                     
                        Unraveling ((توشيع) 
                     16
                     14
                  
                  
                     
                        Counterchange (عكس
                           وتبديل) 
                     8
                     5
                  
                  
                     
                        Repartee (مراجعة) 
                     6
                     5
                  
                  
                     
                        Rhyming – in general – homoeoteleuton (سجع) 
                     5
                     24
                  
                  
                     
                        Verbal Congruence (مناسبة لفظيّة) 
                     4
                     7
                  
                  
                     
                        Paronomasia (جناس) 
                     32
                     21
                  
                  
                     
                        Negative Antithesis (طباق سلب) 
                     66
                     7
                  
                  
                     
                        Positive Anthithesis / Oxymoron (طباق إيجاب) 
                     245
                     35
                  
                  
                     
                        Satirist's, Encomiast's Feints
                         (تأكيد الذّم بما يشبه المدحتأكيد المدح بما
                           يشبه الذّم) 
                     10
                     13
                  
               
            
            
               Appendix 4: Appearance of Each Rhetorical Element in Each Poem (Rhetorical
                  Elements are numbered 1,2,3,4,5,9.2,12,16,17,18
               
                  
                     Poet
                     Poem number
                     Ele.1
                     Ele.2 
                     Ele.3
                     Ele.4
                     Ele.5
                     Ele.9.2
                     Ele.12
                     Ele.16
                     Ele.17
                     Ele.18
                  
                  
                     Al-Buḥturī
                     51
                     8
                     5
                     4
                     7
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     5
                  
                  
                     256
                     11
                     3
                     2
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     2
                     3
                  
                  
                     915
                     10
                     4
                     15
                     3
                     0
                     3
                     1
                     1
                     1
                     11
                  
                  
                     Ibn al-Rūmī
                     9
                     8
                     2
                     9
                     3
                     6
                     3
                     1
                     0
                     1
                     6
                  
                  
                     104
                     4
                     4
                     2
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     1
                     2
                     0
                     3
                  
                  
                     343
                     4
                     2
                     2
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     3
                  
                  
                     344
                     3
                     3
                     3
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     4
                  
                  
                     539
                     0
                     2
                     2
                     4
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     2
                     8
                  
                  
                     691
                     1
                     1
                     2
                     3
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     701
                     3
                     5
                     2
                     7
                     0
                     3
                     2
                     0
                     0
                     2
                  
                  
                     Abū Tammām
                     2
                     10
                     6
                     6
                     3
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     2
                     1
                     6
                  
                  
                     5
                     13
                     12
                     11
                     14
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     14
                     9
                  
                  
                     21
                     2
                     0
                     2
                     4
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     3
                  
                  
                     71
                     13
                     6
                     7
                     4
                     0
                     3
                     1
                     0
                     0
                     12
                  
                  
                     179
                     9
                     5
                     1
                     4
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     2
                     5
                  
                  
                     393
                     6
                     3
                     6
                     5
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     1
                     4
                     10
                  
                  
                     464
                     1
                     2
                     2
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     4
                     8
                  
                  
                     470
                     3
                     6
                     5
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     3
                  
                  
                     484
                     4
                     2
                     6
                     1
                     2
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     10
                  
                  
                     al-Mutanabbī
                     59
                     21
                     10
                     7
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     1
                     1
                     9
                  
                  
                     209
                     5
                     9
                     6
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     2
                     17
                  
                  
                     Dīk al-Jinn al-Ḥimṣī-
                     13
                     0
                     3
                     2
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     2
                     0
                     0
                     2
                  
                  
                     14
                     0
                     1
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     2
                     1
                  
                  
                     9
                     9
                     6
                     7
                     6
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     5
                  
                  
                     62
                     4
                     5
                     3
                     3
                     0
                     3
                     1
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     11
                     5
                     2
                     6
                     3
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     7
                  
                  
                     15
                     0
                     3
                     1
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     2
                     0
                     4
                     7
                     2
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     3
                  
                  
                     35
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     38
                     0
                     8
                     3
                     1
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     2
                  
                  
                     33
                     1
                     1
                     1
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     Al-Najāshī al-Ḥārithī 
                     41
                     4
                     1
                     1
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     62
                     14
                     4
                     7
                     1
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     3
                  
                  
                     Al-Kumayt ibn Zayd 
                     6
                     5
                     3
                     4
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     5
                  
                  
                     8
                     1
                     2
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     Ibn Qys al-Ruqayyāt 
                     40
                     2
                     0
                     2
                     0
                     7
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     2
                  
                  
                     50
                     1
                     4
                     4
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     3
                  
                  
                     Al-Ṭirimmāḥ b. Ḥakīm 
                     22
                     3
                     1
                     3
                     1
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     290
                     1
                     1
                     3
                     1
                     3
                     3
                     0
                     1
                     1
                     3
                  
                  
                     Jarīr 
                     3
                     4
                     9
                     3
                     5
                     2
                     3
                     0
                     1
                     4
                     7
                  
                  
                     11
                     1
                     3
                     7
                     0
                     4
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     Al-Farazdaq 
                     35
                     5
                     0
                     3
                     1
                     4
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     6
                  
                  
                     50
                     0
                     2
                     3
                     0
                     2
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     5
                  
                  
                     181
                     7
                     4
                     7
                     1
                     9
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     2
                     8
                  
                  
                     Abū Dhuʾayb al-Hudhalī
                     1
                     12
                     1
                     7
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     2
                     4
                     2
                     5
                     1
                     7
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     6
                  
                  
                     Bashshār b. Burd 
                     26
                     14
                     6
                     13
                     6
                     0
                     3
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     11
                  
                  
                     Al-Aʿshā Maymūn
                     79
                     13
                     1
                     2
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     3
                  
                  
                     Imruʾ al-Qays
                     8
                     8
                     1
                     4
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     Mulayḥ b. al-Ḥakam
                     2
                     12
                     3
                     2
                     1
                     7
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     2
                  
                  
                     Abū Arāka
                     1
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     Ayman b. Khuraym
                     17
                     1
                     2
                     3
                     2
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     Taʾabbaṭa Sharran
                     29
                     7
                     8
                     9
                     6
                     0
                     3
                     1
                     2
                     1
                     9
                  
                  
                     Dhū l-Rumma
                     30
                     10
                     0
                     5
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     ʿUbaydallāh b. al-Ḥurr
                     53
                     1
                     1
                     5
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     ʾImrān b. Ḥiṭṭān
                     199
                     1
                     1
                     4
                     0
                     6
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     6
                  
                  
                     Qaṭarī b. al-Fujāʾa
                     121
                     0
                     3
                     3
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     Yazīd b. Mufarrigh al-Ḥimyarī
                     44
                     1
                     8
                     3
                     5
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     0
                  
                  
                     Tally of poems in training set
                     58
                     290
                     196
                     247
                     131
                     66
                     174
                     12
                     11
                     66
                     245
                  
                  
                     Al-Nābigha l-Dhubyānī-
                     36
                     8
                     4
                     11
                     3
                     6
                     3
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     5
                  
                  
                     Rabīʿa b. Maqrūm
                     43
                     3
                     1
                     2
                     0
                     3
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     0
                  
                  
                     Al-Aʿshā Maymūn
                     78
                     6
                     4
                     5
                     2
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     5
                  
                  
                     Al-Namir b. Tawlab
                     34
                     2
                     3
                     3
                     0
                     2
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     1
                  
                  
                     Al-Ḥakam b. ʿAbdal
                     1
                     2
                     4
                     2
                     1
                     8
                     3
                     1
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     Abū Dulāma
                     1
                     4
                     0
                     1
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     Anonymous poet
                     9
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     Abū Tammām
                     338
                     0
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     4
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     3
                  
                  
                     Al-Ḥamdawī
                     12
                     0
                     1
                     0
                     0
                     4
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     0
                  
                  
                     Abū Nuwās
                     2
                     3
                     1
                     0
                     1
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     2
                  
                  
                     Muḥammad . Yasīr al-Riyāshī
                     
                     2
                     2
                     2
                     0
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     Abū Dulāma
                     1
                     2
                     4
                     3
                     4
                     10
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     8
                  
                  
                     Ibn al-Rūmī 
                     6
                     2
                     1
                     1
                     1
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     2
                  
                  
                     Al-Ḥamdawī
                     6
                     0
                     0
                     1
                     0
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     3
                  
                  
                     Al-Ḥamdawī
                     8
                     0
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     2
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                      ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAbd al-Ḥamīd al-Lāḥiqī
                     4
                     1
                     3
                     1
                     1
                     0
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     2
                  
                  
                     Abān al-Lāḥiqī
                     1
                     2
                     2
                     2
                     3
                     1
                     3
                     0
                     0
                     0
                     1
                  
                  
                     Tally of poems in testing set
                     10
                     37
                     31
                     40
                     17
                     29
                     51
                     2
                     0
                     7
                     35
                  
               
            
         

            Acknowledgement
            This research was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant No. 1861/14) and
               a Werner Otto Scholarship, University of Haifa.
         
