Title:  A Genealogy of Distant Reading
Volume:  011
Issue:  2
Date:  27 June 2017
Abstract:  
                
                It has recently become common to describe all empirical approaches to literature
                    as subfields of digital humanities. This essay argues that distant reading has a
                    largely distinct genealogy stretching back many decades before the advent of the
                    internet – a genealogy that is not for the most part centrally concerned with
                    computers. It would be better to understand this field as a conversation between
                    literary studies and social science, inititated by scholars like Raymond
                    Williams and Janice Radway, and moving slowly toward an explicitly experimental
                    method. Candor about the social-scientific dimension of distant reading is
                    needed now, in order to refocus a research agenda that can drift into diffuse
                    exploration of digital tools. Clarity on this topic might also reduce
                    miscommunication between distant readers and digital humanists.
            
Full Body Text: 
 Over the last decade or so, it has become common to describe all empirical
                approaches to literary history as subfields of digital humanities. At first, I
                didn’t take this conflation seriously; I thought it was journalistic shorthand for a
                history that scholars understood to be more complex. Writing in The New York Times, for instance, Kathryn Schulz described distant
                reading in 2011 as one of many approaches 
                    currently proliferating under the
                        broad rubric of ‘digital humanities’
                    
                . A reader who thought it worthwhile to quibble could have replied that
                neither thing is a subset of the other. Although the projects were certainly in
                conversation by 2011, the phrases distant reading and digital
                    humanities had been coined ten years earlier, in different academic
                communities, to describe different kinds of research. Digital technology hadn’t even
                played a central role in early examples of distant reading. But why quibble? No one
                expects a short newspaper article to give a full history of academic trends. 
More recently, however, I have noticed that scholars themselves are beginning to
                narrate intellectual history in the same way: treating all quantitative or empirical
                approaches to literary history as aspects of a digital turn in the discipline. In
                Amy Earhart’s genealogy of digital literary studies, for
                instance, distant reading is presented as a recent change of course in an
                intellectual tradition originally centered on editorial theory and the internet.
                    [T]he digital work I have traced in
                    the first part of this book has been largely representational, with technology
                    primarily used to create idealized or better versions than would be possible in
                    print. Current trends in digital literary studies, and the larger digital
                    humanities, appear to be moving away from representational concerns and toward
                    interpretive functions as contemporary digital scholars, such as Stephen Ramsay,
                    Franco Moretti, Matthew Jockers, Geoffrey Rockwell, and others, are using
                    technology to devolve, manipulate, and reform the literary text. 
It may be correct to say that interpretive questions are a relatively late
                development in digital literary studies (a tradition that
                Earhart traces to the impact of the World Wide Web in the 1990s). But the
                interpretive questions posed by the scholars she mentions in this passage are much
                older than the web. Quantitative interpretation of literature is a story that
                stretches back through book history, sociology, and linguistics to a range of
                nineteenth-century experiments , . This tradition is a branch of the digital humanities
                only in a parochial sense — as we might call pizza a branch of American cuisine.
                Both things were imported from a different social context, and inherit a longer
                history of their own.
 There is nothing wrong with writing a history of food in America, and also nothing
                wrong with Earhart’s decision to focus on a particular critical tradition initiated
                by the advent of the web. As long as readers remember that many ingredients of this
                history have longer backstories elsewhere, no one will be misled. But of course,
                backstories do get forgotten with the passage of time, and new generations learn to
                associate pizza mainly with Chicago or New York. Today it is common to see distant
                reading and the sociology of literature folded into discussions of 
                    Big Data research in digital
                        humanities
                    
                . To my eyes, this puts the emphasis in a strange place, and suggests that we
                have begun to forget (or at least underplay) important aspects of our own past.
                    Big data is a twenty-first century technical buzzword. It is odd to
                see it used as a filing category for the much older aspiration to survey patterns
                that organize human culture. 
This essay will turn the calendar back to the middle of the twentieth century, in
                order to tease apart intellectual traditions that have begun to be conflated. In
                particular, I want to emphasize that distant reading is not a new trend, defined by
                digital technology or by contemporary obsession with the word data. The
                questions posed by distant readers were originally framed by scholars (like Raymond
                Williams and Janice Radway) who worked on the boundary between literary history and
                social science. Of course, computer science has also been a crucial influence. But
                the central practice that distinguishes distant reading from other forms of literary
                criticism is not at bottom a technology. It is, I will argue, the practice of
                framing historical inquiry as an experiment, using hypotheses and samples (of texts
                or other social evidence) that are defined before the writer settles on a
                conclusion. 
Integrating experimental inquiry in the humanities poses rhetorical and social
                challenges that are quite distinct from the challenges of integrating digital media.
                It seems desirable — even likely — that distant readers and digital humanists will
                coexist productively. But that compatibility cannot be taken for granted, as if the
                two projects were self-evidently versions of the same thing. They are not, and the
                institutional forms of their coexistence still need to be negotiated.

                Distant reading
                 Large-scale literary history is far from a new idea. Vernacular literary study
                    entered nineteenth-century universities as an already-ambitious project that
                    sought to trace the parallel development of literature, language, and society
                    across a thousand years. It was only in the twentieth century that literary
                    scholarship began to restrict itself paradigmatically to the close reading of
                    single texts. If we take a long view of disciplinary history, recent research on
                    large digital libraries is just one expression of a much broader trend,
                    beginning around the middle of the twentieth century, that has tended to
                    reinstate the original historical ambitions of literary scholarship.
                But that would be a very long view: it doesn’t do much to help us understand
                    current scholarly debate. For that, we need a tighter frame — a frame that can
                    characterize the goals that have energized empirical approaches to literary
                    history over the last half-century or so, without reducing them to an expression
                    of twenty-first-century technology. This essay will provide an account on that
                    intermediate scale. The frame I have chosen to use is the phrase distant
                        reading. But I want to make clear from the outset that this phrase is
                    not inevitable; there are other valid options. Andrew Goldstone observes that
                        distant reading tends to foreground textual interpretation
                    (reading) at the expense of questions about social structure . James F. English has shown that a similar account
                    can be organized instead around the phrase 
                        sociology of literature
                        
                    . Cultural analytics could be an equally valid choice, if we wanted
                    to include disciplines other than literary studies. In short, like most
                    historical phenomena, the trend I am describing is composed of multiple
                    overlapping impulses. There is more than one right way to describe it.
                I have chosen distant reading because the phrase underlines the
                    macroscopic scale of recent literary-historical experiments, without narrowly
                    specifying theoretical presuppositions, methods, or objects of analysis.
                    Although I understand Goldstone’s concerns about the word, I think we are free
                    to interpret reading as an inquiry about social structures as well
                    as literary forms. Distant reading also has the crucial advantage
                    of being vivid, memorable, and less bristly than any of the alternatives that
                    end in mining or analysis. On the other hand, it does have one
                    significant disadvantage: it is often understood to imply a recent origin story
                    that would prevent us from crediting any work done in the previous century. I
                    will need to complicate that story in the pages that follow. It is true that
                    Franco Moretti coined distant reading around the year 2000. But
                    although Moretti is an important scholar in the tradition I will be tracing,
                    there is no reason to treat his invention of the phrase as an originating moment
                    for the whole tradition. Distant reading was not coined to describe
                    a radically new method. The first occurrence of the phrase, in Conjectures on World Literature, seems in fact to
                    describe the familiar scholarly activity of aggregating and summarizing previous
                    research . Distant reading has evolved
                    into a name for a more specific approach to literary history, but the approach
                    described significantly predates this particular name for it.
                Moretti’s turn-of-the-century works were important, not because they invented the
                    idea of macroscopic literary inquiry, but because they galvanized an existing
                    project by infusing it with a new sense of possibility and a new polemical
                    rationale. I will have more to say about his contribution, but this essay will
                    mostly take aim at a larger target — a critical tradition, emerging in the later
                    twentieth century, that would include things originally called book
                        history or sociology of literature, as well
                    as more recent, emphatically quantitative experiments. The common denominator
                    that links all these projects is simply that they pose broad historical
                    questions about literature, and answer them by studying samples of social or
                    textual evidence. Those samples may range from a few dozen instances to a
                    million or more. Instead of prescribing a particular mode or scale of
                    representation, I want to highlight the underlying project of experimenting on
                    samples, and the premise that samples of the literary past have to be
                    constructed rather than passively received.
                This premise is general enough to have cropped up many times, so the tradition I
                    am describing will lack crisp boundaries. Many traditional works of literary
                    history pause at the outset to construct an informal sample of, say, Gothic
                    novels. To the extent that those studies separate the construction of the sample
                    from the process of historical inference, I would say they are approximating
                    distant reading. Since versions of this approach to literature can be traced
                    back to the nineteenth century, it would be pointless to go looking for a moment
                    of origin. The emergence of distant reading was not contained in any eureka
                    moment when a literary scholar decided to try social-scientific methods. It
                    emerged rather through a long sequence of attempts, which gradually transformed
                    casual historiographic practices into an explicitly experimental method.
            

                Mid-twentieth-century developments
                A longer study might follow this story down many different paths. Marxist
                    literary theory has been one crucial influence; Raymond Williams might deserve a
                    chapter of his own. The books he wrote around 1960 laid a theoretical foundation
                    that still underpins much contemporary research — for instance, by insisting
                    that literary culture is never a unified object, but rather a palimpsest of
                    emergent and residual formations, transformed retrospectively by processes of
                    selection. After reading Williams, it becomes hard to imagine that there could
                    ever be a single definition of literary exemplarity, or a single correct sample
                    of the literary past. In The Long Revolution,
                    Williams also intriguingly foreshadows contemporary distant reading by grappling
                    with a longue durée, and by emphasizing our
                    ignorance about the past: 
                        nobody really knows the
                            nineteenth-century novel; nobody has read, or could have read, all its
                            examples, over the whole range from printed volumes to penny
                            serials
                        
                    .
                A full account of the emergence of distant reading might also spend a chapter on
                    book history. Book historians have been compelled to explicitly define samples,
                    since libraries don’t cover the full range of practices they study. Book
                    historians have also pushed literary history to define its object of study more
                    concretely — separating processes of production, for instance, from circulation
                    and reading practices. But these parts of the story are already well known . In this limited space, I need to skip forward to a
                    later stage of development, when the theoretical premises developed in book
                    history and Marxist literary theory started to combine with an experimental
                    method drawn from the social sciences. One excellent example of this fusion can
                    be found in Janice Radway’s Reading the Romance
                    (1984). 
                This book became a monument of feminist scholarship by challenging the widespread
                    premise that popular literature simply transmitted ideology. In Radway’s view,
                    critics had too quickly extrapolated their own interpretive practices to other
                    readers. A critic may pick up a popular romance, for instance, identify the
                    gender norms that seem implicit in the plot, and conclude that the effect of the
                    book is to reinforce those norms. But how much does this tell us about the
                    actual experience of romance readers? What aspects of the stories do they value?
                    What role do the books play in their lives? Studying a community of women linked
                    by a particular bookstore, Radway concluded that readers have more control over
                    the meaning of stories than critics assume. Romances seemed to function in
                    practice as a declaration of
                        independence from the pressure of these readers’ responsibilities as
                    wives and mothers, even when the gender roles represented in the narrative were
                    traditional. Many subsequent arguments about the active agency of reception in
                    fan culture are indebted to Radway’s conclusions.
                Literary scholars have been much slower to imitate her methods, which depended on
                    questionnaires, interviews, and numbers.
                
                    Table from Radway 1984, p. 67.
                    
                
                Radway’s quantitative methods may at first seem remote from familiar examples of
                    distant reading. She doesn’t discuss algorithms. Instead she uses numbers simply
                    to count and compare — in order to ask, for instance, which elements of a
                    romance novel are most valued by readers. Recent examples of distant reading can
                    grow more complex than this. But they can also remain just as simple. Franco
                    Moretti has relied on bibliographies to measure the lifespans of genres; I have
                    quizzed readers about their impressions of elapsed time in ninety novels. 
                Admittedly, contemporary distant reading is usually based on textual evidence, or
                    on social evidence about dead people, rather than questionnaires. Distant
                    readers are certainly concerned with reception ; . But it is hard to find living witnesses to
                    interview when you’re studying the longue
                        durée, so few distant readers have characterized reception quite
                    as richly as Reading the Romance. These are
                    significant differences. But the central research practice I want to highlight
                    is broad enough to encompass all these different kinds of evidence. It is simply
                    that Radway separates the question she is posing from the evidence she gathers
                    to address it, and from the conclusion she finally draws. Moreover, she
                    organizes these aspects of the research process sequentially. In short, Radway’s
                    book is designed as an experiment. It is admittedly an observational experiment:
                    Radway isn’t measuring the consequences of an intervention, and she doesn’t
                    express her reasoning in strict hypothetico-deductive form. Instead, she
                    proceeds ethnographically, allowing herself to pause and comment when she sees
                    an interesting detail. She is, after all, exploring a new research area, and
                    encountering problems that are not yet formally defined. But Reading the Romance is still at bottom empirical research which
                    aims to 
                        test the validity of … a
                            hypothesis
                        
                    . Because Radway’s voice is candid and engaging, the book may not always
                    sound like social science. But the whole rhetorical performance has been
                    organized around a scrupulous attempt to avoid confirmation bias. That is the
                    point of using a clearly-defined sample of readers and novels, rather than
                    casually adducing quotations and anecdotes that happen to fit a thesis defined
                    in advance.
                 Radway’s doctorate was in American Studies; she currently teaches in a
                    department of Communication Studies. But other social-scientific traditions are
                    also hovering in the background of Reading the
                        Romance. Its questionnaires and interviews echo the methods of
                    sociology. And when Radway looks at the romance novels themselves, her methods
                    echo both sociology and structural anthropology. Reading systematically through
                    a sample of twenty romance novels, she finds, for instance, a set of binary oppositions organizing
                    the heroine, the female foil, the hero, and the male foil into a symmetrical
                    structure . The plusses and minuses she
                    uses to represent polarity in this structure recall Claude Lévi-Strauss’s
                    diagrams in The Savage Mind (1965). But her
                    technique of systematically sampling and coding features of each novel also
                    echoes the technique of content analysis that sociologists
                    have applied to mass media.
                 Linguistics was not particularly central to Radway’s project, and it may be
                    worth pausing for a moment to underline this point. Contemporary distant reading
                    has also been shaped by a different intellectual tradition devoted to
                    quantitative analysis of linguistic detail. That tradition has made vital
                    contributions, which I want to acknowledge. But I think linguistics may be
                    looming a little too large in the foreground of contemporary narratives about
                    distant reading, so much that it blocks our view of other things. Linguistic
                    categories are just as important as the social categories Radway explored; it’s
                    not that I want to champion one subject against the other. Rather, I think we
                    need to see both influences at once in order to grasp the generality of the
                    method that organizes this research agenda. Our knowledge about large-scale
                    literary history isn’t expanding because there was a special magic in linguistic
                    analysis (or a special moral authority in feminist sociology). The project is
                    succeeding, rather, because scholars have learned how to test broad
                    literary-historical hypotheses in a way that resists confirmation bias.
                    Otherwise it would be very difficult to make progress at this scale. If you’re
                    working in a domain where you could potentially cite 100,000 different novels as
                    evidence, confirmation bias will make all generalizations equally true until you
                    invent some procedure to limit your own freedom of selection. As psychologists
                    have expressed this: fields with abundant evidence need some way to limit 
                        researcher degrees of
                            freedom
                        
                    .
            

                Moretti’s contribution
                Although Radway’s book was widely celebrated and widely cited in English
                    departments throughout the 1990s, it was not widely imitated there. As James F.
                    English has pointed out, literary scholars are traditionally quick to borrow
                    social scientists’ conclusions, but slow to borrow their methods . We might justify our hesitation in
                    various ways, but it is rooted, practically, in institutional inertia: literary
                    curricula simply do not teach graduate students how to do content analysis or
                    manipulate numbers. There are, however, a few cases where literary scholarship
                    has developed along the lines suggested in Reading the
                        Romance — including, notably, a scholar strongly associated with
                    distant reading. In The Slaughterhouse of
                        Literature, Franco Moretti developed a coding scheme to describe the
                    role of clues in detective fiction . He then
                    read a sample of about twenty stories, taking notes on the presence or absence
                    of each aspect of clues in order to sort the stories into a tree. 
                
                    Figure from Moretti 2000b, p. 213.
                    
                
                This method is very close to Radway’s approach to romance novels: from the sample
                    of twenty texts, to the plan of reading systematically for particular features,
                    to the little plusses and minuses that represent polarity in the diagram. I
                    don’t mean to suggest that Moretti was specifically influenced by Reading the Romance. It is more likely that both
                    scholars drew their methods directly from structural anthropology and sociology.
                    But whether the lines of influence run through literary criticism, or through
                    social science, there is a coherent tradition to be traced here. Moretti adds an
                    evolutionary hypothesis that is missing in Radway, and this may have been the
                    aspect of his argument that most strongly shocked and provoked readers in the
                    year 2000. But from the perspective of the present day, I think we can see that
                    Moretti’s evolutionary hypothesis was no more decisive than Radway’s reliance on
                    questionnaires. The crucial underlying similarity between these works, which has
                    made both of them durably productive models for other scholars, is simply the
                    decision to organize critical inquiry as an experiment. 
                To experiment on the past admittedly stretches the definition of
                        experiment beyond its ordinary association with beakers and
                    prisms. We cannot intervene in the past and then ask whether it changed as our
                    hypothesis predicted. But this is a problem shared by geologists, astronomers,
                    and computer scientists who run experiments on fixed
                    datasets . Distant reading is a historical science,
                    and it will need to draw on something like Carol Cleland’s definition of
                    scientific method, which embraces not only future-oriented interventions, but
                    any systematic test that seeks 
                        to protect the hypothesis from
                            misleading confirmations
                        
                    . Literary historians can minimize misleading confirmations, for instance,
                    by framing testable hypotheses about a sample of texts that are selected before
                    the researcher settles on a conclusion. In calling this approach minimally
                        scientific, I don’t mean to imply that we must suddenly adopt all the
                    mores of chemists, or even psychologists. Imaginative literature matters because
                    readers enjoy it; criticism would gain nothing if we let meticulous
                    hypothesis-testing drain all the warmth and flexibility from our writing.
                    Literary historians who use numbers will have to somehow combine rigor with
                    simplicity, and prune back a thicket of fiddly details that would be fatal to
                    our reason for caring about the subject. But within those rhetorical limits,
                    distant reading can, let us say, aspire to the methods of social
                    science: it is defined not only by a commitment to historical breadth, but by a
                    version of the scientific method appropriate for a historical discipline.
                Of course, not everyone will agree with this definition. For many scholars, the
                    term distant reading is still shaped by the polemical context that
                    surrounded it circa 2000, when it seemed to be the culmination of a long
                    argument over the canon. The process of canon-revision that began by addressing
                    imbalances of race and gender had evolved, by the late 1990s, into a more
                    systematic expansion that sought to recover a larger 
                        great unread
                        
                    . Although the political implications of this project had become
                    increasingly diffuse, it still retained some of the moral fervor of the canon
                    wars. Readers of Moretti’s early experiments on large collections were
                    accordingly tempted to interpret them as a normative argument that the only
                    valid sample of literature is the largest possible one. This is not a position
                    that his articles affirm systematically, but they sometimes leave themselves
                    open to that interpretation. The decision to characterize the archive of
                    forgotten books as a slaughterhouse of literature, for
                    instance, echoes the moral pathos associated with a mission of recovery. I don’t
                    think the normative force of that pathos has turned out to be the most durable
                    and influential part of the project. But it’s the part that readers were primed
                    to pay attention to, and thus the part they often remember.
                Moretti’s insistence on reconstructing a maximally complete archive is also the
                    part of distant reading that scholars have spent most time debating. Many
                    critics have pointed out that it is impossible to recover everything . From that indisputable premise, they
                    sometimes infer (more disputably) that comprehensiveness is not even an
                    appropriate goal . I won’t rehearse the debate here;
                    it seems to me a waste of energy, since there are many valid ways to represent
                    the past. Scholars interested in literary production may want to approximate
                    completeness, while scholars interested in reception prefer to focus on a subset
                    of influential works. Some social questions hinge on the demographic identity of
                    writers, others on readers — while for other modes of moral engagement with
                    human history, the whole issue of synchronic social breadth is less urgent than
                    diachronic scope. All of these sampling strategies have their uses, and there is
                    no reason to make a final choice between them. The legacy of the canon wars has
                    perhaps made literary scholars a little too eager to force such a choice. Having
                    seen many premature arguments on the topic, I try not to join any debate about
                    the representativeness of different samples until I have seen some evidence that
                    the debate makes a difference to the historical question under
                        discussion. Considering more than one sample can be worthwhile, but
                    samples are provisional, purpose-built things. They are not canons. It makes no
                    sense to argue about their representativeness in the abstract, before a question
                    is defined. Moreover, it often turns out that the same patterns are visible,
                    whether you look at ten thousand obscure texts, or at two hundred lovingly
                    curated editions. So it would be a mistake to stall out at the initial stage of
                    research, in 
                        an argument about what constitutes
                            an historically relevant and justifiable sample for analysis
                        
                    . That question has no right answer. We will get much further if we defer
                    the argument, and start instead by comparing different samples.
                I have been at pains to downplay several aspects of Moretti’s contribution to
                    distant reading that are often seen as definitional: his coinage of the phrase
                    itself, and his emphasis on comprehensive samples that include many
                    non-canonical works. However, I do think Moretti is rightly credited with
                    sparking the twenty-first-century expansion of this research project. To
                    illustrate why, I can’t do better than quote the last paragraph of Slaughterhouse: Fantastic opportunity, this uncharted expanse of
                        literature, with room for the most varied approaches, and for a truly
                            collective effort, like literary history has never seen.
                        Great chance, great challenge … which calls for a maximum of methodological
                        boldness: since no one knows what knowledge will mean in literary studies
                        ten years from now, our best chance lies in the radical diversity of
                        intellectual positions, and in their completely candid, outspoken
                        competition. Anarchy. Not diplomacy, not compromises, not winks at every
                        powerful academic lobby, not taboos. Anarchy. 
                
                Two contributions are vital here. First, the recognition that literary history is
                    not an exhausted, well-mapped field, but an uncharted expanse, because we actually know little about its
                    macroscopic shape. When I say that Moretti galvanized distant reading by
                    infusing it with a new sense of possibility, this is the primary thing I mean.
                    But I would also emphasize, secondly, his inference that the diplomatic
                    reconciliation of conflicting normative claims is less urgent than many literary
                    scholars assume.
                Here we reach a zone of persistent miscommunication between distant readers and
                    their colleagues. The discipline of literary studies has long organized itself
                    around prescriptive debates that seek to define the proper concern of a literary
                    critic. We inherit this polemical emphasis from nineteenth-century criticism,
                    and it survives today in vigorous arguments that pit history against form,
                    surface against depth, and critique against appreciation. Scholars rooted in
                    this tradition understandably want to interpret distant reading as a normative
                    stance of the same kind. Perhaps distant readers are expressing a principled
                    opposition to, say, close reading? In that case, the natural next move would be
                    to dialectically sublate the tension between close and distant. Observers are
                    often quite willing to offer this sort of compromise solution . For literary critics, it is an obvious response.
                    But from within the project of distant reading, it feels like a non sequitur. At
                    bottom, distant readers are not arguing against close reading. They’re just
                    pointing to a blank space on our map of the past — where questions about large
                    samples or long timelines might be located — in order to say none of us
                        really know what’s in there yet. A confession of ignorance isn’t
                    something one can meaningfully strike compromises about; it calls for a
                    different genre of response. Instead of interpreting distant reading as a
                    normative argument about the discipline, it would be better to judge it simply
                    by asking whether the blind spot it identified is turning out to contain
                    anything interesting.
                I am of course a biased observer. But personally, I became confident that new
                    scales of inquiry were paying off in 2012, when Ryan Heuser and Long Le-Khac
                    published evidence of a massive, steady shift from abstraction to concrete
                    description in nineteenth-century novels . In
                    subsequent years, distant readers have grappled with social questions about
                    money, gender, race, geography, and literary circulation, as well as formal
                    questions about genre, plot, emotion, and time ;
                        ; ; . Some of these publications are still working their
                    way through the press; in many cases, scholars are still struggling to reach
                    consensus about the meaning of the evidence they uncovered. For instance, the
                    shift toward concreteness discovered in fiction by Heuser and Le-Khac has
                    alternatively been described as a broader parting of the ways between literary
                    and nonliterary language, affecting poetry and nonfiction as well as the novel
                        . If all of these discoveries are things we
                    already knew in a tacit or unconscious way — as skeptics sometimes suggest —
                    then our unconscious must have known so many conflicting things that the verb
                        know seems oddly generous. Consensus about new evidence emerges
                    very slowly: inventing an air-pump doesn’t immediately convince readers that
                    vacuums exist. So wariness about particular conclusions is definitely still
                    warranted. But at this point, there is no doubt in my mind that literary
                    scholarship turned out to have a blind spot. Many important patterns in literary
                    history are still poorly understood, because they weren’t easily grasped at the
                    scale of individual reading.
            

                Distant reading and computational methods
                Up to this point, I have said relatively little about numbers, and nothing at all
                    about computers. I have characterized distant reading as a tradition continuous
                    with earlier forms of macroscopic literary history, distinguished only by an
                    increasingly experimental method, organized by samples and hypotheses that get
                    defined before conclusions are drawn. The interdisciplinary connections that
                    mattered most for this tradition were, until recently, located in the social
                    rather than computational sciences.
                However, it is true that this sociological approach to literature has, over the
                    last twenty-five years, fused with a computational tradition. The history of
                    that fusion is complex, and I won’t try to detail it fully here; one could point
                    to Mark Olsen and the ARTFL project at Chicago, or to Matthew Jockers and the
                    Stanford Literary Lab, or to John Unsworth and an archipelago of people involved
                    with the MONK Project. In any case, it is clear that large-scale literary
                    history is now suffused with ideas drawn from corpus linguistics, information
                    retrieval, and machine learning. I don’t intend to downplay the significance of
                    this fusion; it has been the most exciting part of my career, and I’m indebted
                    to everyone I just mentioned.
                Nor do I want to suggest that computation was merely a means to achieve an end
                    that Radway and Moretti had already fully defined. Critics of digital humanities
                    often assume that computer science ought to remain merely instrumental for
                    humanists; it should never challenge our 
                        fundamental standards or
                            procedures
                        
                    . This misunderstands the place of computational disciplines in
                    intellectual history. The value of computation is not merely to accelerate
                    literary research or expand its scale; on the contrary, ideas drawn from
                    computer science have given literary scholars new questions , and have encouraged us to frame existing
                    questions in a more explicitly theorized way . Machine
                    learning, for instance, represents a new way of thinking about literary
                    concepts, like genre, that may be organized around loose family resemblances
                    rather than crisp definitions .
                In short, I am not at all motivated to shore up disciplinary boundaries or insist
                    on a strictly internalist history of literary studies. And yet I have to admit
                    that, for me, distant reading remains the name of an approach to literary
                    history rather than a computational method. To be sure, it has multiple
                    genealogies, and roots in many disciplines. But in tracing connections to the
                    past I would still, on the whole, emphasize the thread that runs back through
                    Moretti, Radway, and Williams. My rationale is simple. An approach to literature
                    informed by social science can produce significant historical results by itself
                    — with or without computers. But the converse has not generally turned out to be
                    true. Computational methods, by themselves and without a social scale of
                    inquiry, have not been enough to transform literary history.
                We know this, to be quite blunt, because computational methods were applied to
                    literature for thirty years without making a great impact on the discipline. The
                    journal Computers and the Humanities was founded in
                    1966. It became the center of an ambitious intellectual community, making
                    important contributions to phonology and concordance-building, database design
                    and the teaching of language. But the whole project made very little difference
                    for literary history. Stanley Fish observed as much in the 1970s , and Mark Olsen couldn’t really disagree, writing in
                    the pages of the journal itself in 1993: 
                        Computer-aided literature studies
                            have failed to have a significant impact on the field as a whole
                        
                    . According to Olsen, the mistake lay in trying to explain how a text achieves its literary
                        effect by examining subtle
                        semantic or grammatical structures in single texts or the works of
                        individual authors. Computers had turned out to be very poorly suited to those New
                    Critical questions, and concentration on them had 
                        tended to discourage researchers
                            from using the tool to ask questions to which it is better adapted, the
                            examination of large amounts of simple linguistic features
                        
                    . The irony, Olsen goes on to say, is that this broader and simpler kind
                    of text processing is exactly what recent developments in literary theory and
                    semiotics would seem to demand. (He cites Roland Barthes, Michel Foucault, and
                    M. A. K. Halliday.) If only these two branches of research could be connected,
                    computational analysis might finally assume a central role in literary
                    studies.
                 This was the article that originally pulled me toward distant reading in the
                    mid-1990s . I still find it a prescient
                    argument. One of Olsen’s strengths is that he ignores the false opposition
                    between allowing our research to be shaped by properly literary questions, and
                    allowing it to be guided by the capacities of digital tools. Instead, he
                    considers both aspects of the landscape at once, and highlights a zone of
                    intersection, where new literary questions happen to overlap with new technical
                    opportunities. That zone of intersection turned out to be extremely productive,
                    and Olsen’s prophecies have almost all come true. With the important (but
                    isolated) exception of authorship attribution, computers still contribute
                    relatively little to our understanding of individual texts and authors. But
                    computational methods now matter deeply for literary history, because they can
                    be applied to large digital libraries, guided by a theoretical framework that
                    tells us how to pose meaningful questions on a social scale. Olsen’s article may
                    overlook some scholars who were already moving in the direction he recommended
                        ; . And the framework
                    we use today may be more sociological, and less semiotic, than Olsen predicted.
                    But as crystal balls go, his 1993 article isn’t bad. It explains at once how the
                    tradition embodied in Computers and the Humanities
                    could eventually become significant for literary history, and why that
                    significance wasn’t for the most part achieved until the twenty-first century. 
                Moreover, Olsen’s remarks are still a useful warning for scholars working in the
                    area of overlap between digital humanities and distant reading. Algorithms are
                    genuinely important; they aren’t merely instrumental. But they also aren’t
                    sufficient for this project. So far, computation has only made a difference for
                    literary history in combination with reasonably broad samples aimed at
                    historical questions. A broad sample does not have to be an exhaustive
                    collection; it might only amount to a few dozen books. But framing questions
                    about dozens of books still tends to require a complete rethinking of received
                    research questions. So I understand why scholars are often tempted to start with
                    the algorithms instead, hoping that they will produce something interesting when
                    applied to familiar author-sized questions. Unfortunately, in my experience,
                    this is false economy. Olsen’s warning has not been superseded by any technical
                    advance: computers still can’t teach us much about New Criticism. (Maybe
                    someday, but not quite yet.) Within the sprawling ecumenical community called
                        digital humanities, it can be impolitic to insist on
                    this barrier to easy assimilation of digital methods. But I make a point of
                    distinguishing distant reading from digital humanities partly in order to
                    signpost the problem: using computation, and reframing the scale of literary
                    inquiry, are two distinct things. The first will not give you the results of the
                    second. 
            

                The elision of social science
                Writing in Computers and the Humanities, Olsen was
                    naturally inclined to tell a story whose central characters were humanists and
                    computers. He acknowledged the relevance of social science, but didn’t
                    foreground its methods. The same thing can be said about much contemporary work
                    in distant reading. The best distant readers do in practice approach their
                    projects as experiments. (We don’t wander around aimlessly counting things.) But
                    the experimental structure of our research is not always foregrounded when we
                    write it up for publication. An article organized in social-scientific fashion
                    (methods, then results, then conclusions) might not be warmly received by an
                    audience of literary critics who are used to rhetorical panache. It can be more
                    effective to pretend that your work grew in a casually discursive, thesis-driven
                    way, and then happened to be illustrated with some scatterplots you had lying
                    around.
                I’m as guilty as anyone of striking this casual pose. It is often unavoidable. I
                    have suggested that distant readers aspire to a version of the scientific method
                    appropriate for a historical discipline. But we are also literary critics, and
                    critics have an obligation to be interesting. This means that we sometimes have
                    to tuck methods in an appendix, or make the analytical task look a bit easier
                    than it truly was.Even here, I am simplifying for rhetorical effect. In
                        reality, many writers have developed informal ways of stressing the
                        experimental character of their research. Scholars who have worked in the
                        Stanford Literary Lab tend to be particularly good at highlighting moments
                        when the evidence they gather fails to support their original assumptions.
                        If I am right that resistance to confirmation bias is the main point of
                        experimental method in the humanities, this narrative device may be just as
                        effective as the more formal templates (methods/results/conclusions) that
                        have developed in the social sciences. Freely sharing code and data is
                        another way to reveal the experimental infrastructure that the disciplinary
                        mores of literary study would tend to conceal. On the whole, I accept
                    this rhetorical double-bind as a consequence of our location on a tricky
                    disciplinary boundary. But it does have the side-effect of obscuring an engine
                    that powers the project. Readers can see why broad historical questions matter,
                    and they can see the role of computers. But the value of an explicitly
                    experimental approach can be hard to discern: distant readers have an incentive
                    to play down that part of our work. And yet, the experimental framing of
                    research questions is really the key to this field. Great work can still be done
                    with Janice Radway’s quantitative methods, which require little more than paper
                    and pencil. On the other hand, it’s very hard to do social research at scale
                    without imitating Radway’s explicitness about hypotheses, samples, and results. 
                Unfortunately, social-scientific methodology has not been a central subject of
                    conversation in digital humanities, or in the forms of distant reading that
                    cluster under the DH rubric . Andrew Goldstone is
                    right that the word reading itself contributes to the elision of social
                    science . But the recent tendency to treat distant
                    reading as a subfield of digital humanities may also play a role. The term
                        digital humanities stages intellectual life as a dialogue
                    between humanists and machines. Instead of explicitly foregrounding experimental
                    methods, it underlines a boundary between the humanities and social science.
                That’s why I have written this article — to tease out the elided
                    social-scientific genealogy behind distant reading. There are other threads one
                    could trace. For instance, as I have acknowledged, machine learning is exerting
                    a powerful influence on the contemporary scene. I don’t want to disparage any
                    subfield, but I do want to insist that the genealogy of distant reading should
                    be traced by disentangling its central intellectual impulses, not just by
                    following the zone of overlap between computers and textual study as far back as
                    possible. Roberto Busa’s concordance of Aquinas was a valuable thing, but a
                    concordance of a single author does not constitute an important origin moment
                    for distant reading. If we wanted to trace this tradition back to the middle of
                    the twentieth century, we would need to follow different threads in several
                    different directions. We might end up asking what Raymond Williams was doing
                    with literature in the late 1950s, what Claude Lévi-Strauss was doing at the
                    same time with social anthropology, and what Frank Rosenblatt was doing with the
                    perceptron.
                In the twenty-first century, admittedly, these disciplinary stories are tending
                    to converge and fuse. That creates an exciting challenge, but also a problem for
                    graduate training. Scholars preparing to work as distant readers probably need
                    some exposure to programming, social theory, and statistics, as well as fairly
                    deep knowledge of a literary-historical tradition. Right now, the flexible
                    interdisciplinary community called digital humanities may
                    be the best home for students trying to combine these modes of preparation.
                But if these two projects are to coexist under one roof, the differences between
                    them need candid discussion. Digital humanists don’t necessarily share distant
                    readers’ admiration for social science. On the contrary, they are often
                    concerned to defend a boundary between quantitative social science and humane
                    reflection (see, e.g., ). If DH is unified at all, it
                    is unified by reflection on digital technology, in a mood that ranges from
                    playful exploration to monitory critique. Distant reading, on the other hand, is
                    not primarily concerned with technology at all: it centers on a
                    social-scientific approach to the literary past. This tension sets up a
                    predictable conflict, which has already begun to unfold. Introductory courses
                    and workshops in DH rarely teach students what they need to know in order to
                    practice distant reading. So distant readers will have to agitate for a
                    different kind of curriculum, with more emphasis on quantitative methods. The
                    agitation is already underway (e.g. in  and ), but in a conversation framed by the adjective
                        digital, it can easily be misinterpreted as an attempt to push
                    digital humanists in a more technical direction. For instance, distant readers’
                    interest in broad historical questions — which runs back at least to Raymond
                    Williams — is widely conflated with the recent technical buzzword, big
                        data. Conflations of that kind could begin to create an unproductive
                    debate, where parties to the debate fail to grasp the reason for disagreement,
                    because they misunderstand each other’s real positions and commitments.
                This article has tried to clarify the commitments that define distant reading. I
                    have not aimed to produce consensus: I know that many scholars cited here will
                    disagree with my definition of the field. In particular, I know that many
                    scholars maintain strong ties to both digital humanities and distant reading,
                    and I expect people who do both things will resist the conclusion that these are
                    intellectually distinct projects. Certainly, the projects are at present fused,
                    in ways that matter deeply to academics as human beings. For instance, job
                    advertisements usually call for a digital humanist — almost never for a
                        distant reader. So it is pragmatically unwise for junior scholars to
                    separate the two terms, and a purely descriptive account of the contemporary
                    social scene might well fold them together. This essay has separated digital
                    tools from experimental methods for reasons that are not purely pragmatic or
                    descriptive. I have tried to ground the separation in a genealogical narrative,
                    but I would also admit that it has a forward-looking prescriptive purpose. 
                Over the last fifteen years, as distant readers have seized technological
                    opportunities, the goals of the project have become diffuse. Often our immediate
                    goal has really been exploratory: let’s see what can be done with these
                        tools. The exploration has been fruitful, but I think the field is ready
                    to move past exploration. Large-scale literary history could now reorganize
                    itself around clear research questions and rigorously advance our knowledge of
                    the past. But in order to do that, I believe we need to set fascination with
                    technology to one side and rediscover the guiding principle of experiment. I
                    have defended that opinion by pointing to the history of the field, and
                    especially to the importance of social science in Williams, Radway, and Moretti.
                    But it is also, in the end, an opinion. This essay promises only a
                    genealogy of distant reading. There will be other versions of the story, and I
                    look forward to reading them.
            

                Acknowledgments. 
                This essay benefited greatly from conversation at the Instant History symposium
                    at Loyola University Chicago, organized by Paul Eggert and Steven Jones in the
                    fall of 2016. Respondents at the symposium included Ian Cornelius, Lydia Craig,
                    Casey Jergenson, and Justin Hastings. The argument was also influenced by
                    conversation with Andrew Goldstone and Eleanor Courtemanche, and it was improved
                    by the editors and reviewers of DHQ. 
            
