Title:  It’s Time to Historicize DH: A Review of 
Volume:  019
Issue:  2
Date:  30 May 2025
Abstract:  
                This review of Claire Warwick’s Digital
                        Humanities and the Cyberspace Decade, 1990-2001: A World Elsewhere
                    (2024) praises the monograph’s unique value to the digital humanities as a
                    comprehensive reconstruction of 1990s attitudes and practices regarding
                    cyberspace. Warwick’s justification for her hybrid methodology, which combines
                    history, analysis, thick description, and autoethnography, is discussed, as well
                    as its basic premise that the 1990s should be of interest to digital humanists
                    and humanist academics more broadly. The review then summarizes the monograph’s
                    narrative arc, which traces the ultimate failure of cyberspace’s promises to
                    offer freedom and community in a space apart from the constraints of the
                    everyday world, with special attention to the way that Warwick positions
                    humanist academics and the publishing industry as significant parts of internet
                    history. The review ends with a recommendation that other academics adopt
                    Warwick’s hybrid methodology in the service of historicizing the digital
                    humanities.
            
Full Body Text: 
Among the multitudes of posts, articles, and books that have entered the never-ending
                quest to define the digital humanities, there are very few references to the decade
                poised just before the millennium’s end. Definitions that invoke prehistories of the
                digital humanities typically focus on humanities computing from the 1960s to the
                1980s, eliciting images of punch cards, vacuum tubes, Selectric ribbons, and
                green-glowing monospace glyphs beyond the lived experience of most of the field’s
                contemporary practitioners. Such distance lends a venerable, even romantic, aura to
                the machines and formats that preceded DH qua DH. While that
                aura has been pierced by scholars who have rightly critiqued the era’s exclusionary
                practices and politics, the central significance of the older era for the
                development of DH has not been questioned. The 1990s, nearer to lived experience but
                no less rich or strange as a topic of humanistic inquiry, are all but ignored. One
                might be forgiven the impression that the chief achievement of the World Wide Web
                was to provide a medium for developing and publishing digital scholarly
                projects.
Enter Claire Warwick’s Digital Humanities and the
                    Cyberspace Decade, 1990-2001: A World Elsewhere
                . Warwick blends cultural history, autoethnography,
                humanistic analysis, and Wayback Machine-enabled readings of early websites to
                reconstruct the exhilarating intellectual and affective atmosphere of cyberspace,the monograph’s titular world elsewhere,
                an enticing place, removed from everyday activities and
                full of hope for its utopian possibilities
                .She defines the cyberspace period as the period
                bookended by two geopolitical events that deeply influenced the construction and
                deflation of cyberspace’s association with freedom: the fall of the Berlin Wall and
                the attacks of September 11, 2001. My aim, Warwick
                discloses, is to lure readers back to an age, and a digital
                    place, that seemed more hopeful, more innocent and almost miraculous
                , not to idealize a utopianism now dismissed as
                naivety, but to contextualize it as an historical phenomenon, explain why it amassed
                so much rhetorical power, and chart its rise and fall over the long 1990s. As part
                of that larger project, Warwick reconstructs the overlapping territory between the
                contemporaneous popularization of the internet as an everyday infrastructure and the
                development of DH as a scholarly field and practice. She thus departs refreshingly
                from pop-cultural norms that narrate technological development as product of
                isolated tech-industry geniuses, instead populating the monograph with a variety of
                average users, distributed communities, and ahead-of-the-curve humanities
                scholars.
One academic early adopter profiled in Digital Humanities and
                    the Cyberspace Decade, 1990-2001 is Warwick herself, an early consumer
                of cyberspace discourse and practitioner of web development and humanities
                computing. She sedulously explains how she applies autoethnography and postmodern
                historiography to neutralize personal bias and imperfect memory as much as possible
                while reaping the advantages of firsthand experience. In another effort to counter
                the objections she anticipates readers will bring to her choice of primary sources,
                Warwick opines, Some of the most perceptive material to be
                    written about the nature of cyberspace, digital textuality and hypertext was
                    produced in its first decade, when this phenomenon was new… Although few of
                    these accounts and critiques were taken seriously at that time, they still have
                    much to teach us about the nature of the digital world and the place of humans
                    within it . Far from exposing any
                faults in her methods, these explanations are salient reminders of the humanities’
                fundamental investment in human values, perceptions, and perspectives as worthy of
                study and part of reality. The passage of three decades may have witnessed the
                promising premises of cyberspace culture proved wrong, or at
                    least very premature… [or] increasingly implausible
                , but their problems and failures should not
                disqualify them as objects of academic analysis. On the contrary, they are all the
                more imperative because the study of the past of cyberspace
                    [is] a way to defamiliarize contemporary digital culture
                , making it a matter of some urgency to
                understand how many of the problems associated with cyberspace,
                    then and now, were caused because insufficient attention was paid to the human
                    aspects of the use and adoption of cyberspace technologies
                .
Establishing that argument across a number of online environments over the long 1990s
                is, methodologically speaking, a big ask. Digital Humanities
                    and the Cyberspace Decade, 1990-2001 is up to the task, applying
                    Clifford Geertzian thick description to bridge the book’s dual
                identity as a history of ideas and a history of practices. Warwick thus unites the
                broad conceptual reach of the former with the satisfying concrete groundedness of
                the latter. Thick description also means that the book is jolly good fun as a
                treasury of interesting anecdotes, thoughtfully buoying up readers as they follow
                the tragic arc traced by the deflation of celebratory narratives of freedom and
                opportunity by deregulation, neoliberalism, and internet harassment. After
                delivering a perfectly proportioned introduction to the book’s purpose and
                methodology in Chapter 1, Warwick begins tracing this arc with Chapter 2, A Consensual Hallucination: Imagining Cyberspace, which
                reconstructs early definitions of cyberspace. The choice of William
                    Gibson’s Neuromancer as a central text may
                be overdetermined, but Gibson’s influence cannot be ignored, and Warwick devotes
                plenty of attention in the chapter to competing influences on early cyberculture and
                basic facts about the development of the internet. Its wide coverage, together with
                the use of vivid autobiographical passages to illustrate the human dimensions of
                dates, acronyms, and technical facts, makes Chapter 2 especially accessible for
                readers new to the topic and ideal for assigning as a course reading.
Chapters 3 and 4 form a natural dyad, best read together. Virtual Communities: Cyberspace Before the Web, describes the lively
                interactions supported by email lists, UseNet groups, BBS (Bulletin Board Systems),
                IRC (Internet Relay Chat), WELL (Whole Earth ‘Lectronic Link), MUDs and MOOs
                (game-playing communities), and other mechanisms that preceded social media. Warwick
                recounts how, as users were busy connecting to strangers with similar interests,
                flaming and being flamed, and (almost accidentally) developing new business models,
                debates about the reality of such communities raged on- and offline, sparking
                the first of what are now-familiar hand-wringing episodes about the pernicious
                effects of virtual experiences on real life. In the next chapter, Wired Women: From a Bird on the List to a Rape in
                    Cyberspace, Warwick focuses on dangers that proved quite real. The
                positivity of female-only communities and prominent female figures in and theorists
                of cyberspace, like Sadie Plant and Donna Haraway, crashes
                against a variety of exclusions and assaults (including text-based cybersexual
                encounters) that were sometimes excused as evidence of the
                    social awkwardness and ineptitude of some male cyber enthusiasts yet
                were nevertheless deliberate… attempts to drive women away from
                    online spaces
                .
Chapters 5 and 6 shift gears from communities of leisure to academia, business, and
                professional life. Chapter 5, A Design for Life: Building
                    Digital Identity on the World Wide Web documents how academics were
                quick to understand the text-based static websites as a medium
                    through which they could present their research and allow users to access
                    digital resources, irrespective of the hardware they were using
                . Warwick enriches her catalog of early
                humanities computing projects far beyond well-known milestones like Father
                    Busa’s Index Thomisticus, TEI-XML, and
                quantitative linguistics to include the founding of academic societies, journals,
                conferences, degrees, departments, labs, and centers. Especially welcome is the
                elucidation, description, and screen-shotting of virtual libraries created by
                academics or under the auspices of universities, such as OTA (the Oxford Text
                Archive), Sunsite, The Labyrinth, The Voice of the Shuttle, and the Decameron Web.
                Warwick uses the Wayback Machine (that indispensable history of the internet, a
                nonprofit reference resource run by the legally embattled Internet Archive) to view
                early versions of those ambitious libraries, as well as early editions of
                grant-winning juggernauts still online today (e.g., the Walt Whitman Archive and the
                William Blake Archive) and personal academic websites (such as Matthew
                Kirschenbaum’s). The resulting descriptions and screenshots perform far more work
                than one might assume, more than Warwick’s understated claim that they provide
                    a unique insight into the state of the web when it was
                    young, as they demonstrate how humanist academics were part of a movement that propelled the web out of its niche in cyberspace
                    and into the commercial professional, and scholarly mainstream
                .
Chapter 6, The Triumph of Virtuality, somewhat hastily
                recounts the economic promise of the dotcom era, whose high hopes for online
                retailing and working from home were temporarily dashed in the early 2001 bust.
                (Peeking out of the 90s timeline to enfold the frauds and scandals of recent history
                of startup culture and venture capital into Warwick’s analysis would have yielded
                some crisper insights about dotcom discourse, but doing so would have disrupted the
                book’s beautifully constructed narrative arc and intricate interweaving of
                technology, culture, politics, economics, discourse, and textuality). The section on
                electronic publishing is the most original in a chapter that seems to want to skip
                over itself in preparation for the next chapter, Ceci Tuera
                    Cela: Digital Textuality and the Death of the Book. Like Chapter 5,
                Chapter 6 restores the influence of academia and the publishing industry in
                cyberspace history, in this case tackling fears that the internet would signal the
                end of the book — that is, the textual format of the physical codex — in the wake of
                e-texts, electronic literature and e-journals. Warwick adds a new dimension to her
                capable summaries of conversations held by Sven Birkerts, Jay
                    David Bolter, Umberto Eco, George Landow,
                    Richard Lanham, Janet Murray, and others about the
                potential of electronic text, by contextualizing them alongside academic
                participation in (and resistance against) the digitization of humanities texts and
                research publications. Some readers will be surprised that, although the daily life
                of readers and writers in the 2020s is very much screen-bound, Warwick mostly sees
                failures, concluding that e-books did not sway readers from the physical book form
                and hypertext did not effect the complete transformation of
                    literature, literacy, and academic culture that had been predicted
                . Such failures only come into view once one
                appreciates the full breadth and intensity of cyberspace utopianism and considers it
                on its own terms, not through the lens of the 2020s (a historicized conclusion that
                may in time itself be historicized). At this moment in 2025, Warwick’s
                perspective has the salutary defamiliarizing effect of bringing the contingencies
                and incompleteness of contemporary screen-boundedness into sharp relief. If it could
                have been otherwise, then those who wish it had been otherwise now have more power
                to imagine alternatives.
Three-quarters of the way into Digital Humanities and the
                    Cyberspace Decade, 1990-2001, the monograph’s discussions of academia
                and textuality largely recede, affording a return to the earlier chapters’ dominant
                focus on cyberspace’s promise of freedom and its endangerment by the realities of
                pervasive harassment and the increasingly heavy hand of governance and regulation.
                In Chapters 8 and 9, warriors for internet freedom — from hackers and the followers
                of Wired magazine to John Perry Barlow and
                    Laurence Lessig — resist encroachment by government bodies, such as
                the European Union and U.S.A.’s Federal Communications Commission. These governing
                bodies paradoxically combined affirmations of the civilian benefits of deregulation
                with assertions of regulatory powers. Over and above the battles of individual
                freedoms won or lost in those struggles is the broader historical shift by which
                decades of government-led or -backed deregulatory practices have failed to protect
                citizens from the very real harms that can arrive by virtual means. Suitably pitched
                as a final act in cyberspace’s narrative arc of freedoms found and lost, Warwick’s
                conclusion takes the form of a serious warning about the vital need to counter
                deregulation to mitigate its catastrophic effect related to data privacy, artificial
                intelligence, user safety, and cyberwarfare.
The gravity of Warwick’s warning about deregulation is enough to warrant a strong
                recommendation for Digital Humanities and the Cyberspace
                    Decade, 1990-2001, but for readers of DHQ,
                a second call to action lurks underneath the explicit recommendation that ends the
                book. As Warwick remarks in the introduction chapter, somewhat
                    ironically, what I am attempting to do in this book, using humanities methods to
                    critique a digital phenomenon, would probably not have been recognized as part
                    of the field at the time
                . Some scholars will continue to resist
                understanding Warwick’s book as part of the field, which continues to rate tool
                building over the humanistic analysis of digital phenomena. Such analysis is then
                frequently re-categorized as media studies or acknowledged only within
                intradisciplinary contexts (as digital history, digital rhetoric, digital
                philosophy, etc). Meanwhile, the most prominent scholars in the field engaged in
                theoretically sophisticated analysis are generally performing meta-scholarship of
                the field itself — the yack in the hack/yack binary or continuum — rather
                than the work of analyzing digital cultures with methods shared by all humanities
                disciplines. Certainly, Warwick’s account of how DH and humanities computing were part of cyberspace as a phenomenon and shares its
                    history
                 qualifies as meta-scholarship, but she is
                providing descriptive histories and close readings of 1990s humanities computing
                websites, rather than making prescriptive pronouncements. We will always need
                future-looking prescriptions (what we should do), but the field has a
                deep enough past that its forms and accomplishments (what has been
                done) are no longer self-evident. What humanists were doing on the web in the 1990s,
                and what lay citizens of cyberspace were doing with the humanities, is still a
                history largely unwritten. At the same time that 1990s crop tops, bucket hats, and
                boot-cut jeans have reentered the fashionable world, visible as a unique aesthetic,
                it is increasingly becoming possible to historicize the 1990s — to situate
                individual events and artifacts in larger cultural and historical frameworks with a
                critical eye — and, more to the point for DHQ readers,
                to historicize DH.
