Title:  Machine Reading the 
Volume:  010
Issue:  4
Date:  4 October 2016
Abstract:  
                 Early modern printed books pose particular challenges for automatic
                    transcription: uneven inking, irregular orthographies, radically multilingual
                    texts. As a result, modern efforts to transcribe these documents tend to produce
                    the textual gibberish commonly known as dirty OCR (Optical Character
                    Recognition). This noisy output is most frequently seen as a barrier to access
                    for scholars interested in the computational analysis or digital display of
                    transcribed documents. This article, however, proposes that a closer analysis of
                    dirty OCR can reveal both historical and cultural factors at play in the
                    practice of automatic transcription. To make this argument, it focuses on tools
                    developed for the automatic transcription of the Primeros
                        Libros collection of sixteenth century Mexican printed books. By
                    bringing together the history of the collection with that of the OCR tool, it
                    illustrates how the colonial history of these documents is embedded in, and
                    transformed by, the statistical models used for automatic transcription. It
                    argues that automatic transcription, itself a mechanical and practical tool,
                    also has an interpretive effect on transcribed texts that can have practical
                    consequences for scholarly work.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Optical Character Recognition, or OCR, is a ubiquitous element of intellectual
                    life online. Whether we are reading scanned documents behind a paywall, beyond
                    copyright limits, or from sites of semi-illegal textual redistribution, we have
                    all encountered these highly flawed efforts to transform the printed word into
                    machine-readable type. Defined on Wikipedia as the
                        mechanical or electronic conversion of images of typewritten or printed text
                        into machine-encoded text, OCR works by identifying a correspondence
                    between printed characters and their UTI-encoded digital equivalents . Described metaphorically as the process of
                    machine-reading the printed page, what OCR achieves is the conversion of an
                    image into data that can be processed computationally. It is thus a technology
                    located at the intersection between material and digital text. 
                Dirty OCR is the name given to OCR output that features non-linguistic
                    characters or gibberish transcriptions. Table 1
                    shows examples of dirty OCR that reflect various material conditions (the
                        noisiness) of the original image. In one example, a
                    poorly aligned scan has distorted the characters beyond recognition. In another
                    case, shadows on a blank page are re-interpreted as characters by the
                    over-optimistic machine reader. In a third example, a decorative image is
                    misinterpreted as language and encoded as nonsense. Each of these examples
                    reflects the machine's inadequate understanding of the relationship between text
                    and object. Other examples, some of which will be addressed later, reflect the
                    machine's inadequate understanding of language. 
                        Dirty OCR of facsimile pages of historical documents taken from
                            archive.org.
                        
                            
                                
                            
                            
                                
                            
                            
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            ONTENTS. rer'sTraTelt Z^ the Reader *• aptain GnlliTer to his
                                    CotMia vii. PARTI, TAOB TO LtLLIFUT. JprclTtt lome aecoant ofhim
                                    • nu first indncemeDts to travel. Bd, aadtwiflu fisr his life ;
                                    seta in the conntry of Lillipat ; it % and carried up the
                                    country. 15 perpr of Lillipat, attended by >bUity, comet to tee
                                    the Au- emeni. The Emperor's person u* '^J^'ffr*®^ men
                                    appointed
                            
                            :;»«.^ ^■^ tt'-^T.- ^ ur%,i\ v< 0^- >• — ALAi«b^.3i.^ . r ^
                                *^ i ^ XJ,-.- ■.'::<-'i3rtr. 
                            '^u/ .. '//^M/yr/^^//. /^a yo/r?7/r/f.j/^, ^// S'^iffiCc:
                                REMARKS O N I" H N s o n's Life of M i l t o n.
                                W E were in hope that we had done -vitk Milton's
                                Biographers; and had little ■orefight that fo accomplilhed an
                                artificer B of
                        
                        
                            Title page to an 1823 edition of Gulliver’s Travels, with accompanying
                                        full text as found on archive.org .
                            Blank page opposite the title page to a 1780 edition of John
                                Milton’s Areopagitica, with accompanying full
                                    text as found on archive.org .
                            Title page from the Remarks on Johnson’s life
                                    of Milton (1780) with accompanying full
                                    text as found on archive.org .
                        
                    
                Imperfect OCR output can have consequences for corpus analytics, affecting
                    everything from word searches to measures of word frequency, collocation, or
                    sentiment analysis. Elizabeth Lorang and Brian Pytlik describe many of these
                    concerns in their article about the electronic text analysis of newspapers. They
                    considered using OCR output for their study, but found that The issues of OCR accuracy and a lack of disclosure about accuracy
                        rates made these sources untenable, prompting them to limit their
                    study to double-keyed manual transcriptions . For those who stick with dirty transcriptions, there are other consequences,
                    as both Maciej Eder and Matt Jockers have discussed. In his 2012 study of
                    systematic corpus errors, Eder tested an authorship attribution tool on corpora
                    with varying degrees of transcription accuracy. He found that as long as error
                    rates remained under 20 percent, they did not affect the success rates of the
                    attribution tool. This suggests that large-scale corpus analysis can handle
                    large degrees of error . Extending this claim, Matt
                    Jockers has suggested that perhaps manually-corrected OCR, though not perfect,
                    is good enough for stylometric analysis,
                    hypothesizing that 
                        at the large scale these OCR issues become
                            trivial
                        
                    . 
                Eders and Jockers both work with literary corpora cleaned of problematic pages
                    like the ones displayed above; given the size of their corpora and the
                    specificity of their research queries, dirty OCR may in fact be adequate for
                    their purposes. It's worth noting, however, that the simulations of dirty OCR
                    used by Eder and Jockers assume that character errors are randomly distributed
                    across a corpus. Eder’s claims may not hold up if there are, in fact, patterns
                    in OCR error distribution. As Jockers himself remarks wistfully, the
                        good-enough hypothesis may be wishful thinking. OCR
                    errors may impact corpus analytics more than we like to admit. 
                Dirty OCR can also affect other kinds of reading. A student searching for the
                    location of a quote, a scholar looking for the presence of a word, or a family
                    member looking for reference to an ancestor might be stymied by bad OCR. A
                    reader of any kind might find dirty OCR to pose an insurmountable challenge.
                    Here, for example, is a page from a French edition of the Annales de Domingo Francisco de San Anton Muñon Chimalpahin
                        Quauhtlehuanitzin (known colloquially as Chimalpahin) found on
                    archive.org: 
                        o — M r^ -^ v^SO |>»00 Cv O — « r^ -«t- «^\o r-^oo
                            Oso — r^  vo SO vO \0 vO *0 vO vO nO so \0 sOvO
                            vososOnOvOvOvosOvOvO 00 (7s O — «*< '♦N ^ w^sO r-»00 (7s o «- n
                            r^ 't- «^VO f>.00 Cv o w^ w^vO sovovosovovovo>ovo r**
                            r^r^i^i^c^r>.c^r>. r**oo VO r**00 Cv o — *^ «^ -^ «^SO
                            t>i30 J\ o — r« 
                        
                     This edition is frequently cited by scholars of Nahuatl, the native
                    language of Chimalpahin, as evidence of the paucity of good Nahuatl
                    transcriptions. A few minutes of collation reveal that the gibberish is not
                    actually a transcription of the Nahuatl text, but rather the misrepresentation
                    of a linguistic table inserted vertically into the French introduction,
                    incorrectly rendered by the machine as horizontal text. As in a similarly
                    illegible example from a digitized page of the New York
                        Tribune provided by Lorang and Pytlik Zillig, in cases like this 
                        reading and comprehending the text from the OCR
                            transcription alone is practically impossible
                        
                    . 
                The Chimalpahin example suggests that Eder’s random error distribution model may
                    be more optimistic than accurate, revealing how certain kinds of information
                    (like tables) are disproportionately likely to be transcribed incorrectly. At
                    the same time, it shows how OCR reinforces structural norms like horizontal
                    lines of text, treating perfectly standard documents like tables as deviant
                        texts. Lisa Gitelman’s work on the document is a useful reminder of
                        the many kinds of printed text that may exist beyond the narrow standards of
                        the printed book or newspaper . As a
                    result, corpora with high levels of deviance (such as a collection of historical
                    ephemera) are disproportionately impacted by the dirtiness
                    of OCR. This is especially true because smaller corpora are particularly
                    sensitive to minor errors, an issue of particular concern when the size of a
                    corpus is a reflection of its historical marginalization, as in the example of a
                    corpus of indigenous-language documents. This concern is compounded when the
                    machine treats language variation itself as deviance from a linguistic norm.
                This paper offers a close analysis of dirty OCR: that frustrating gibberish that
                    inserts itself into our innocent efforts to produce automatic transcriptions of
                    printed texts. It takes as a predecessor Whitney Anne Trettien’s A Deep History of Electronic Textuality, which
                    examines digital reproductions of John Milton’s 1644 tract on freedom of press,
                        Areopagitica
                    . This project, however, takes as a case study a
                    tool that I helped to adapt for use on the Primeros
                        Libros collection, an online collection of digital facsimiles of
                    books printed before 1601 in the Americas. This collection features documents
                    printed in multiple typefaces and in multiple languages, including Latin,
                    Spanish, Nahuatl, and five other indigenous languages. This paper focuses
                        on Nahuatl, the most heavily represented American language in our corpus. We
                        hope to extend the work for other indigenous languages in future work.
                    
                
                The Primeros Libros collection is unique, and for
                    that reason it may be tempting to think that the challenges it poses are
                    marginal, or of limited value to a general audience. But I have found that the
                    predominant difficulties that we confronted were nearly universal among early
                    modern corpora: irregular printing, inconsistent orthographies, antiquated or
                    unusual characters, and multiple languages, some of which have only limited data
                    available digitally. This article follows Laura Mandell’s approach to
                        periodization in the digital humanities: we need to
                            speak of periods still but extending them to take into account, not the
                            reigns of monarchs but dominance of medium
                        . Here the term early modern is
                        used to designate a period across Europe and its colonies during which
                        printed texts shared the defining material qualities of our corpus:
                        wandering baselines, uneven inking, unfamiliar fonts, archaic orthographies,
                        and multilingualism. Mandell uses the dates 1473-1800 to describe this
                        period, with some location-specific flexibility on the upper
                        register. I suggest, in fact, that the orthographically irregular
                    multilingual document should be considered the standard for early modern OCR.
                    The monolingual corpus is an artifact of modern assumptions about historical
                    language usage, and a misrepresentation of early modern discourse in Europe and
                    its colonies.
                The Primeros Libros collection also draws explicit
                    attention to the relationship between digital processes of transcription and
                    transmission and the long colonial history of textual reproduction. Despite
                    scholarship focused specifically on the role of scribes, notaries, and other
                    transcribers in shaping early modern discourse, these writers of New Spain are
                    often overlooked in favor of single authors, whose names and influence are
                    better known. Similarly, despite work that has been done to situate media
                    technologies within the history of warfare, nation building, and globalization,
                    predominant narratives continue to treat the technologies themselves as
                    apolitical and their use as socially neutral. The history of colonial texts,
                    which often erases the intellectual labor of indigenous and African subjects
                    even as it distorts or misrepresents their systems of communication, serves as
                    an important warning for the study of these tools, cautioning us against the
                    continued erasure of labor and marginalized voices in our study of – and growing
                    dependence upon - automatic transcription.
                This article suggests that an understanding of the history of these early texts
                    can provide new insight into the continuing use of automatic transcription. Both
                    colonial transcription and automatic transcription have been described in terms
                    of textual accessibility and utility. Yet as Peter Robinson and Elizabeth
                    Solopova write, [T]ranscription of a primary textual source
                        cannot be regarded as an act of substitution, but as a series of acts of
                        translation from one semiotic system (that of the primary source) to another
                        semiotic system (that of the computer). Like all acts of translation, it
                        must be seen as fundamentally incomplete and fundamentally
                        interpretative (quoted in ). The relationship between semiotic systems, however, is never equal;
                    instead, it is hierarchical and shaped by the social conditions of its
                    production. Automatic transcription, itself a mechanical and practical tool,
                    also and simultaneously participates in this transfer of power, with practical
                    consequences for scholarly work and our work as actors in the public sphere.
            

                Methods and Methodology
                The presence of a methodology section in this essay is an acknowledgement of two
                    major theoretical influences that inform it: digital humanities and decolonial
                    studies. First, within the loosely defined discipline of digital humanities, the
                    divergence of approaches to the studies of culture and technology has led to a
                    renewed attention to method. This is compounded by the influence of scholars in
                    the sciences, for whom method is integral to written scholarship, and by the
                    increasing attention to quantitative analysis, the proper evaluation of which
                    depends on a clear articulation of methods and results. In part because the
                    field of digital humanities is defined by neither its methods nor its objects of
                    study, it has become necessary for each project to inscribe its own borders and
                    direction within the field.
                In this project, media archaeology provides a framework through which the methods
                    of close (or scalable) reading are brought to bear on
                    transcribed texts. As Wolfgang Ernst writes, media archaeology calls for 
                        an awareness of moments when media themselves, not
                            exclusively humans anymore, become active ‘archaeologists’ of
                            knowledge
                        
                    . In the study of OCR, these moments occur when my working definition of
                    transcription (the sequential replication of previously existing words) is
                    belied by the mechanics of transcribing. 
                In these moments, the methods of close reading modeled by N. Katherine Hayles and
                    Matthew Kirschenbaum are essential to understanding the workings of
                    transcription 
                    . Although text and language take on a
                    different valence here than in the literary experiments that these authors
                    study, this project shares a philological focus on words, orthographies, and
                    scenes of textual production in a digital context. 
                In the field of decolonial studies, renewed attention to method comes as scholars
                    work to tease apart the relationship between scholarly discourse and
                    imperialistic ideologies, particularly when indigenous or colonized peoples
                    become the objects of study. As Linda Tuhiwai Smith wrote in her now classic
                        Decolonizing Methodologies, 
                        it is surely difficult to discuss research
                                methodology and indigenous peoples together, in
                            the same breath, without having an analysis of imperialism, without
                            understanding the complex ways in which the pursuit of knowledge is
                            deeply embedded in the multiple layers of imperial and colonial
                            practices
                        
                    . While in the digital humanities a description of methodology is also the
                    delineation of a project’s scope and a point of access for evaluators, in
                    decolonial studies methodology is an articulation of a project’s complicity
                    with, or resistance to, colonial discourse. 
                This article addresses this mandate by seeking to push against the reduction of
                    colonially charged texts to mere content and the implication that the
                    contingencies of historical textual production are not preserved in
                    transcription systems or affected by OCR algorithms. This approach is inspired
                    by the #DHPOCO movement spearheaded by Roopika Risam and Adeline Koh, which 
                        brings critiques of colonialism, imperialism, and
                            globalization and their relationship to race, class, gender, sexuality
                            and disability to bear on the digital humanities
                        
                    . In this case, the interaction between highly complex colonial documents
                    and the OCR tool we used to transcribe them brought to the fore questions about
                    the relationship between the colonial status of sixteenth-century transcription
                    practices and those of the twenty-first century. By bringing together content
                    and context, I seek to reflect on these two historical periods and their
                    analogous, and interdependent, transcription practices.
                Absent from the method applied in this paper is collaborative work with the
                    stake-holders for this project, and specifically with the Mexican academic,
                    religious, and indigenous communities for whom these documents are cultural
                    heritage items. This is beyond the scope of the project, which focuses
                    specifically on the unfunded, extra-curricular development of an OCR tool and on
                    preliminary efforts to apply it to printed books. Since this article was
                        composed, the OCR prototype described here received funding for further
                        development in the form of an NEH Digital Humanities Implementation Grant.
                        The implications of funding structures for Digital Humanities work are
                        beyond the scope of this article, but are worthy of consideration, as Ryan
                        Cordell and others have argued . Any views,
                        findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this article do not
                        necessarily represent those of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
                        The project can be followed at sites.utexas.edu/firstbooks/. Nonetheless, as Kimberley
                    Christen has reminded us, the implications for this absence are considerable,
                    particularly when we take into account cultural differences in the ways that
                    digital access and discoverability are valued and understood . It is hoped that future work will take these
                    elements of the project into account. 
            

                Materials
                This article takes as a case study Ocular, an OCR tool developed by Taylor
                    Berg-Kirkpatrick et al. in 2013 for the automatic transcription of historical
                    documents . I came upon Ocular because I
                    was interested in transcribing the Primeros Libros
                    collection, a corpus of digital facsimiles of books printed before 1601. I
                    developed the project in collaboration with Dan Garrette, a computer scientist
                    then at the University of Texas at Austin; Kent Norsworthy, the digital
                    scholarship coordinator at the Benson Latin American Collection at UT Austin;
                    and Berg-Kirkpatrick, a computer scientist and Ocular’s primary developer at the
                    University of California, Berkeley. We found that Ocular required significant
                    modification for use on the Primeros Libros. In
                    this section, I provide a brief description of our corpus (the Primeros Libros collection) and our modifications of
                    the Ocular tool.
                
                    The Primeros Libros Collection
                    The Primeros Libros collection was built through
                        a collaborative effort between institutions in the U.S. and Mexico to
                        produce digital facsimiles of all surviving copies of all books printed in
                        the Americas before 1601. Known, controversially, as the American
                        incunables, these books document the establishment of this new technology
                        for textual production in the nascent Spanish colony. Created by New Spain’s
                        mendicant friars and secular clergy, they cover topics ranging from
                        religious practice to anatomy and politics. They have been valued most
                        highly, however, for their discussions of indigenous Mexican languages,
                        which make them important resources for both linguists and historians. This
                        also makes the Primeros Libros vital cultural
                        heritage objects for the more than one million Nahuas living in Mexico
                        today, who have been systematically denied access to historical documents
                        written in their native language . For
                        this reason, both the Primeros Libros project
                        and the automatic transcription project are motivated by the desire to
                        increase the accessibility and discoverability of these documents.
                    The two books that will be featured as examples in this article both center
                        on indigenous language, culture, and history, though in different ways. The
                            Advertencias para los confessores de los
                            naturales (Warnings for the Confessors of Natives) is a
                        multi-volume tome written by the Franciscan friar Juan Bautista and printed
                        around 1601 at the Colegio Imperial de Santa
                            Cruz in Tlatelolco, Mexico. The Advertencias was written to be a guidebook for new
                        missionaries, providing a detailed discussion of the theological intricacies
                        of taking confession from new converts, along with translations of religious
                        texts and ideas into Nahuatl (the predominant language of the Nahuas, known
                        popularly as the Aztecs) and extensive theological passages in Latin (often
                        copied wholesale from European authors). In his later Sermonario, Bautista introduces in some detail nine indigenous
                        scholars who provided him with both linguistic and cultural assistance; we
                        can assume that some of them collaborated in the composition of this work as
                        well . For more about the
                                Advertencias, refer to Mark
                            Christensen’s Nahua and Maya Catholicism
                            ; Veronica Murillo Gallegos’ article
                                Obras de personajes novohispanos en las
                                Advertencias
                            ; and Louise Burkhart’s The Slippery Earth
                            . Christensen is concerned primarily with
                            contextualizing Bautista’s ideas of confession within the context of
                            confessional practices in Europe and New Spain. Murillo Gallegos
                            considers the way that the Advertencias
                            situates itself within a developing local intellectual culture. And
                            Burkhart examines the decisions that Spanish friars made about how to
                            translate complex theological concepts like purity or sin in order to
                            understand how they navigated or engaged with indigenous cosmologies.
                            She finds that both the preservation of Spanish (or Latin) vocabulary
                            and the adoption of indigenous translations carry ideological
                            weight.
                    The second book featured in this study is Antonio Rincón’s Arte Mexicana. Printed in 1595 in Mexico City by
                        Pedro Balli, the Arte Mexicana is one of three
                        important sixteenth-century grammars of the Nahuatl language. The
                            other two are Andrés de Olmos’ Arte para aprender
                                la lengua mexicana (1547) and Antonio de Molina’s Arte de la lengua mexicana y castellana
                            (1571). It stands out because its indigenous author was one of
                        the only ordained indigenous Jesuits, and was the first indigenous linguist
                        in Mexico. Walter Mignolo and others have argued that the introduction of
                        alphabetic writing to indigenous American communities functioned as a
                        linguistic conquest that paralleled other kinds of colonization, based on
                        the presumed superiority of Latin grammatical structures . In contrast, Rincón was unique in seeing
                        Nahuatl as different from Latin, rather than deficient, suggesting that the
                        language called for new grammatical models. The
                            alphabetic representation of the languages, McDonough observes, 
                            can indeed be seen as suppression or even an
                                attempted destruction of one technology and the imposition of
                                another. At the same time, Nahua appropriation of the alphabetic
                                script, and of the Latin and Castilian languages, was just as much a
                                    possession
                            
                        . For McDonough, Rincón was an indigenous scholar who took possession
                        over alphabetic writing and Spanish grammatical models.
                    These two texts emblematize the transcription challenges posed by the Primeros Libros collection: the presence of
                        fluidly multilingual text and variable orthographies. They were also
                        selected because this project was developed through close work with Kelly
                        McDonough, Stephanie Wood, Sergio Romero, and Adam Coon, scholars of Nahuatl
                        who were particularly interested in the ways that corpus analytics could
                        provide new opportunities for research into indigenous Mexican language and
                        literature. The focus of this article emerges from the research interests of
                        our collaborators.
                
                
                    Ocular
                    We chose Ocular as our preferred tool for transcribing the Primeros Libros because it is state-of-the-art in
                        historical document transcription, designed specifically for documents
                        printed using a hand press. This article does not consider other
                            prominent OCR systems, such as Google’s Tesseract or ABBYY Fine Reader,
                            though a comparative study could yield interesting results. Both systems
                            do offer the option of a language model, suggesting that some of the
                            implications of this study would be broadly applicable. By taking
                        into account the unique material factors affecting transcription of these
                        printed books, Ocular improves significantly on tools that expect the
                        stylistic consistency of modern printed books. Ocular works by combining two
                        generative statistical models that represent how text should be. The first
                        model, which is called the font model, focuses on the material
                        qualities of the text: the shape of the font, the alignment of the type, the
                        over- or under-inking that make text difficult to read visually. The second
                        model, which is called the language model, focuses on the text
                        itself. After analyzing a language sample, it builds a statistical model of
                        six-character strings (known as six-grams): given any sequence of five
                        characters, it is able to guess at what the sixth character should be. The
                        result of this combination is a model that can identify clearly defined
                        characters and use context to recognize an unclear image . 
                    Ocular is uniquely effective because it pays particular attention to the
                        material conditions of the text. When working with the tool, however, we
                        found that equal attention to the language model is necessary for a fully
                        functioning OCR system. Ocular was originally designed for a
                        nineteenth-century British corpus which was relatively monolingual and
                        orthographically regular. In our sixteenth-century corpus, monolingual
                        documents were not guaranteed: texts switch between languages at the level
                        of the chapter, paragraph, sentence, and even word. This is illustrated, for
                        example, in a passage from Rincón’s Arte
                            mexicana in which he describes the Nahuatl use of the gerund,
                        writing: El gerundio, en do, ſe
                            ſuple tambiẽ en dos maneras. Lo primero por la compoſicion de todos los
                            verbos que ſignifican quietud o mouimiẽto v.g. ni
                                tetlaçotlatica, eſtoy amando, nitetlaçotlatiuitz. vengo amando… (, Nahuatl words have been italicized).
                            The gerund, endo, is also used in two ways. The
                                first is in the composition of all the verbs that signify stillness
                                or movement, for example, ni
                                        tetlaçotlatica, I am loving, nitetlaçotlatiuitz. I come loving…. I
                            have retained the orthographic idiosyncrasies of the original. Thanks to
                            Adam Coon for his help with this translation. Elsewhere,
                        quotations from Latin are incorporated smoothly into the Spanish prose, much
                        like in this article.
                    Like language usage, sixteenth-century orthography was not consistent even
                        within a single document, where printers might use three or four spellings
                        for a single word, including common letter substitutions (a u in
                        place of a v) or shorthand (the elision of the letters n and m).
                        Neither of these challenges is unique to the Primeros
                            Libros corpus: in his survey Natural
                            Language Processing for Historical Texts, Michael Piotrowski
                        describes these as two of the key challenges for transcribing and analyzing
                        historical documents created throughout the early modern world .
                    To handle these challenges, we modified Ocular by developing a multilingual
                        model that allows it to identify the language of each character before
                        attempting to transcribe it. We also added an interface for orthographic
                        variability, which allows us to alter the system manually according to
                        period-specific orthographic patterns. A technical description of the system
                        can be found in the Proceedings of NAACL 2015
                        . A technical discussion of further
                            modifications to Ocular, made after the composition of this article, can
                            be found in the Proceedings of NAACL 2016
                            . This extension enables Ocular to
                            automatically generate a modernized text
                            alongside the diplomatic transcription.
                    
                
            

                Ocular in History
                Most histories of OCR begin in the nineteenth century, when innovators in the
                    United States registered the first patents for machine readers for the blind.
                    Like many other histories of technology, these stories situate early machine
                    reading within a narrative of nineteenth-century national identity construction
                    in which blind citizens are brought into civic life with the aid of new
                    technologies. They also provide validation for automatic transcription based on
                    what Mara Mills, in her important work on OCR, describes as the assistive pretext of OCR: the claim that automatic
                    transcription is a tool used primarily to increase the accessibility of printed
                    documents, especially for blind readers 
                    . 
                In the twentieth century, these histories turn to the twin processes of
                    globalization and neoliberalism to explain how OCR shifted from being a tool for
                    aiding individual readers to become a tool for the facilitation of institutional
                    data processing. Interestingly, this institutional present of automatic
                    transcription is often described as one that is independent of identity,
                    culture, nation, and language. Even when scholars are critical of what they see
                    as the neoliberal implications of big data, they often describe it as a total
                    rupture with historical forms of engaging (as humans and machines) with text. In
                    contrast, when OCR is written into a longer history of transcription practices
                    that extends into the medieval era, it becomes possible to understand how it
                    engages with the practice of scribal correction, translation, and composition. 
                Transcription has long played an essential role in the reproduction of texts, and
                    scribes, the figures responsible for replicating these texts, have long held
                    influence over their form. The vast scholarship on textual criticism of the New
                    Testament bears witness to this history, as does the study of scribal culture
                    and its influence on the transmission of the literature and archival documents
                    of antiquity . Though one concern of these studies
                    has been the identification of authorial or biblical truth, other studies have
                    focused more on scribal influence over historical texts. To cite just one
                    example, a recent study on scribal copying in medieval England has shown how
                    copyists also worked to correct texts at an orthographic, aesthetic, and
                    semiotic level that has been described as akin to philology or literary
                    criticism .
                Some of this practice was carried into early colonial Spain, where indigenous
                    students were given transcription duties as part of their religious educations.
                    This labor of transcription also involved varying levels of interpretation and
                    translation in all cases, particularly when these students brought their
                    knowledge of indigenous practices, beliefs, and language use to the texts for
                    which they were responsible. Such is the case, famously, of the Nahua assistants
                    who worked with the Franciscan Fray Bernardino de Sahagún, often described as
                    the father of modern anthropology. Sahagún’s assistants, students at the Colegio
                    de Santa Cruz de Tlatelolco, were responsible for transcribing oral testimony
                    into alphabetic text; for copying (and providing alphabetic glosses of)
                    pictorial documents; and for translating Christian texts into Nahuatl. As Ellen
                    Baird has written in the case of the pictorial transcriptions, 
                        The artists’ own history and their life in the present
                            (as well as Sahagún’s) shaped their conception of the past and the
                            manner in which they chose to represent it
                        
                    . Similar relationships informed the production of a number of texts in
                    the Primeros Libros corpus. As a result, these
                    multilingual documents are perhaps best understood as the product of what
                    Kathryn Burns calls a 
                        blended, composite agency
                        
                    . 
                In colonial Mexico transcription existed alongside the printing press, rather
                    than being superseded by it. Indeed, in the Americas printed texts were
                    transcribed both for training purposes and to produce copies into the nineteenth
                    century. Transcription remained essential for the reproduction of manuscripts
                    throughout this period as well. Many of the printed editions of early colonial
                    American texts that appeared in the nineteenth century were based on transcribed
                    copies, such as Carlos María de Bustamante’s 1830 edition of Sahagún’s Historia general or Joaquín García Icazbalceta’s 1858
                    edition of Fray Toribio de Benavente (Motolinía)’s Historia
                        de los Indios de la Nueva España. In the case of Icazbalceta’s
                    edition of Motolinía, the text was based on a transcribed copy, made in Boston,
                    of a copy made in Spain 
                    . As in the colonial case, this transmission
                    history had consequences for the orthography and language of historical
                    documents.
                How can we situate OCR against or within this history? A full narrative of
                    transcription practices that extends from the sixteenth to the twenty-first
                    century is beyond the scope of this article, though we might observe certain
                    continuities or breaks with the past. Already by the nineteenth century, the
                    hand transcription of culturally valuable documents, for example, had shifted
                    away from the church and towards academic institutions and libraries. Today,
                    this work is carried out by faculty members, students, community volunteers, and
                    occasionally the workers on Amazon’s so-called Mechanical
                        Turk. It is not mere coincidence that both racialization
                        and colonization are embedded in this title. See Ayhan Aytes, Return of the Crowds: Mechanical Turk and Neoliberal
                            States of Exception in Digital
                            Labor, ed. Trebor Scholz, 2013; and Shawn Wen, The Ladies Vanish in The New
                            Inquiry (Nov. 11, 2014). Most transcriptions of printed
                    documents, however, are produced through computer-aided processing. This might
                    suggest that the labor of transcription has become, at least in part, computer
                    labor, and that the artificially intelligent computer may be in some ways
                    analogous to the Franciscan friar or his indigenous students. See Mara
                        Mills’ claims about the relationships between reading and blindness; reading
                        and artificial intelligence 
                        .
                
                Yet in other ways automatic transcription belongs to a profoundly separate
                    history. Scholars in the humanities – and PDF users more generally – are
                    familiar with OCR primarily as a transcription tool. Yet transcription has not
                    been the primary purpose of OCR since the 1950s, when large institutions and
                    corporations first became interested in making their data – addresses on
                    envelopes, accounts payable and receivable – available for computer processing.
                    This required the conversion of paper records to machine-readable files. At this
                    point, the task of transcribing a text disappears entirely
                    from the narrative. In its place we find the deconstruction of an image into its
                    constituent parts in a way that makes it available, as text, for computational
                    analysis. 
                Today, OCR requires neither the presence of a written document (a page, an
                    envelope, the address printed on the mailbox of a house) nor the presence of a
                    human consumer. At the post office, OCR is used to sort envelopes without any
                    human intervention: though the material text (the envelope) remains central to
                    the process, human readers disappear entirely . At Google, OCR is used to recognize house addresses in Street
                    View footage in order to improve the accuracy of Google Maps: although currently
                    human readers are used to train the models, ultimately neither humans nor
                    objects will be relevant to the complex models, of which OCR is just a small
                    part . As Ayhan Aytes and Shawn Wen have pointed out,
                    even when humans participate in the transcription process through programs like
                    reCAPTCHA or Mechanical Turk, the work is often fragmented and decontextualized
                    to the point where the transcriber has no interpretive grasp on the text being
                    transcribed 
                    . 
                The temptation here might be to suggest that this total fragmentation of the text
                    into parts or pixels eradicates the composite agency behind
                    transcribed texts. In contrast, I argue that this shift in the relationship
                    between transcriber and text requires us to shift the focus of our attention as
                    we seek evidence of the transcriber’s hand (metaphorically speaking) in the
                    final transcription. First, it means that, like the machine reader, we must work
                    at the level of the character string, rather than the word or the sentence, to
                    identify sites of interaction between a transcription and the historical moment
                    of its production. Second, it means that alongside the transcription, we can
                    turn to the processing apparatus itself to identify further interventions in the
                    text produced by the machine. As Ocular processes facsimiles, it gathers
                    extensive information about every pixel – and every character – on the page.
                    This supplementary information, not unexpectedly, becomes central to the
                    processing potential of the tool, and to the interpretive interventions made to
                    the printed page.
            

                Biased Transcriptions
                How does OCR shape transcriptions? I have argued that Ocular intervenes in the
                    printed text in two ways. Ocular’s recognition of printed
                    characters directly impacts the final output. At the same time, the processes
                    through which Ocular recognizes characters create supplementary information that
                    alters the meaning of the text. 
                 This section is concerned with the first intervention: the ways that the Ocular
                    system recognizes printed characters and how that
                    recognition can have an interpretive effect on the final transcription. I show
                    first how the dangers of transcription that are present in the colonial context
                    (the composite author-figure of the contact zone) insinuate themselves into
                    Ocular by way of the language data. Second, I consider how the Ocular system and
                    our evaluation methods are biased towards certain kinds of machine reading.
                    Here, I seek to show that the system itself has a deterministic effect not just
                    on the success of the machine reading, but also on its form. This impact, again,
                    is shaped by the context of the system’s use.
                Importantly, the goal in this section is not to prove machine-learning systems
                    like Ocular aren’t neutral. As recent reports in popular media about biased algorithms have shown, this is already a
                    well-established truth 
                    
                    . Instead, I attempt to identify where the historical
                    contingencies of text and context interact with the Ocular system, how they
                    affect our transcription of the Primeros Libros,
                    and how this situates our Ocular transcription within the longer history of
                    colonial textual reproduction embedded in the Primeros
                        Libros collection.
                
                    Biased Data: The Language Model
                    As the brief history of the Primeros Libros
                        described, the colonial effort to reframe Nahuatl as a Latin language has
                        been understood as a process that both enacted and recorded broader
                        processes of cultural exchange and (forced) assimilation in early colonial
                        Mexico. We see this embedded in the very texts themselves, as shown by the
                        example of Rincón’s creative reworking of Latin grammatical law, or in
                        Bautista’s efforts to translate theologically precise concepts and texts
                        into Nahuatl. The differences can be expressed, importantly, at the level of
                        orthography: for example, the presence or absence of the letter h,
                        used by some philologists to mark the glottal stop, may reflect different
                        understandings of the language that are shaped by efforts to adhere to – or
                        sway from – the Latin model . 
                    
                        
                            Facsimile image of a page from the Advertencias .
                            
                        
                    Consider, for example, the facsimile shown in Figure 1. This page from
                        Bautista’s Advertencias discusses efforts to
                        communicate the concept of the holy trinity to new indigenous converts. The
                        danger is that the converts will understand the trinity – meant to be three
                        facets of a single god – as polytheistic. The solution, Bautista informs us,
                        is to use the Nahuatl phrase Ca huel imeixtintzitzin,
                        which signifies todas tres personas son el
                                verdadero (all three people are the true [god] ). As Bautista describes, however,
                        embedded in this Nahuatl phrase is an amphibologia (amphibology: a grammatically ambiguous phrase)
                        which might lead the uninformed to the heretical belief that God is a
                        person. Bautista explains: Eſta
                                ãphibologia no ay ẽ latin, por ſer diferẽte la
                            terminacion (
                            This amphibology does not exist in Latin because
                                the ending [of the word] is different
                            
                        ). This is Bautista’s paradox: without properly explaining the concept
                        of the holy trinity, new converts will believe Christianity is polytheistic.
                        Yet due to a grammatical difference between Latin and Nahuatl, efforts to
                        explain the concept lead, themselves, to the risk of heresy.
                    The process of automatic transcription can pose a translation problem that is
                        analogous to that faced by Bautista. This translation problem is introduced
                        to the system by way of the language model. Recall that the language model
                        is a simple n-gram model based on language data
                        provided by the user. To observe how this language data shapes the
                        transcription, consider Table 2, which shows
                        three variations of an Ocular transcription of the page from the Advertencias shown in Figure 1. 
                    
                        Sample transcriptions of a facsimile page from the Advertencias using different language
                            models
                        
                             ley Capital-gains  ,  increaſing the expenſes from the
                                coſts founderwrite  tranſaction of trading progreſs
                                controverſity of the -  es propoſition operating to Security
                                owner orders a-  nd they were Directors had to ſelling that the
                                new  products , and for the firſt ventures that its 
                                fiſcal propoſed on between trying the comforta-  they ſay the
                                current on the ſtock Exchange Standa-  rds that the perſonal
                                market with the market De-  pre-  ſentations made
                                defenſive Carlucci International  the federates performation of
                                the markets for  the reſponſortia mayor Paris Chairman analyſts
                                 ſaid the inveſtors including in Tokyo ſtock Exch-  ange
                                of this year of the readers ſaid . The compan-  ouſe States
                                ſaid it is propoſition , there than  the contract more three to
                                the next months of -  the termination and the contributed that
                                the -  Senate marketing the months of the market 's th- 
                                nerations on queſtions perſonal come verſio-  n the think Force
                                aſſets to the continue to t-  he market mutual rates problems
                                becauſe of t-  he ſtock into the percentage firms that come in
                                1991-  on ſhareholders are indicate propoſed on the c- 
                                onſtrations open before the average portfo-  lio intereſt rates
                                in the markets . For 1990 m-  odel 1989-1990s , the
                                1989-1991-1999 ,-  e- 
                             Iow Conſelfores  ____  and ran ſo dich a propoſicion
                                one ſhe ſenſide, no  Itant a niave tract at perokew coft-ſons
                                firſt a q-  es propoſition a pittle dog tea, y-tione or to ſen
                                 tide yars. Drow es ſlad to, I ſtro. S Suſt as trew 
                                perſonas, you loſt deſſes verd-dore fains. I a  tiſkes
                                propoſicion here ſea, y cuſt to clow tow ſit  dies la hair
                                entendide a ſat ſtot quite gGradow  an uncixtin perſonal me, at
                                your tain noiſs Di-  ns. 'J_ual doll as ſtes perſon as cs
                                verd-doto  Uto wry hauſe do do to ſp: Ca hunt ſnicket into a
                                 tain. To daw tres perſon as ſon of verdade to fat  low,
                                reſp pool a may or parte. Ca yeſtnat win ſit  Trpiltain, o each
                                ice ſtain in Tept ſtain G_ no  ſole of litto es of verdade to
                                Dins. I a at put-  belogia do ſo dich a propoſition, it too do
                                que  elſe no bre no moral, ce, come no rient it as do  Vn
                                a terminacion in different on into it: ap to-I  genere in as
                                cuſino, Tarmen mo,y hour to I look-  nera-grabion. qud viſa
                                perſon a come yet-o-  r it ſetom a porvn a pies a come commot
                                to to  retus les naturales, ew ppoſicion here-,) 'I 
                                aſkce, ſerorn a per vita offencia come l-to-  on to a quarden
                                are ſadach a propoſickets, ew t-  he ſtea. Eff a fipht belogia
                                no ay STat to, pot ſet  lifferere faterminacient do ſaill
                                par-in-  I-N-I-I priſon-,) 'I-P!" PRERP!" "a  R
                                
                            ſos Confeſſores ex anarán la dicha propoſición en eſte
                                ſentido, no hauia más q̃ tractar; pero es coſa manifieſta
                                q̃ es propoſición ã Philiologica, y tiene otro ſen- tido,
                                y es. Dios es Padre, Hijo, y Spŏ S . tres perſonas, vna ſola
                                dellas verdadero Dios. La q̃l es propoſicion herética, y caſi
                                todos los in- dios la han entendido aſsi «Por q̃
                                pregúradosá nimeixtin perſonaſme, ac yehuatzin nelli
                                Di- os . Q¿ual deſtas tres perſonas, es verdaderoDios, y
                                hauiẽdo dereſp. Ca huel imeixtintzi tzin. Todas tres perſonas
                                ſon el verdadero Di- os; reſpi por la mayor parte. Ca yehuatzin
                                inTepiltzin, o ca çã ieeltzin in Tepiltzin . Q¿no ſolo el
                                Hijo es el verdadero Dios. La amplia- bologia de la dicha
                                propoſición, nace de que eſté nõbre numerál,ce, como no tiene
                                mas de vna terminacion indifferentemẽte ſe aplica,
                                á género mas culino, tan uenino, y neutro. Demánera q̃ tã
                                bien: q. d. vna perſona como vn Dios y ſi ſe toma por vna
                                liſona como comúmẽte la tomã los naturales, es oppoſicion,
                                herética, y ſi el ce, ſe toma por vna eſtencia, como lo
                                toma- ron los q̃ ordenarõ la dicha propoſicion, es
                                cá holica. Eſtá ãphibologia no ay ẽ latin, por
                                ſer liſſetẽte la terminacion; de la ſil parece quãdo ſe
                                toma por perſona, y quãdo por naturaleza, ſí: 4 
                        
                        
                            New York Times
                            Alice in Wonderland
                            Trilingual language model
                        
                    
                    The three variations here show three ways of reading the
                        facsimile page, each based on a different language model. The first
                        variation uses a model based on the New York
                            Times, similar to the Wall Street
                            Journal model used by the original Ocular system. The second
                        variation uses a language model based on the full text of Lewis Carroll’s
                            Alice in Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass from Project Gutenberg.
                            http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/11, http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/12 The third shows a
                        language model that draws on three historical corpora of Latin, Spanish, and
                        Nahuatl.
                    Each variation is a kind of dirty OCR: a deformation of
                        the original text that looks like gibberish. A closer examination, however,
                        shows that there are patterns. Each variation is a reworking of Spanish and
                        of Nahuatl that reflects the linguistic biases of the original. Ocular works
                        by pairing a font model based on the visual appearance
                        of the characters with a language model based on its
                        knowledge of what language is supposed to look like. In these examples, the
                            font model pulls the transcription towards the
                        visual appearance of the text, while the language model pulls it towards the
                        linguistic context of modern English, Victorian English, and multilingual
                        New Spain. The result is a jabberwocky-esque transcription that looks like
                        the Advertencias – like Spanish and Nahuatl –
                        but appears in sequences characteristic of other times and places. 
                    We would never use Alice in Wonderland as
                        language data for the automatic transcription of the Primeros Libros. What these examples make explicit, however, is
                        that the language data has a direct effect on the transcription. This is
                        true even in the multilingual, early modern corpus that we used for our
                        transcriptions. Given the wide variations in orthographic norms among
                        regions and writers and the sparsity of language data relative to the
                        requirements of the language model, it was impossible to build a language
                        corpus that perfectly represented the context of our documents. Instead, our
                        language data is more generalized, which has a homogenizing effect on
                        regional variations. This homogenization is complicated by the fact that
                        many of the transcriptions we used for our data are modernized versions of
                        historical documents. Modifications of spelling, extension of shorthand, and
                        standardization of character use are respected practices among documentary
                        editors working to produce readable documents for a (relatively) general
                        public. When they are embedded into the language data, however, they become
                        unrecognized influences over the shape of the final text. 
                    A closer consideration of the Nahuatl case shows how this homogenization or
                        modernization can have a meaningful impact on the final transcription.
                        Because alphabetic Nahuatl was still under development during the sixteenth
                        century, orthographic difference can be an important marker of regional,
                        religious, authorial, or class distinctions. Our language data for Nahuatl
                        came primarily from scholars schooled in the orthographic tradition promoted
                        by James Lockhart. This tradition, based on that developed by the
                        seventeenth century philologist Horacio Carochi, was primarily documentary:
                        it sought to reflect the styles of the original documents . Modernization nevertheless occurred,
                        as in the transcription of an unrenderable shorthand as qz, or the
                        general adherence to standards that didn’t jelly (to use Lockhart’s term) until the 1560s or 70s, some
                        thirty years into the Primeros Libros corpus. 
                    In this case, the decision to draw on Lockhart’s documentation in our
                        transcriptions was a conscious decision to bias the model towards these
                        orthographic standards. Perhaps more significantly, however, the Lockhart
                        examples often came from the legal archives, which had spelling conventions
                        that often differed significantly from their ecclesiastical counterparts. As
                        Lockhart writes, 
                            when left to themselves […] Nahua writers had a
                                very different outlook on what they were doing than their Spanish
                                counterparts. Spaniards were spelling words; in general, they wrote
                                a given word the same way every time they used it, employing the
                                same standard spelling, in relative independence of how they might
                                pronounce it. To the Nahuas, the word, insofar as they were even
                                aware of it, was a constantly changing entity with fluid
                                borders
                            
                        . This could be represented by a difference in spacing, but could also
                        appear in the form of phonetic spelling variations. It was also reflected at
                        the level of the letter, through the presence and absence of the glottal
                        stop as h and the n or m to signify nasal sounds. To
                        impose this orthographic pattern onto the Primeros
                            Libros documents, which were primarily ecclesiastical, is to
                        erase important cultural differences between two forms of Nahuatl writing.
                        Yet given the paucity of the Nahuatl corpus, distinguishing between the
                        various forms of Nahuatl was not a real option. 
                    I find in this intractable challenge an echo of the problem that Bautista
                        encountered with translating the holy trinity. Bautista found himself
                        trapped linguistically between two heresies: the heresy of polytheism or the
                        heresy of deistic personhood. Though the orthographic variations in Ocular’s
                        language data may not appear to carry the same theological weight, they do
                        mark epistemological differences, the erasure of which may, among certain
                        circles, come dangerously close to heresy. If we return to the scene of
                        textual production, we recall that these texts are the products of
                        relationships between the friars – Spanish and criollo – and the indigenous
                        scribes. Orthographic homogenization can also present itself as the erasure
                        of already-obscured indigenous voices, or of the growing influence of
                        Spanish epistemologies. Both of these factors are consequential for our
                        reading of the text.
                
                
                    Biased Systems: Algorithms and Evaluations
                    Recognizing bias in the language data is intuitive: it makes sense that what
                        you put into the system will affect what comes out of it. Less intuitive are
                        the ways that the system itself can have a deterministic effect on the
                        transcription. This deterministic effect is built into the relationship
                        between the font model and the language model, which work in tandem to
                        recognize characters. It is also present in the evaluation system that we
                        use to measure Ocular’s accuracy.
                    The previous section described how Ocular’s transcription output responds to
                        different orthographic patterns in the language data. This does not mean,
                        however, that we can simply impose a transcription philosophy on our system
                        by choosing the right texts for the language model. When human transcribers
                        decide to replace an x with the more modern j in words like
                            dixe (modern Spanish dije,
                        I said), they do so based on an understanding of the historical
                        relationship between the two characters. In contrast, when the system
                        encounters dixe, the visual data from the font model
                        makes the letter j highly improbable as a substitute. Instead, if the
                        historical usage of the x in place of the j is not embedded in
                        the language data, the system is likely to substitute a visually similar,
                        but incorrect, letter.
                    
                        Automatic transcription of two instances of the word "mentira" using
                            the original Ocular tool and Ocular with our orthographic interface
                            extension. Without the extension, the system misreads the shorthand
                            version as a different word.
                        
                            
                            
                                
                            
                            
                                
                            
                        
                        
                            Automatic transcription
                            mentira
                            merita
                        
                        
                            Automatic Transcription + orthographic extension
                            mentira
                            mẽtira
                        
                    
                    Consider a similar example that we encountered in the Advertencias. Table 3 shows two variations of the Spanish word
                            mentira (lie) that appear on a single
                        page. The first variation follows modern spelling conventions. In the second
                        variation, the n has been elided, as indicated by a tilde over the e
                            (mẽtira). When we give the language
                        model a standard corpus of early modern Spanish, the system misreads the
                        second variant as merita, a statistically probable
                        interpretation of the character string, but not a correct one. When we use
                        the interface for orthographic variation that we built into the system to
                        teach the program about character elisions, it’s able to read both words
                        correctly. This points, again, to the relationship between language data and
                        transcription output. But it also reveals one way that the system imposes a
                        single transcription method onto the text. Ocular prefers – and in some
                        ways, depends on - an ultra-diplomatic transcription. 
                     This preference for the ultra-diplomatic model was not always duplicated by
                        the evaluation system that we used to test Ocular. When presenting our
                        modifications of Ocular to a scientific audience, we provided data in the
                        form of a table of results, summarized in Table 4 . 
                    
                        Macro results show Ocular transcription error rates, and improvements
                            based on our multilingual extension and our orthographic variation
                            interface. Full results are reported in Garrette 2015.
                        
                            
                            Character Error Rate
                            Word Error Rate
                            Word Error Rate with punctuation
                        
                        
                            Ocular
                            12.3
                            43.6
                            56.6
                        
                        
                            + code switch
                            11.3
                            41.5
                            53.5
                        
                        
                            + orth. var.
                            10.5
                            38.2
                            51.0
                        
                    
                    Our results show an improvement over Ocular, which in turn showed an
                        improvement over Tesseract, Google’s popular and freely available OCR tool
                            . This improvement can be
                        understood as evidence of what Julia Flanders elegantly describes as the
                            progressive momentum of the digital
                        humanities. In a now-classic article in Digital
                            Humanities Quarterly, however, Flanders argues that 
                            the digital humanities domain reflects the
                                non-progressiveness of the humanities disciplines
                            
                        . While the improvements that our system provides for automatic
                        transcription are real, they are not the whole story. 
                    The Ocular system is evaluated by measuring the correspondence between the
                        characters output by the system and the characters typed by a human
                        transcriber. This poses a scientific problem: how can we be sure that the
                        human is correct? If one system is closer to the human system, does that
                        mean the system is more accurate? Better? Are those always the same thing?
                        In this case, we found that human transcribers struggled to determine where
                        to put spaces between words, and how to encode unusual diacritics or
                        orthographies. A smudged letter might be a u in modern Spanish, but
                        in sixteenth century text it might just as likely be a v. If one tool
                        output u and the other output v, the one that guessed closest
                        to the human would earn a better evaluation, but might not be more
                            correct.
                    The epistemological concerns embedded in this evaluation system are made most
                        clear in the Nahuatl example. In our case, none of our transcribers were
                        fluent in Nahuatl, though all read Spanish and Latin. As a result, while a
                        transcriber could make a decision about an unclear Spanish word based on his
                        knowledge of the language and the historical context, he could only make
                        Nahuatl decisions based on his knowledge of Spanish and Latin. As a result,
                        the evaluative system encouraged an output in which the Nahuatl looked more
                        like a Romance language.
                    This effect is compounded when we consider the history of the Nahuatl
                        documents themselves. As described previously, for the early Spanish
                        linguists, Nahuatl’s value as a language was measured against a Latin
                        standard, such that one Franciscan was able to remark 
                            the Mexican language lacks seven letters
                            
                        . For these early linguists, this lack articulated not just the
                        paucity of the language, but by association, the weakness of the culture
                        which produced it. At the same time, the imposition of Latin grammar,
                        orthography, and textual ideology onto Nahuatl culture was itself a
                        reframing of the relationship among speaker, language, and text which would
                        have epistemological consequences. When these linguistic relations are
                        duplicated by the Ocular evaluation system, the colonial legacy of the
                        documents is again embedded in the system’s output.
                
            

                Beyond Transcription
                In the prior section, I showed how the automatic transcriptions produced by the
                    Ocular system are shaped by biases in the system and the language data. In my
                    description of the history of OCR, however, I suggested that the automatic
                    transcription output by an OCR system is merely a byproduct of the textual
                    processing at the heart of the work that Optical Character Recognition does. To
                    conclude this article, I want to point to some ways that recentering our
                    understanding of OCR away from the transcription can open new doors for textual
                    analysis that go beyond the re-inscription of cultural hierarchies into digital
                    copies of colonial texts.
                 Ocular produces a statistical analysis of each character in the digital
                    facsimile of a historical document, analyzing color saturation, character
                    alignment, textual context, and language. Ocular conducts this analysis in order
                    to recognize each character by predicting its most likely
                    textual correspondent. If we reorient away from character recognition, however,
                    we find a wealth of data about the original facsimile. This data can open new
                    doors for textual analysis. For example, Ocular’s font model has a statistical
                    understanding of the font used by a given document that could provide insight
                    into the circulation of fonts, or provide key evidence for printer attribution
                    in the case of an ambiguous document. The font model also identifies patterns in
                    inking and character variation that might enable us to identify the order in
                    which copies were printed. 
                The language model gathers important analytic data as well. Consider for example
                    the language tagging that is implicit in our multilingual enhancement of the
                    original Ocular system. We modified Ocular by asking it to identify the language
                    of each word in a document before drawing on the appropriate language model for
                    character recognition. Given the three language options in our corpus (Spanish,
                    Latin, and Nahuatl), the system makes a best guess for every word as it
                    transcribes it, and then uses that guess to improve the transcription. By
                    preserving that language choice, we end up with a representation of language
                    distribution across the document. 
                There are several ways that language tagging can open new interpretive
                    possibilities for future analysis. This data makes it easy to filter the
                    thousands of pages in our corpus to focus on a particular language. It also
                    makes it possible to track patterns of multilingual expression throughout the
                    corpus. Furthermore, language tagging can have important downstream consequences
                    for scholars interested in natural language processing. Piotrowski describes how
                    multilingual documents pose problems for future analysis, like part-of-speech
                    tagging, lemmatization, morphological analysis, and syntactic parsing, because
                    each of these forms of analysis expects a monolingual corpus . Multilingual tagging may enable separation of
                    the corpus for these monolingual forms of analysis. 
                
                    Lines from the Advertencias with an
                        automatically produced Ocular transcription. Red marks Spanish, while blue
                        is Latin and black is Nahuatl. Note the difference between the two instances
                        of the Spanish word Dios.
                    
                
                At the same time, errors in language tagging reveal how these analytic approaches
                    carry their own colonial dangers. Errors in language tagging frequently occur in
                    the Rincón transcription, which often intersperses Nahuatl prefixes, suffixes,
                    and other elements of word use into Spanish descriptions of grammatical
                    patterns. Here the brevity of the word fragments (two or three letters) doesn’t
                    provide enough information to trigger a language shift in the system. More
                    interesting for our purposes, however, are errors like those in Figure 2, which
                    shows a fragment from the Advertencias that
                    continues the discussion of the holy trinity described above. Here we see that
                    the Spanish word Dios, which appears twice in
                    the fragment, has been identified first as Spanish, then as Nahuatl. Elsewhere
                    on the same page, the Latin words Sancto and
                        Sanctisima were incorrectly tagged as
                    Nahuatl. In both cases, the incorrect tagging is likely triggered by the
                    frequent presence of loanwords in the Nahuatl, Spanish, and Latin training
                    corpus. Though the Primeros Libros may be an
                    exaggerated case, early modern writers were almost all multilingual, and early
                    modern writing frequently switches between Latin and the vernacular, using Latin
                    words to emphasize or highlight key terms in much the same way that Spaniards
                    writing in Nahuatl (or their Nahua assistants) drop in terms like Sancto (holy) or Dios (god). 
                The accurate tagging of loan words poses a particular problem when there is a
                    mismatch between our language data and the text being transcribed, because, as
                    James Lockhart has shown, the use of Spanish loanwords in Nahuatl is
                    period-specific. As with the other examples in this article, however, the
                    concept of a language tagging error obscures a deeper ambiguity in the language
                    itself. If a text written in Nahuatl uses the word Dios, is it accurate to describe that as a Spanish word, or would
                    it be more accurate to describe it as a Nahuatl word adopted after conquest?
                    Should we perhaps understand it as the codeswitching of a bilingual writer for
                    whom the boundaries between the two languages were not fixed? The system forces
                    a single linguistic choice where we may in fact be observing the breakdown of
                    standard linguistic categories. It has been noted that this difficulty
                        could be resolved by tweaking the system to allow for an ambiguous or
                            multilingual tag in cases of language uncertainty. While we will
                        experiment with this in future iterations of the system, broader questions
                        about historical linguistic categories remain relevant.
            

                Conclusion
                According to the assistive pretext of OCR, the primary purpose of automatic
                    transcription is to improve access to digitized texts. OCR accomplishes this by
                    increasing the distribution and legibility of the texts, making them accessible
                    to screen readers and making them available for digital analysis. Implicitly,
                    this process of transcription is also a neutral one: it recognizes characters,
                    rather than reading them; it transcribes them rather than writing. Under the
                    assistive pretext, acts of interpretation disappear.
                By situating optical character recognition within a longer history of
                    transcription and by conducting an analysis of several systems on which OCR is
                    based, I have suggested that the assistive pretext obscures more complex
                    analytic processes that occur alongside and within the act of transcription. The
                    complex cultural interactions embedded in early colonial transcriptions are a
                    reminder that copies, like computers, are never neutral: they inscribe the scene
                    of their production on the printed page. Similarly, the machine-recognition of
                    printed characters is a historically charged event, in which the system and its
                    data conspire to embed cultural biases in the output, or to affix them as
                    supplementary information hidden behind the screen. 
                A broader implication of this argument is that the machinic transformations of
                    text are neither more nor less radical than those produced by the many systems
                    of interpretive reproduction that came before. Instead, much like the early
                    colonial processes of transcribing and printing the Primeros Libros, machines transcribe the historical contingencies
                    of their use into processed texts. This matters for those interested in critical
                    textual studies because it suggests a mode for analyzing digital texts as
                    historical texts. By understanding the historical context of the tools through
                    which digital texts are processed and displayed, we can bring to the surface the
                    traces these tools leave on digital documents. This may allow us to recognize
                    how digital projects implicitly reinforce historical hierarchies of power and
                    knowledge even as our scholarship works to critique or counteract those systems. 
                This research also matters for those who work to digitize historical documents
                    and seek to produce intellectually rigorous transcriptions. An attentive
                    approach to the processes through which texts are transcribed – from gathering
                    language data to selecting options and transcription tools – will enable
                    practitioners to manage the biases of digitization systems. Rather than being
                    victims of the contingencies of the tools we use, we can target the outcomes we
                    want by considering up front how tools shape text and how historical
                    expectations frame textual reproduction. Building multilingual capabilities into
                    Ocular, for example, allowed us to change the shape of early modern OCR by
                    bringing multilingual documents to the center of automatic transcription rather
                    than imposing an anachronistic, monolingual concept of textuality onto the early
                    modern period. Manually altering our language data similarly allowed the system
                    to be attuned to the unique orthographic qualities of the books in our corpus. 
                Finally, we see a great deal of potential in the amplification of the implicit
                    textual analysis that accompanies OCR. We often treat automatic transcription as
                    a preliminary step to digital analysis, a costly but necessary evil that
                    introduces needless errors without providing much analytic gain. By working with
                    Ocular’s developers, we hope to expand Ocular’s analytic capabilities, enabling
                    OCR to do more than recognize characters and output transcriptions. Rather than
                    seeking to minimize the potential damage done by OCR’s analytic systems, we hope
                    to capitalize on those processes through explicit attention to what machine
                    learning is capable of and where its limitations lie. 
            

                Acknowledgements
                In addition to the many individuals named in this article who have supported this
                    project, I am indebted for their editorial support to Roanne Kantor, Matt Cohen,
                    Kelly McDonough, Dan Garrette, Maria Victoria Fernandez, and Kent Norsworthy.
                    Special thanks to DHQ managing editor Duyen Nguyen and my anonymous
                    reviewers.
            
