Title:  Archival Liveness: Designing with Collections Before and
                    During Cataloguing and Digitization
Volume:  009
Issue:  3
Date:  3 December 2015
Abstract:  
                
                We present archival liveness as a concept in design and the Digital
                    Humanities and describe its development within a Research Through Design
                    process. Working with a newly acquired archive of contemporary poetry we
                    produced designs that both manifested and geared in to
                    
                     the temporal rhythms of the work and
                    infrastructure of archiving. Drawing on user-centred work with participants,
                    often poets themselves, we focused on marginalia as a material feature of the
                    archive, developing a drawing machine and live Twitter bot. Our work addresses
                    institutional concerns for outreach and engagement while also acknowledging and
                    exploiting the inevitably incomplete or live character of archival collections.
                    For designers working with digital archives, we demonstrate the pragmatic and
                    critical value of liveness as a focus of the design process.
            
Full Body Text: 

                INTRODUCTION
                Digital interfaces to archives and cultural collections have, in recent years,
                    become a crucial means of accessing our heritage and their design has become a
                    subject of interest in interaction design 
                    
                    
                    . With a wealth of digital material being made
                    available by institutions many have produced rich and innovative interfaces of
                    their own e.g. (Smithsonian Design Museum n.d.) or in collaboration with
                    researchers . A number of methodologies have been
                    applied to such design processes including engaging potential users of the
                    interface in its design 
                    , or developing interfaces as critical lenses on
                    cultural collections 
                    
                    . Despite the popular image of archives as static
                    and authoritative, digital archives and cultural collections are dynamic.
                    Cataloguing, description and digitization are slow and costly processes; as such
                    archives exist in various forms of incompleteness yet institutions are under
                    pressure to share digital collections in order to better engage with a
                    contemporary audience . There is consequently
                    conflict between the state of completeness of the archive and the need for
                    institutions to share what they have.
                In answer, we present a novel approach to the design of archive and collection
                    interfaces and introduce the concept of archival liveness as a
                    concept which opens 
                        the play of possibilities for
                            design
                        
                     and affords designers new formal and conceptual considerations in working
                    with archival materials before and during cataloguing. Archival liveness
                    promotes a view of the archive as a set of on going professional, institutional
                    and technical processes and precipitates a focus on the different kinds of
                    temporality embodied within these. Throughout our design work we made a feature
                    of some of the distinctive temporal features of the archiving process and used
                    them to reflect on the way that the archive is used and presented.
                We describe a Research Through Design approach 
                     in which we designed a range of experimental
                    interfaces, visualizations and interventions for an archive during the process
                    of cataloguing and digitization. We discuss this work as Research Through Design
                    because of its associated methods some of which we adopted through our work and
                    because of its speculative and experimental orientation. Throughout this article
                    we use interfaces to refer to the online catalogue interfaces we were
                    developing. We refer to aspects of this interface work as visualization
                    where it is specifically data driven and involving graphical representation.
                Crucially, by considering the process of archiving as live and taking this as the
                    focus of our design interventions we address an area of concern to archival
                    institutions . That is, we take the incompleteness
                    and long time scales of archiving as features of interest, not as problems to be
                    overcome. In doing so we identify benefits for design researchers working
                    collaboratively with archivists and for producing aesthetically and critically
                    interesting designs. We therefore hope that aspects of our approach are
                    repeatable by other designers, for other archives.
                We contribute:
                
                    A definition of archival liveness emphasizing its formal qualities. 
                    A description of Research Through Design work undertaken to develop the
                        above.
                    A discussion of the implications of archival liveness and the benefits of
                        applying it in the design of archive and collection interfaces.
                
                
                    Motivation
                    Our research comes at a time when an interest in the theoretical and critical
                        concerns around archives has begun to pervade discussions of designing for
                        the archive. This tendency reflects themes in archive-oriented humanities
                        scholarship, since the early 1990’s in particular , about the role of archives as repositories of culture and archivists and
                        institutions as producers of versions of the past . As archival practice has become increasingly
                        mediated by digital technologies, these themes have become of key interest
                        to scholars positioning their work in terms of the Digital Humanities e.g.
                            
                        . Thus a converging set of theoretical
                        concerns, disciplines and epistemologies center on the technologies and
                        practices of archiving, and their relationship to older critical
                        perspectives from the humanities. The overlap of Human Computer Interaction
                        (HCI) and Interaction Design research with concerns from the Digital
                        Humanities represents a compelling opportunity for inter-disciplinary
                        research.
                
                
                    Project Context
                    Our research was conducted in the context of an eighteen-month-long research
                        project. At the outset our university had recently acquired the archive of a
                        publisher of contemporary poetry, Bloodaxe Books, consisting of around
                        60,000 items (see Figure 1), mostly edited manuscripts of poems. 
                    
                        The Un-catalogued Archive
                        
                    


                    We were engaged to produce experimental interface design research as part of
                        an inter-disciplinary team together with other researchers from the creative
                        arts and humanities. Around thirty project participants, mostly poets
                        themselves, were engaged in personal, creative-practice research in the
                        archive. Importantly, the archive itself was in a completely un-catalogued
                        state at the start of the project. Research was consequently being conducted
                            in parallel to the cataloguing and digitization process and
                        we will contend that this contemporaneity afforded a range of creative and
                        technical opportunities that helped us explore, describe and use the concept
                        of archival liveness.
                
            

                BACKGROUND
                
                    Liveness
                    Liveness has been productively recognized as a concept in the field of HCI
                        and has been investigated across areas including live electronic music 
                        , interactive art 
                        , and TV production  sometimes looking to theatre and performance art for comparison . Liveness has been shown to have significant
                        implications for user experience, particularly of live events. Some authors
                        have suggested that work remains in considering liveness in interaction more
                        broadly. During the early phases of our research we were frequently
                        confronted with a number of technical and experiential ways that the archive
                        could be considered as subject to live processes (such as the ongoing
                        activities of digitization and cataloguing) and indeed, could be considered
                        itself as live. These considerations lead us to consider notions of
                        archival liveness and its possible application to the study of the user
                        experience of archives, collections and their interfaces.
                    Previous accounts of liveness 
                        
                        
                        
                         describe how a sense of liveness can be
                        achieved and supported, and emphasise the power of a feeling of liveness to
                        affect experiences of technologically mediated events. Definitions of
                        liveness as 
                            …the properties of intimacy and
                                immediacy experienced by both spectators and performers
                            
                         are calibrated to evoke interpersonal, affective encounters. However
                        the more recent use of the term in the context of data visualization  provokes a reconsideration of its features of
                        interest away from performance. An expanded sense of liveness has the
                        potential to inform interaction design more broadly . The study of liveness has, in summary, hitherto focused primarily on the
                            experience of liveness, through which performances, art or
                        entertainment are lived. 
                    In the context of data-driven technological experiences (such as viewing or
                        using visualization) however, an account of how the formal characteristics
                        of the supporting infrastructure actually contribute to the phenomenon of
                        liveness is so far under-developed. As part of our second contribution, we
                        develop this formal description and describe the role it played in affording
                        opportunities for design. In this sense we find commonality with research in
                        live electronic music, in particular Freeth et al.  who describe how the experience of a live, networked, collaborative
                        musical composition is shaped by the technical constraints of the system.
                        Others  have suggested that such constraints
                        should be seen as features of particular material interest and be viewed as
                        aesthetically integral to the piece of music, rather than being viewed as
                        problems. In the study presented herein we follow prior work e.g. 
                         by seeing such technological materiality as part
                        of the landscape of what makes the archive a particular kind of
                            live.
                
                
                    Archive and Collections Interface Design
                    Concerns about the power of archives to produce particular versions of our
                        cultural past  have motivated some researchers
                        to adopt participatory design (PD) or similar approaches to involving future
                        users of archives in the design process. Doing so raises a series of complex
                        questions regarding the stakeholders in such archives (whose archive is it?)
                        and their relationship to archival standards (by whose terms should the
                        items be described?). Featherstone asks 
                            should the focus be on
                                received traditions and the canon, or on local knowledge and
                                diversity?
                            
                        , and a number of research projects have opted emphatically for the
                        latter. Povinelli  describes the production of
                        an archive of cultural information with and about indigenous Australians.
                        The interface to this archive attempted to recreate patterns of knowledge
                        sharing (and exclusion) particular to the group in question. Huvila  highlights the importance of knowledge held by
                        future users of an archive of local history and describes its integration
                        into the design of a records management system. These explicitly
                        participatory projects come with a considerable commitment in time and
                        resources. Although these results are valuable, we suggest that there is
                        scope for approaches which are responsive to users but without the sometimes
                        prohibitive costs involved in pure PD processes. One such process is
                        described by Feinberg  who suggests a notion of
                            dialogue between
                        collections interface designer (as author) and user (as audience).
                    With the integration of archival record keeping and networked technologies
                        (such as document-storing servers, online record aggregators , and front-end collection interfaces)  Hedstrom notes that as a critical node in the
                        relationship between archive, archivist and user, archival interfaces are
                        implicated in the interconnections between power, institution, memory and
                        artefact described above. As well as the decisions taken by archivists as to
                        inclusion, preservation, access and description, a set of further
                        considerations inform the presentation and curation of archives. Such
                        considerations encompass interface design, data management strategy and
                        access policy and are a site of potential interdisciplinary collaboration
                        and user engagement. The context of a research project afforded us an
                        opportunity to pursue creative exploratory work in this design space. 
                
                
                    Background: Summary
                    We have seen first that liveness has been of interest in design communities
                        in providing clues about the experience of live performance and interaction.
                        Significantly, we have noted that we can develop the concept of liveness in
                        the archive by supporting the discussion of experience with a description of
                        some of the formal features of the archival process which contribute to the
                        phenomenon of liveness. The development of designs exploring archival
                        liveness is proposed as a useful contribution to the rich but complicated
                        design space of archival interfaces.
                
            

                Starting the design process
                
                    Research Through Design
                    We adopted a Research Through Design methodology as exemplified by Frayling,
                        Gaver, Bowers and others 
                        
                        , in that artefacts produced 
                            allow a range of topical,
                                procedural, pragmatic and conceptual insights to be
                                articulated
                            
                        . Research Through Design has been demonstrated as compatible with a
                        critical  orientation which is consistent with
                        our aims to consider how archival liveness might support the production of a
                        more open, experimental or creative engagement with archival materials. Our
                        approach is critical in that we propose archival liveness as a concept
                        through which to query existing design practices in archive interfaces and
                        to provide pathways towards new kinds of design. 
                    In the following we describe four distinct design activities: Archive
                        Inserts, Box Log Connections, The Marginalia Machine and a Twitter bot.
                        These activities were conducted on an overlapping timeline; here we present
                        them in a roughly chronological sequence that shows their formative role in
                        developing our understanding of archival liveness.
                
                
                    In The Archive
                    Inspired by previous Research Through Design work 
                         we conceived of a cultural probes activity to gain insight
                        into the way the archive was being used by our project participants and to
                        uncover some of the things they found interesting about the materials
                        themselves. As poets with substantial domain knowledge they could be
                        considered as 
                            lead users
                            
                         with the potential to give insight informing future designs for a
                        broader group. 
                    With our project partners we also held a series of four, hour-long discussion
                        meetings with groups of around ten participants at a time. These meetings
                        were audio recorded and transcribed. In the following section we draw on the
                        probing activity and the results of the discussion together. We emphasize
                        that these activities were undertaken not as information gathering or
                        requirements analysis activities per se, but to sensitize ourselves to the
                        material and its prospective users. That is to say our discussions were not
                        directed towards user requirements specifically but instead tried to get
                        some flavor of their experience in the archive.
                    
                        Detail of the Instructions for our Probing Activity Showing one of the
                            Archive Insert Probes
                        
                    

                    Towards this end we also spent time physically situated in the archive
                        ourselves. We observed during this period that the library silence imposed
                        by the archive’s location in the university Special Collections room
                        meant that participants who were potentially conducting related research
                        were unable to communicate. Indeed a participant commented during a session
                        that,
                    Both times that I have been to the archive, I have requested a box and
                            I was emailed back that somebody else had requested a box the same as
                            me. So I got this strange feeling that there was this other me, who was
                            interested in the same things that I am interested in. I think the fact
                            that we were actually going to the same session, and wanting the same
                            box for it, I started to feel a bit weird about it.
                    Partly in response to this scenario, we created a probing activity,
                            Archive Inserts (see Figure 2) which used a bookmark-like insert
                        to act as a conversation backchannel for participants. A trial of
                        this activity revealed a number of interesting features of the archive which
                        focused our interests and informed future designs. 
                    We scanned the completed inserts and conducted a basic thematic analysis,
                        sorting results into the following categories; materiality,
                            typographical, literary criticism, questions about the
                            cataloguing process, poems (several participants chose to
                        leave poems for others to find), links between items,
                            illustrations (several participants drew pictures of what they
                        found) and declarations (comments which didn’t appear to solicit a
                        particular response). 
                
                
                    Probe Findings
                    There were two principal outcomes from our analysis. First: it was clear that
                        temporality was a significant factor in the participants’ experience of the
                        archive. Second: virtually all of the aspects identified as interesting by
                        the participants were not intended to be described in metadata in the
                        forthcoming catalogue, and thus would not be represented in future
                        interfaces to the archive. This latter observation is fundamental to the
                        value we identify for a Research Through Design process in this context.
                        These outcomes are described further below.
                    
                        Temporality
                        A number of comments from participants suggested that being in the
                            archive conveyed a sense of temporal connection with the people and
                            events of the past. One participant jokes that the editor of Bloodaxe,
                            was figuratively looking over their shoulder.
                        …suddenly I became aware of somebody stood next to me and it was
                                Neil! I felt as though I’d been caught out. Then I thought perhaps
                                I’d conjured him up!
                        
                            Detail of a Manuscript (by Ruth Fainlight) with Editorial
                                Notes
                            
                        

                        Similarly, a number of participants discussed the importance of the
                            historical situatedness of the items. They speculated on the
                            circumstances under which items were produced and this speculation was a
                            significant facet in their experience of archival research. One item (a
                            manuscript by the Russian poet Anna Akhmatova) prompted the writer of
                            one probe insert to ask: What was the process for the publisher to
                                publish a book by a political prisoner still serving time?
                            Another speaking during our discussion describes the interconnection,
                            for them, of wrapping materials and past events.
                        Picking up on the idea of an aura that’s added by the fact that
                                this material has suddenly become a part of history. I got really
                                interested in the wrappers that material was in, in the box that I
                                called up yesterday. It had half in envelopes which were the
                                envelopes that the manuscript seems to have been sent in originally,
                                so that there was that history of a poet addressing an envelope and
                                putting a stamp on the packet.
                    
                    
                        Materiality
                        The interest in the material aspects of the archive described by the
                            participant above was a recurrent point raised both in discussion and in
                            the probing activity.
                        
                            I just think that’s really interesting when you’re then going into
                                an archive, when you are seeing things that are finished on the
                                page, but still having this other voice of the handwritten notes or
                                the handwritten marginalia, or somebody else’s marginalia. Coming in
                                and still being in dialogue in those tiny and precise ways right to
                                the very end. I am very much interested in the voice of the
                                handwritten note and in marginalia generally.
                        The items in the Bloodaxe archive are mostly late stage proofs of poems,
                            often similar to the published versions of the work. The two significant
                            differentiating factors therefore are first, the quality of the printed
                            material in the forms of paper densities and grades, the marks of
                            varying kinds of typewriter, word-processor and printer and second, the
                            handwritten editorial notes (see Figure 3). These latter when inscribed
                            in the margins are termed marginalia in archival parlance. The
                            marginalia were interesting to us, firstly because they were interesting
                            to participants and secondly because of the link described above between
                            marginalia and the temporal sense of the archive. We
                            decided to adopt the marginalia (taken in an expanded sense to include
                            all marks which were not printed characters) as the material in a
                            process through which we explore archival liveness.
                    
                    
                        Cataloguing Process
                        We have already described the importance of the archival catalogue and
                            interface as 
                                critical nodes
                                
                             in the relationship between materials and the significance of
                            archives in culture. A final group of quotes highlight the concern felt
                            by some participants over the processes by which items were to be
                            archived and made available. One participant, writing in a probe insert,
                            had misunderstood the cataloguing process.
                        there isn’t an archive number, this is because it is an unpublished
                                work […] Are unpublished works going to remain uncatalogued? Does
                                this make the item invisible?
                        The item in question had no archive
                                number because the archive, at this stage, was in a
                            semi-catalogued state and the item in question had not yet been
                            catalogued. Also the state of publication has no bearing on whether
                            items are catalogued (though it may affect their inclusion in an
                            interface due to copyright issues). Another participant expressed
                            concerns during our discussion over management practices for future
                            items.
                        …what’s interesting is that the correspondence is fascinating,
                                nobody prints correspondence anymore. All of the current
                                correspondence will be on email, so I’m wondering what the onward
                                strategy at Bloodaxe is for retaining that, because that would be
                                gone.
                        These comments reinforced our early justification for designing within
                            the archive during the cataloguing process and contributed to our
                            growing definition of archival liveness in that they strongly associate
                            the degree of definitiveness of the catalogue with a sense of time.
                    
                
                
                    Preparing for Design
                    Our work with participants had revealed a number of features of interest in
                        the archive that informed our designs. First our sense of the vital
                        importance of the temporality of archive materials was clearly shared by
                        participants. Second, the aspects of materiality valued by the participants
                        presented us with some clear ideas about what kinds of material to work
                        with. Lastly the comments about the relationship between materials and the
                        ongoing cataloguing supported our earlier impression that presenting the
                        archive during the cataloguing process might engage users at this critical
                        and contested stage. 
                
            

                DESIGN INTERVENTIONS
                
                    Design Work
                    Having spent time in the archive and with project participants we developed
                        two main design proposals both of which adopted the archival marginalia as a
                        starting point for a creative design intervention. A further design was
                        produced early in this process and is described separately. Although neither
                        of the former two was in itself an interface design, both were produced to
                            lead to the catalogue and future interfaces to it in different
                        ways. The first design intervention was a live Twitter bot, connected to the
                        digitization process in the library (see Figure 4). The server running the
                        bot uses machine learning techniques to separate handwritten notes and
                        illustrations before tweeting the resulting image with a link back to a
                        catalogue page with basic catalogue information. The detection of this
                        marginalia relies on the results of optical character recognition (OCR) as
                        performed by the Tesseract OCR engine . 
                    
                        Screen Grab of a Marginalia Tweet
                        
                    

                    OCR detects typewritten symbols, associating a level of detection confidence
                        with each symbol. This allows estimation of the expected colour and
                        dimensions of typewritten symbols for a given document. Regions of content
                        either ignored by OCR or whose colour and/or dimensions lie outside the
                        expected range for typewritten symbols are then deemed to be marginalia.
                    The second intervention was an artwork, the Marginalia Machine (see Figure
                        5). The Marginalia Machine is an X/Y or Cartesian plotter
                        which draws details  These were curated for the exhibition and chosen
                            for their features of formal interest. of the marginalia on a
                        continuous scroll of paper. It was displayed during Poetry International an internationally recognized festival of
                        poetry at the Southbank Centre, London, UK. 
                    The Marginalia Machine is based on a kit of parts sold by Makeblock  which was significantly modified and improved.
                        We added stabilizing belts and pulleys and designed a paper roller mechanism
                        that would advance after each document was drawn. The Marginalia Machine was
                        controlled by an Arduino microcontroller in serial communication with a Java
                        application which we wrote specifically for the project. This application
                        sent a series of point coordinates combined with pen up or pen
                            down messages. To produce these coordinates we wrote a Python script
                        which vectorised the marginalia images (produced as described above) and
                        produced an XML document of coordinate data. A supporting documentation
                        video, shown in the gallery space, described the technological processes
                        behind the machine and its context in our design research.
                    
                        Detail of the Marginalia Machine
                        
                    

                
                
                    Uncovering Liveness
                    The design process afforded a number of insights that support our
                        contribution of a definition of archival liveness. As we developed our
                        designs, a set of three sites of liveness emerged, each with its own,
                        idiosyncratic sense of liveness. These were: the special collections area of
                        the library itself, the server infrastructure that would host aspects of our
                        design interventions, and the manifestations of our designs on Twitter and
                        in the gallery.
                    
                        Working Hours, Working Rhythms
                        The production of both the Marginalia Machine and the Twitter bot
                            entailed a long, friendly, and respectful exchange between ourselves and
                            the professional archivist and digital assistant in the library. This
                            relationship and the practices it uncovered informed our developing
                            sense of archival liveness. A challenge of working with archival
                            materials during the cataloguing process is that access to those
                            materials and sources of metadata must be negotiated and then
                            technically facilitated before formal procedures are in place or perhaps
                            circumventing existing procedures. In the Bloodaxe Archive a
                            conventional workflow was in place wherein items were catalogued and
                            scanned, and image files converted for preservation. The cataloguing was
                            conducted using a web-based tool which eventually aggregates the
                            collection with other UK archives. This kind of workflow is based on a
                            long production cycle and with the assumption that the catalogue will be
                            published near the end of the cataloguing process. Further, there was
                            little formal connection between the catalogue and digitized files.
                            Although they were connected by reference numbers, the digitized items
                            were not seen as part of the archive, but as illustrations for the
                            catalogue.
                        The cataloguing and digitization process as described above had a
                            distinct kind of temporality associated with it. It was
                            based on batch processing, a strict sequencing of cataloguing and
                            digitization and an ultimate cycle of around eighteen months (after
                            which point the funding would be exhausted). We felt that this rigid
                            timescale concealed a host of rich features of the archiving process by
                            effectively silencing the project until its conclusion. In this sense
                            the liveness of the archive was suppressed.
                        Despite the formality of this workflow, we were aware that a parallel set
                            of informal organizational practices were at work in the library. For
                            instance the archivist preferred to keep her catalogue in spreadsheets
                            before transferring new records to the records management software at
                            the end of the month. The digital assistant meanwhile had a complex but
                            well-defined folder structure by which she kept track of which documents
                            had been scanned, converted, uploaded and saved. Through regular contact
                            we were able to negotiate access to these intermediate working
                            structures in order to engage with the processes behind the production
                            of an archive. While doing so we were careful to communicate our
                            intentions to the archive staff so that they understood that these areas
                            were to be partly made public. An example of one outcome of this access
                            can be seen in a visualization
                                http://bloodaxe.ncl.ac.uk/sandpit/bloodaxe_archive_box_connections/blood.php
                            we produced for the participants.
                        The visualization shows relations between the roughly sorted boxes (see
                            Figure 6) in which the archive was delivered to the university. If an
                            author or title is in both box 6 and box 15, for instance, this
                            connection will be drawn on the graph and a list produced on the right
                            hand side. Also visible in the image is a figure for the most popular
                            (as in most viewed by participants) box (44 in this case). While
                            ostensibly a tool by which participants could more efficiently search
                            the boxes, this visualization also served the purpose of showing a
                            pre-catalogued representation of the archive; the archive in its nascent
                            state. As such it was a time marker in the process of archive
                            creation. More importantly for our argument it was made possible by
                            access to two items; an informal spreadsheet provided by the vendors of
                            the archive, Bloodaxe Books, and a Microsoft Word document in which the
                            archivist recorded the participants’ archive box requests. Neither were
                            part of the formal cataloguing process but working
                                documents used by the archivist as part of her day-to-day
                            job. Opportunistic access allowed us to extract the data from those
                            documents in situ on the archivist’s
                            working server space, and from there to make it available. We suggest
                            that such documents which support the daily work of the archive are
                            themselves indicators of liveness.
                        
                            Visualization of Archive Box Connections
                            
                        

                        The approach taken with the Box Connections visualization influenced the
                            development of the Marginalia Machine and the Twitter bot. Having become
                            familiar with the archival activity in the library we became interested
                            in releasing materials as and when they were produced rather than at the
                            end of the envisaged production cycle. By releasing images early and
                            often, alongside what parts of the catalogue existed, we were attempting
                            to provide indices to archiving as a live process.
                    
                    
                        Scripts and Servers
                        In order to achieve the above we developed a technical framework to
                            support our intervention. The particular affordances of the technologies
                            involved also played a significant role in developing our
                            characterization of archival liveness. Such affordances defined this
                                site for work. We explored, tinkered with and organized those
                            technologies according to a mixture of technical criteria (what will be
                            stable) and aesthetic and theoretical ones (what organization of
                            technical resources would most aptly reflect the work in the archive).
                            By doing so, a sense of the human inflected our technical work, just as
                            technical considerations inflect the (human) work of the archivist and
                            digital assistant. That is to say that archival liveness reflects an
                            integrated set of technical and human factors which together define the
                            particular kinds of time in the archive.
                        Both the Twitter bot and the Marginalia Machine were intended to respond
                            to the digitization of new images in the Bloodaxe archive. To make this
                            possible we developed scripts that would scan a working folder on the
                            server space of the digital assistant. With her consent, we asked the
                            university technical services for read-only permission to this shared
                            storage. Similarly, we wrote scripts to convert exports of the catalogue
                            to a data structure to support a work in progress online catalogue. We
                            emphasize these points because they are germane to our wider discussion
                            that our process was not part of the envisaged production flow for the
                            archive. We further suggest that these opportunistic technical
                            interventions take advantage of the mess described by Dourish & Bell
                            2011  as fundamental to the character of
                            contemporary networked technology.
                        To check the status of the shared folder we wrote a simple shell script
                            triggered by a Cron process. Cron is a Unix tool for scheduling the
                            execution of scripts, but it comes with its own temporal constraints. It
                            is designed for regular tasks and accordingly can be scheduled to run on
                            the minute (at the most), on the hour (or n minutes afterwards),
                            everyday and so forth. In that sense Cron became part of the temporal
                            range of archiving activities as we connected it to our designs. While a
                            scheduled check seems to break the immediacy implicit in the notion of
                            liveness, we felt that live does not necessarily imply
                                continuous. The archive is live insofar as it is an ongoing
                            process. Breaks and pauses such as those introduced by Cron are part of
                            the texture of its liveness. Although it might be argued
                            that Cron processes are not part of the core of the archive, we argue
                            that its use as a scheduling process as part of the technological
                            infrastructure of the archive effectively defines it as such. In this
                            sense by using Cron as part of our design intervention we were making an
                                aesthetic claim that this kind of time should be part
                            of the texture of archival liveness in this archive.
                        Having chosen this approach we encountered another significant temporal
                            feature of the technologies. Our script cross referenced each item in
                            the shared folder (of multipage scanned PDFs) with each item in another
                            folder, where extracted and compressed JPEG versions were stored, in
                            order to identify new PDF files. This process itself was lengthy because
                            of the volume of files involved, taking around half an hour to run. Once
                            a new file was found, a series of further processes added to the
                            execution time. First the PDF was extracted to individual JPEGs using
                            command line image processing software ImageMagick . Then the JPEGs were resized to produce
                            thumbnails for the website. A PHP script was then called to update the
                            catalogue with the new file information. Next a further script produced
                            the marginalia image before finally the image was tweeted along with a
                            link to the relevant page of the work-in-progress catalogue
                            interface.
                    
                    
                        The Right Time?
                        As well as the timeframes already described regarding the working rhythms
                            within the library and the various running times of scripts and
                            processes the public manifestations of our designs introduced a third
                            temporal issue that pertained to the experience of archival
                            liveness.
                        The micro-blogging service Twitter is based on short updates which appear
                            as a mix in a user’s timeline. We were conscious of the risk that a
                            heavy stream of updates from the archive would overload followers’
                            timelines and alienate or annoy them. Equally however we wanted to
                            retain a sense of the particular rhythms of the archival process, so to
                            tightly schedule updates felt restrictive. To reconcile these two
                            opposing concerns we allow a maximum of three marginalia images per hour
                            to be tweeted. As this compromise shows, we sought to manage the
                            performance of archival liveness in the public realm.
                        The Marginalia Machine presented its own constraints. Because the working
                            pattern of the digitization process is irregular, and of course takes
                            place on weekdays, there were significant problems with presenting a
                            live-connected version that was in synchrony with the archival process.
                            For an artwork in a gallery, long periods of inactivity do not often
                            make for a satisfying experience. To provide a satisfying experience for
                            visitors while attempting to maintain a connection to the live archiving
                            activity we had the Marginalia Machine draw from a bank of twenty of its
                            most recent images. We hoped that the constant, noisy activity of the
                            machine would be indicative of the activity of the archive even though
                            some of the direct temporal correspondence had been broken. 
                    
                
            

                DISCUSSION
                
                    Kinds of Liveness
                    In the previous section we described three distinct temporal facets to our
                        work in the archive: the working rhythms of the archivist and digital
                        assistant, the execution and scheduling times of the technologies, and the
                        frequency with which we updated the Twitter feed and Marginalia Machine. Our
                        motivation for these designs was to manifest the liveness of the process of
                        archiving within our designs but a tight binding to this process was in
                        conflict with the technical and experiential concerns we outlined. However
                        rather than seeing this as a compromise, we suggest that archival liveness
                        is embodied equally in these three facets and that weight should be given to
                        each within the design process. Following Freeth and Tanaka 
                         we prefer to see these different temporal
                        qualities as features of material interest. We observe that the adoption of
                        and experimentation with such features of materials is entirely
                        characteristic of Research Through Design processes and indeed one aspect
                        that differentiates them from other design practices. 
                    By distinguishing between the working rhythm of the staff in the archive and
                        the various constraints and affordances of the server infrastructure we
                        reflect an obvious historical tension between the working patterns of people
                        and technologies design to support them. Rather than representing this
                        distinction as a binary one however, our approach based in archival liveness
                        nuanced our understanding of the particular kinds of temporality in
                        different parts of what might be thought of as an ecosystem of work and
                        technology. The pursuit of archival liveness, as we have said, brought us
                        into closer contact with the archivist and digital assistant as well as the
                        library technical services team. With this close contact we gained unusual
                        access to the way their work was organized across a diverse technical
                        infrastructure. We observed a disjuncture in the temporal patterns of the
                        archival process and the way that the archive was accessed by our
                        participant researchers. Where the archivist and digital assistant worked to
                        long time frames with a tendency to batch processing and repetitive
                        activity, the participants were inclined to dip in and out of the
                        archive irregularly. Our intervention through Twitter in some senses mimics
                        this comparison. After running the bot for several weeks, we noticed that in
                        periods when digitization was taking place, tweets would commonly appear
                        around 5pm; seemingly the digital assistant placed scanned PDFs in the
                            complete folder as one of her last tasks of the day. The
                        appearance of the tweeted marginalia image on followers’ Twitter timelines
                        however will be interspersed with other material. What was a semi-regular
                        event for the digital assistant manifested as sporadic for the followers of
                        the bot. 
                
                
                    Gearing In Through Liveness
                    As well as presenting design opportunities, we note that our particular
                        engagement also created a kind of gearing in
                        
                         to the archiving process and the technologies
                        around it. Durrant et al.  referencing Gurwitsch
                             describe a scenario wherein visitors
                        adjust to the infrastructure of a theme park as it aims to present a
                        particular mode of experience. The process by which the visitors begin to
                        socially organise their visit around this infrastructure is one of gearing in. In the
                        context of the archive we can see the progression of our design
                        interventions from the cultural probes to box log connections, to the
                        Twitter bot and Marginalia Machine as ways of learning to mesh our
                        designs with the work of the archive. Our treatment of archival liveness was
                        in many ways a process of orientating ourselves to the various rhythms of
                        the archiving process and the materials available at each stage. One
                        practical advantage of this gearing in was that we were able to produce engaging, timely
                        designs at stages of the project earlier than might have been otherwise
                        possible. More significantly, this gearing in gave us access to a rich set
                        of materials and concepts, prompting designs that offer new modes of
                        engagement and reflection on the archive. 
                
                
                    Performing as a Live Archive
                    In this project we were focused on the liveness of the archiving activity
                        principally because of our desire to engage users with the archiving work.
                        However by highlighting the archiving process we were also creating a public
                        performance of the Bloodaxe Archive as live. Liveness was being presented as
                        part of the public identity of the archive. In this presentation, we find
                        direct accord with other digital heritage initiatives. As archive catalogues
                        are aggregated into web services and interfaces, a number of interesting
                        points arise regarding the permanence and stability of archives and their
                        expression through catalogues and interfaces. Application Programming
                        Interfaces (APIs) such as  now provide aggregated
                        access to the collections of thousands of institutions. The constantly
                        changing nature of the collections defined by the scale of such aggregations
                        suggests a particular sense of the live archive (as growing, more available,
                        more diverse) in contrast with the dead one (as complete, finished
                        and closed). The National Archives of Australia recently launched “SODA”
                             a service which publishes the most recently
                        digitized records from across their aggregated resources. The developers
                        make the point that the constantly changing state of the catalogue makes it
                        difficult to know which new records are available. By facilitating easy
                        access and sharing the Archive’s aim to convey a sense of the rate at which
                        the collection is growing  they hope to engage
                        potential users in the new content. As in our case, liveness is implicitly
                        part of the way the public identity of the archive is performed.
                    Similarly, Circus Oz maintains a 
                            Living Archive
                            
                         of video and photographs of its performances since its inception in
                        1978. Through their stories tab, they emphasize the connection of the
                        archive to the lives of the performers and audiences. By doing so they
                        suggest that the archive is also live in the sense that is engaged with the
                        daily lives of the people represented in it. 
                
            

                CONCLUSIONS
                Earlier, we suggested that our work designing with and for liveness offered a
                    response to concerns about the role of archives in institutionalising the past.
                    In our case, the Marginalia Machine and the Twitter bot were ways of
                    simultaneously investigating archival liveness and engaging our project
                    participants and wider audiences with the archival process, with the
                    work-in-progress catalogue interface design and with the project more generally.
                    While our own work (so far) does not afford significant opportunity for users of
                    the archive to intervene in the cataloguing process we believe that further
                    potential for this exists. 
                To produce such design work has methodological implications as described but
                    also, we feel, indicates a role for a particular kind of researcher. Such a
                    researcher would have an interdisciplinary background, sensitizing her to the
                    value and interest of the archival materials while bringing a range of technical
                    and creative skills enabling different kinds of design intervention. She would
                    be in a position to quickly conceptualize, develop, and release work in an
                    opportunistic and occasional fashion, using the materials made available, early
                    and often. This particular kind of working practice (one that is agile,
                    responsive, opportunistic) may encounter difficulties at larger scales. As we
                    have suggested, one of the values of our way of working was in supporting a kind
                    of familiarity not only with materials and technical systems but also with the
                    working patterns and concerns of our colleagues in the library. Much of our work
                    was produced with what was effectively unfinished materials (the
                    work-in-progress catalogue particularly) and this access was negotiated on a
                    personal level. A future challenge for this work is to consider how some of the
                    rich temporal features of archiving may translate on a scale where such
                    negotiation is not feasible. One emergent design consideration here is how the
                    technical tools of archivists (such as archival data base software) might be
                    designed to reflect a variety of states of finishedness rather than
                    simply being unavailable until the point of completion. It is interesting to at
                    least speculate on the possibilities for design if the default state of
                    catalogues in progress were accessible rather than closed. They could then be
                    used in a timely and experimental way taking advantage of the liveness of the
                    process of archiving.
                Other aspects of our work are more broadly applicable elsewhere. Although
                    user-oriented processes for designing archival interfaces are not without
                    precedent e.g. in  they remain the exception. Rather
                    than as a set of more general user experience (UX) concerns focused on
                    usability, we indicate the suitability of Research Through Design methods as a
                    kind of culturally sensitising activity which we maintain is appropriate, indeed
                    necessary for designing for archive and cultural collection interfaces. We deem
                    this sensitivity necessary given the vital role such interfaces have in
                    mediating our cultural heritage. If we, as a society, are to encounter our
                    cultural heritage in digital forms online and elsewhere it seems appropriate to
                    engage ourselves in a conversation about not only usability but also aesthetics
                    and creativity informed by engagement with future users. With this inclination
                    however we immediately encounter future questions regarding the relationship
                    between presentation and interpretation in design work such as ours. Much of the
                    work we produced exemplified our particular attitude to archival materials in
                    which we see them as having value for future creativity. Although our particular
                    interventions were informed by our work with project participants it is
                    undeniable that in their presentation as (at least partly) creative works, we
                    injected our own interpretative stance into their presentation. The later
                    results of this approach can be seen online in our catalogue interface
                        http://bloodaxe.ncl.ac.uk/. This work (which we will discuss
                    in more detail in a forthcoming paper) combines conventional functionality such
                    as search and filter with facets of visualisation, text-mining and image
                    processing techniques to generatively produce connections around the archival
                    materials.
                One of the motivations for maintaining an ostensibly neutral catalogue based on
                    international standards for record keeping is to defer the interpretative moment
                    outside of the catalogue and its interface to allow for a plurality of
                    approaches later on. We sympathise with this position but it is hugely
                    problematized of course by the nature of any claims to neutrality. As Drucker
                         has pointed out, the design of our interfaces
                    already embodies an epistemological commitment inherited from particular
                    cultural traditions and emphasising hierarchy, standardization, and objectivity.
                    With this characterisation in mind we feel that there remains a huge role for
                    user-oriented, Research Through Design methods in exploring the line between
                    presentation and interpretation.
                Archival liveness addresses a desire (and a need) for the archives and
                    collections to make their holdings publically accessible. Digital archives are
                    dynamic: continually expanding, taken up in larger aggregations, being
                    re-catalogued and described. Thus, a model of design that treats the archive as
                    static, whole, and complete is often not appropriate. With this research we have
                    demonstrated that design interventions before or during the cataloguing and
                    digitization process benefit from early access to a wider range of materials and
                    have the potential to engage audiences and future users of the archive along the
                    way. Above and beyond this though, we have demonstrated the use of archival
                    liveness in a particular kind of Research Through Design process. Archival
                    liveness encouraged us to treat the various temporalities of the archive as
                    material with which to design and provided us with a number of distinct ways of
                        gearing in
                    
                     with the people and technologies at work in the
                    archive.
            

                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                This research was funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Council under their
                    Connected Communities theme.
            
