Title:  Lost Spaces, Lost Technologies, and Lost People:
               Online History Projects Seek to Recover LGBTQ+ Spatial Histories
Volume:  014
Issue:  3
Date:  25 September 2020
Abstract:  
            This article looks at online history projects focused on lost spaces, with an
               emphasis on lost LGBTQ+ spaces. In documenting lost spaces, these projects also
               highlight lost or marginalized historical actors. I position these projects at the
               center of debates surrounding how to recover lost peoples who have been left
               out or erased from mainstream histories. This article will discuss the various
               techniques used by digital humanities projects, focusing particularly on Jan Kurth’s
                  Lost Womyn’s Space, Greggor Mattson’s Mapping Lost Lesbian Bars, and my own project, The Feminist Restaurant Project. This article discusses the
               various techniques used and the value these open access history websites serve for
               scholars and non-scholars alike. The article finishes by exploring how lost space
               projects preserve what was not previously preserved, while these websites are
               simultaneously vulnerable to similar preservation issues that plague digital
               humanities projects and community archives more broadly, especially those separate
               from large institutions. These challenges raise the questions: is lost space doomed
               to be lost? Can the history of LGBTQ+ space be recuperated? What role do digital
               humanities have in this work? And what does it mean to be found? 
         
Full Body Text: 

            What does it mean to be lost?
            In 1983, A Woman’s Coffeehouse of Minneapolis, Minnesota taped an open community
               meeting during which members of the predominately white, working class, lesbian
               coffeehouse could reflect on their experiences. One middle-aged participant remarked
               that by not speaking with younger generations of lesbians about differences between
               their coming-out experiences, she felt that she [had] lost her
                  history,
               . This woman’s concern about not having forums in which to
               share and document her own history and that of her community was not unique.
               Archivists and historians have discussed how to preserve and to recover LGBTQ+
               histories; less attention has been given to the ways that digital humanities projects
               have tried to preserve and recover lost LGBTQ+ spatial histories. This article
               seeks to fill this gap in the literature by analyzing online projects focused on the
               history lost LGBTQ+ spaces, particularly women’s spaces. 
            In documenting lost LGBTQ+ spaces, these projects highlight previously
               overlooked marginalized historical actors and geographies. Although the scale of
               projects varies from local studies to national or even international, these projects
               seek to empower marginalized communities by acting as testimony to their existence,
               to provide resources for others to build upon the research, and to document
               particular historical phenomena. This paper will discuss the various techniques used
               by the creators of these projects, particularly Jan Kurth’s Lost
                  Womyn’s Space
               , Greggor Mattson’s Mapping Lost
                  Lesbian Bars, , and my own project The Feminist Restaurant Project
               . It is outside of the scope of this article to look at
               every history website devoted to documenting or finding lost LGBTQ+ histories.
               Instead by narrowing it down to the scope of projects devoted to documenting
                  lost spaces, primarily lost lesbian and queer women’s and feminist spaces
               on the national and international scale, this paper still provides fruitful
               comparison. Despite the projects’ emphasis on lesbian spatial culture, I use the
               LGBTQ+ umbrella. The three projects documented spaces that served a wider range of
               people than just lesbians. Furthermore, the problematics raised by this article
               relate to other lost LGBTQ+ projects, even if they are not wholly the same. 
            For this article, I analyzed the projects themselves, as well as interviewed their
               makers and included my own reflections as a project creator. In doing so, I explore
               the contribution that these websites make to the general public and scholars alike,
               paying particular attention to why documenting lost spaces is so necessary to
               understanding a community’s history. The article concludes by exploring how although
               lost space projects preserve narratives that have all but been erased or forgotten,
               these websites are vulnerable to similar preservation issues that plague both digital
               humanities projects and community archives, particularly those built separate from
               large institutions. These problems raise a number of questions, including: is lost
               space doomed to be lost? Can the history of LGBTQ+ space be recuperated? Is it
               possible to develop sustainable digital preservation initiatives that attempt to
               document the experiences of LGBTQ+ spaces? I argue that digital spatial history
               projects do not replace community archives, yet fulfill a different, complementary
               need. As such, the solution to the preservation of these materials rests with
               institutionalization within an archive large enough to provide the necessary
               financial and technological resources to sustain the project beyond the scope of the
               original, individual creator. 
         

            Who and What is Lost? And Why Should We Care?
            Historians and archivists argue over how to recover missing or marginalized
               communities. Archivists Joan M. Schwartz and Terry Cook posit that conventional
               record creation and archival practices mean that some can afford
                  to create and maintain records and some cannot; that certain voices thus will be
                  heard loudly and some not at all; that certain views and ideas about society will
                  in turn be privileged and others marginalized
               . Historians, such as Judith Bennet and Steven Maynard,
               and archivists, such as Randall Jimerson, have shown that socially and culturally
               marginalized communities, including LGBTQ+ communities, have also been marginalized
               in archives and the discipline of history 
               
               . Resulting from the acknowledgement of this deficit and
               beginning in the 1960s, social history sought to reclaim histories of marginalized
               peoples. Archives, a vital aspect of this shift, transformed collection and
               preservation practices in order to reflect these new historiographical interests.
               Archivists Marika Cifor, Michelle Caswell, Alda Allina Migoni, and Noah Geraci have
               argued that this phenomenon was especially apparent in the development of community
               archives. When community archive movements developed as a response to the social and
               political movements that came to the fore in 1960s and 1970s, within each of these movements activists and community groups recognized the
                  significance of writing persons and communities whose histories and lives had long
                  been marginalized, erased, or misrepresented into the historical record
               . They show that the process of community archiving was a
               form of self-representation, identity construction, and
                  empowerment, affecting both past and present .
               Melinda Marie Jetté (2019), James Brooks (2019), Jodie Boyd (2019), and others have
               written about how necessary it is to document LGBTQ+ histories in a way that is
               accessible to the public in The Public Historian’s
               Special Issue on commemorating queer history. Despite efforts to recover the
                  lost or marginalized histories, traditional historical and archival
               practices, however, do not capture all of them. 
            As a result, LGBTQ+ community archives began to rectify this gap. These community
               archives, such as the Lesbian Herstory Archives, often function outside of
               institutional support, which enables the community to preserve its own histories, but
               can also make the collections vulnerable to issues of funding and sustainability . Community archives also do not preserve the histories of
               the entire LGBTQ+ community; in the North American context, when these communities
               are documented, it is often members of that community that live in large urban or
               coastal areas . 
            While not fully compensating for this deficit, LGBTQ+ archival projects also exist
               online. Archivist Erin O’Meara argues that collecting activists’ papers and
               documenting related social movements has always had inherent problems, but digital
               techniques complicate matters as they raise new questions around preservation . Elise Chenier, founder of the Archives of Lesbian Oral
               Testimony, has several articles on the challenges of preserving lesbian digital
               history projects including issues of collection and retention, related to her work
               with oral histories 
               . Similarly, archivist Anthony Cocciolo discusses the
               challenges of establishing a digital community archive, finding that establishing and
               maintaining a community digital archive necessitates navigating a complex set of
               technological and social issues, including methods for capturing records, ownership
               and copyright, digitization and born-digital record keeping, social media and web
               archiving, and digital preservation . However, art
               historian, Roxanne Samer continues to believe in the potential of feminist and queer
               digital archives despite these issues, acknowledging that intergenerational sharing
               of knowledge through digital archives may be the key to this information surviving
                  . While archivists have innovated new techniques to
               include more perspectives, online history projects provide complementary and
               alternative materials yet face similar problems. The unique nature of digital
               humanities projects necessitates different solutions than are required for community
               archives, which have historically been wary of institutionalization.
            Access to narratives of marginalized people is impacted by accessibility of
               information and access to technologies. Online public history projects provide new
               opportunities to share materials and create new or different avenues of access apart
               from physical and digital archives . Jan Kurth’s Lost Womyn’s Space, Greggor Mattson’s Mapping Lost Lesbian Bars, and my own project The
                  Feminist Restaurant Project, are not digital archives but rather digital
               humanities history projects that seek to collect, remember, and retain information
               about LGBTQ+ spaces. These digital history projects build upon a tradition of LGBTQ+
               individuals creating and utilizing new technological forms to advocate about their
               communities. Their narrowed focus, particularly on the difficulty of creating and
               retaining lesbian and queer women’s spaces, is paralleled by the challenge of
               retaining records about these spaces in digital form. 
         

            What Does Being Found Look Like? What Makes Digital History Projects
               Different than Community Archives? 
            If to be lost is to be marginalized or erased, to be found or to
                  find means centering LGBTQ+ histories; some history websites do exactly that.
               One technique for recovering marginalized histories has been to document where
               marginalized groups spent time. As the editors of Queers in
                  Space, Gordon Brent Ingram, Anne Bouthillette, and Yolanda Retter note,
               both permanent and temporary spaces were important to queer activist organizing and
               community building . Geographer Julie Podmore likewise
               argues the importance of studying space to understand lesbian histories . It is not that community archives do not provide evidence
               of community spaces, but rather the emphasis of these websites is on documenting
               specifically community spaces and providing visitors with information with which to
               explore these spaces further. As Kurth notes, Certainly I have
                  seen a lot of projects since I started Lost Womyn's Space that focus just on
                  lesbian bars. I find that work of value, but I think we miss something when we
                  don't look for parallels and connections with other forms of women's space over
                  time and geography
               . Since this research started, other projects seeking to
               document lesbian and queer spaces have begun. In 2017, designer Lucas LaRochelle
               began the community generated mapping project, Queering the Map, that geo-locates
               queer moments, memories and histories in relation to a world map. Unlike the three
               projects this article focuses on, Queering the Map seeks to represent queer memories
               outside of fixed queer spaces, such as gay bars or lesbian bookstores, and rather on
               ephemeral moments, published without dates, which happen anywhere in the world to
               mark experiences of queerness wherever they occur .
               While there is strong value in recording individual memory, documenting the location
               of more formalized geographies with fixed dates does something different; it provides
               a sense of space, situated in specific historical moments, to which future
               generations can situate themselves in relation to and build upon.
            The three projects this article focuses on, take space seriously on a national or
               international scale by attending to an exploration of historical sites of LGBTQ+
               socializing and political organizing. While they differ in their format and exact
               focus, they look at similar communities: lesbians, women with a focus on lesbians,
               and feminists with an emphasis on lesbian feminists. Mattson’s work specifies bars, I
               target restaurants, cafes, and coffeehouses, and Kurth has the widest scope,
               encompassing all kinds of women’s spaces and businesses. Likewise Mattson has the
               most specific geographic focus by looking solely at the United States, the Feminist
               Restaurant Project is U.S. and Canada centered, and Kurth’s work is global . The projects have some overlap and directly attribute the
               work of the other creators in their own work . 
            This article recognizes the different motivations of the sites’ creators and the
               problematic nature of the individual creator being centered. On the one hand, these
               projects work to represent large swaths of lesbian and queer women communities, yet
               on the other hand, the individuals doing the work shape them. The identities of the
               creators impact their ability to do this labor and may influence the willingness of
               others’ view of the authority of the content. That the creators of this work are
               predominately white, and a self identified gay man academic (Mattson), queer woman
               academic (Ketchum), and a lesbian non-academic (Kurth), affects which LGBTQ+ spaces
               are found — through who is willing to share resources with us, through our
               editorial choices, and through how our work is understood as authoritative or
               non-authoritative. Furthermore, a creator’s biases shape the form of the project and
               risk marginalizing or erasing histories of other marginalized groups while doing the
               work of recovering or showcasing lost LGBTQ+ histories. This phenomenon became
               particularly apparent when in 2019, Kurth made trans-exclusionary comments while
               discussing the lack of women’s and lesbian venues in a post. In doing so, her project
               that in fact includes community spaces in which transgender people worked, gathered,
               and socialized, now minimizes or erases these histories. Responding to the
               marginalization, neglect, and deletion of trans geographies and trans geographic
               histories, geographer Kath Browne challenges how gender
                  geographies have focused on normatively gendered men and women, neglecting the
                  ways in which gender binaries can be contested and troubled
               . Browne builds on the work of Viviane Namaste and Susanne
               Stryker and argues that trans voices need to be heard and new
                  knowledges created from the specific understandings gained through lived
                  experiences
               . This is not to say that cisgendered creators are unable
               to include trans voices or representations of LGBTQ+ communities of color, but rather
               that the predominant whiteness and cisgendered identities of the creators of these
               projects affects the representation of these historical geographies. This issue is
               especially pertinent if the only, or majority, of projects documenting these spaces
               come from a white, cis perspective. While this article focuses on what it means to do
               the labor of recovering lost or missing histories, all to potentially lose these
               histories again, the individual creators’ identities impact the ability to do this
               work; the willingness to include or acknowledge certain people and spaces; and the
               form that work takes.
            Yielding to the call to think seriously about space, digital representations such as
               online mapping projects, scrapbook databases, and user forums focused on space,
               highlight an aspect of historical preservation not fulfilled in the same manner by an
               archive. The projects surveyed in this article are part of a phenomenon of spatial
               documentation. However, typically spatial projects have focused on local regions.
               Creators benefit from access to insider community knowledge and histories, primarily
               due to the intensity of labor of gathering this information. Projects such as Found
               San Francisco are advantaged by focusing on a targeted local region, which allow the
               creators to delve in detail . As Jan Kurth reflected,
                     I also enjoy the various projects that put together
                     and catalog lost places, as that combines my interest in space
                     and history. Typically, these efforts tend to be localized, as hunting down all
                     these places can be pretty labor intensive. So generally, most of these
                     projects will be devoted to particular cities, and sometimes, even more
                     specifically, to particular bars or LGBT bars in a particular city. I had
                     noticed that lesbian bars tend to get lost in the city lists and even
                     the LGBT lists, so I wanted to highlight lost lesbian bars as those are rapidly
                     disappearing. But as I played around in Google archives (later newspaper.com), and on the Internet in
                     general, I came across all kinds of interesting lost, disappearing, or
                     endangered women's spaces. So I thought it would be fun to have a kind of rangy
                     blog for collecting all these places in one location.
                  
            Although projects focused on a smaller region can be more manageable, as individuals
               in that community can share their stories and collective memory, national and
               international public history projects build awareness of the larger phenomenon of the
               desire for community run spaces that are occurring beyond the local level. Both types
               of projects are useful. Greggor Mattson agrees, remarking, I
                  like all the sites that are trying to map gay bars and LGBT spaces. The New York
                  site is the gold standard, in my view, but it's one that exceeds my abilities both
                  technically and in terms of time to devote to it
               . He is referring to the NYC LGBT Historic Sites Project
               website, which consists of an interactive map that links to histories of each
               location . Mattson’s site, rather, tries to be nationally comprehensive, yet he explains that it's tough to just make sure that all the regions are being
                  represented. Mattson focused only on the United States due to language
               barriers and his own scholarly background. In my own experience, I focused on the
               United States and Canada because as a historian my training has focused on Canadian
               and American historiographies. Furthermore, my digital project was tied to my
               dissertation work in which I wanted to contextualize the development of these spaces
               within the legal and economic context of their times. Researching feminist restaurant
               histories for two countries was complicated to historically contextualize as I wanted
               to be specific about municipal, state/provincial, and federal laws. While my lens
               allowed me to speak to trends and historical phenomena regarding feminist and lesbian
               feminist restaurant creation, I had to sacrifice some precision; however, trying to
               integrate more countries would have required more generalizations than I was
               comfortable making. This article is concerned most specifically with the barriers of
               preserving LGBTQ+ spatial national and international projects, as unlike local
               projects, which are typically supported by regional organizations, the larger scale
               projects are created, updated, and preserved by individuals. For smaller scale
               regional projects without institutional or organizational backing, the suggestions at
               the end of this article will be relevant. 
            Compiling data on national and international scales can be more difficult as source
               materials are scattered. If this information is available on the Internet, as Kurth
               denoted about some of her source materials, is it really lost? As the Indiana
               University Lilly Library argued, when materials are in libraries, archives, or even
               on the Internet, they are actually the opposite of lost
               . However, information, particularly about marginalized
               communities, can be so scattered and inaccessible to locate that while it may not be
               formally lost, it can be lost. To be lost is to be unable or difficult
               to find. The sites surveyed in this article collate this information, bringing it
               together for users and often creating duplicate files of these records, which can
               disappear at a moment’s notice, as had been the case with Google archives. This
               creation of records is not the only way that these digital history projects differ
               from digital archives. Usually, larger projects require input from users as the
               creators may not be familiar with the areas discussed.
            Crowdsourcing information is a key component for revealing histories of lost spaces,
               especially for projects on the national and international scale. LGBTQ+ history
               projects particularly benefit from crowdsourcing as the former users of these spaces
               are less likely to have had their recollections previously recorded, as marginalized
               communities’ experiences are not only marginalized in historical and archival
               contexts, but also in the popular media .This technique
                  is not exclusive to LGBTQ+ focused history projects. The non-LGBTQ+ project, the
                     Lost Pub Project which documents the decline of
                  the English pub, has compiled over 35,000 entries. On the website, which functions
                  as a kind of directory, the makers write, Help our community
                     project to archive these lost pubs before they are forgotten forever. If you
                     know of a pub which has closed at any time in the past, please submit it,
                     together with any anecdotes, historical information or photographs that you
                     might have. They further ask users to check for inconsistencies,
                  writing that pubs do re-open from time to time, so if you see
                     one on the site that is open please let us know. The creators share
                  information on their website, Facebook, and twitter channels and users can check
                  the database by clicking on city/town names and seeing listings. While the Lost
                  Pub Project shows that lost LGBTQ+ pages are not unique in their use
                  crowdsourcing, the technique is still valuable. As of October 31, 2018, the site
                  features 35, 323 lost pubs, together with 20,509 photos. Greggor Mattson’s
                  Mapping Lost Lesbian Bars utilizes crowdsourcing. He
               admits on his site that it is inevitable that there are errors
                  in this kind of enterprise – please send me corrections and queries to his
               email and Twitter account. He likewise explains, Eventually I
                  will merge this with a map of currently-open lesbian bars, which I’ll launch as a
                  crowdsourcing effort
               . This kind of community driven research on lost spaces
               benefits from a wide variety of perspectives and experiences. Crowdsourcing also
               generates publicity through the initial launch of the call for submissions and thus
               also draws more attention to these sites. On the Feminist Restaurant Project website,
               there are multiple calls asking visitors to contribute to the project. Although the
               initial directory and map were based on my amalgamation of old travel guides,
               periodicals, advertisements, and interviews, I created the website in part for the
               purpose of crowdsourcing new information. The website has a page called Submissions in which I ask users, Know
                  of a feminist restaurant, cafe, or coffeehouse that existed/exists in the United
                  States and Canada? Please check if it is listed on the database — if not, email
                  The Feminist Restaurant Project to let us know. Likewise above the
               directory I have a note asking for feedback . Since I
               first launched the site in April 2015, I have only received about a dozen emails from
               people who found me through the site, but they were thorough, full of information,
               and quite helpful. The directory and its associated maps thus become living documents
               that grow as readership grows. As Jan Kurth has stayed anonymous on her site, her
               information is not crowdsourced in the same way.She has given me permission to
                  use her name for this article. Users can post comments but cannot email her
               through the site. While the Lost Womyn’s Spaces site shows that crowdsourcing is not
               the only technique creators can use to collect information, the method is still
               valuable. The creation of websites with maps and directories, like those of Mattson
               and my own, allow for users to get directly involved, turning the site into a kind of
               community project/ archive. 
            Social media works as an invaluable tool for crowdsourcing information for these
               digital history projects. Mattson finds information through social media and spreads
               awareness about his research on Twitter. He found that most gay
                  bars communicate better on Facebook than by phone or e-mail
               . Facebook enabled him to contact bar owners for
               interviews. He then used his social media presence and his website as a way to add
               credibility to his requests, explaining, I thought it would be
                  useful for them to see that they were part of something bigger to induce them to
                  accept my request for an interview. I wanted them to see that this was something
                  I'd been thinking about for a while and that I was serious
               . I, likewise, have found social media sites,
               particularly Facebook and Twitter to be invaluable resources . Facebook group administrators allowed me to join their
               online communities and pose questions to the members, asking if people had resources
               about other feminist restaurants or if they wanted to be interviewed. Like Mattson, I
               used my website, The Feminist Restaurant Project, to demonstrate the work I had
               already done on the topic and had a publicly available source that could be shared
               within these communities. I used Twitter to connect with people whose email addresses
               I did not have or could not find, as well as to publicize the project. As my research
               progressed, I was able to use these social media channels as a way to keep the
               community informed about the state of the project and publications. It has been a
               relationship of reciprocity. 
            Community archives do rely on donations from community members, but the kind of
               exchange on these websites is different. Digital LGBTQ+ spatial history projects
               collect scattered information from around the Internet, from physical archives, guide
               and travel books, and the oral histories and shared memories of community members.
               These digital projects thus, do not only gather information that could not be found
               in a single community archive, but the process of creating these sites produces
               knowledge. Users are motivated to share stories that would otherwise perish along
               with them. While similar to community archives, these digital projects do something
               different. This difference is made clear in how their information is displayed.
         

            Visuals: Spatial Histories and What Digital History Projects Offer that Community
               Archives Do Not
            To be lost is to be hidden or unseen. To be found is to be revealed. Even our
               language around being lost and found speaks to visual culture. All three sites use
               visuals in different ways to draw in readers and contribute to underlying arguments.
               In Kurth’s scrapbook format, where she pastes any relevant information within the
               blog post, she includes photographs of the businesses when available, Google
               Streetview images of the buildings when an address was known, and other photos and
               illustrations. Mattson, likewise found it touching to use Google
                  street view and have a look at the outside of the buildings when it was still a
                  lesbian bar: the rainbows or triangles or posters for women's bands
               . He had a research assistant take the screenshots and
               post them so that as Google Streetview updates with the new exteriors, at least one
               image of the bar would remain. He remarks I have no pictures of
                  the gay bars that I've liked to visit, in part because I'm old fashioned about not
                  taking pictures in or around gay bars in case someone is closeted,
                yet he knows how valuable these visuals can also be.
               While the display of this visual information differs between the three sites, none
               follow the format of digital archives’ formatting of folders filled with jpegs of
               images from the physical archives or reproduced text, as is the case with projects
               like the Queer Zine Archives and the Lesbian Herstory Archives.
            Apart from physical pictures, these websites provide other visual cues that speak to
               the existence of lost communities. Kurth’s website’s side bar, that shows the
               number of blog post entries written per month, is another powerful visual that
               conveys how many spaces existed that are now lost. The 652 posts make clear
               that these spaces were not a rare or isolated phenomenon. I was, likewise, motivated
               by the visual power of numbers when I decided to make my directory and maps publicly
               available. An immediate benefit of quantitative mapping techniques is that they show
               the preponderance of these spaces. Based on my initial estimates before beginning my
               research, I guessed that there were, at most, 40 feminist restaurants, cafés, and
               coffeehouses in America and Canada. In fact, the number of verified feminist
               restaurants, cafés, and coffeehouses from the 1972-1989 is over 250 and, further,
               there are over 430 unverified spaces, and it is likely, feminist spaces are included
               in this set. The verified and unverified spaces are color coded with pink and blue
               markings on the site. These visual cues help quantify the space.
            One approach to understanding lesbian feminist history is to mark where women
               gathered. Maps can change conceptualizations of the past in ways that narratives
               cannot alone.
            Both Mattson and I use maps to serve multiple purposes. Some of my maps simply show
               where places actually existed, some show the variety of feminist businesses in a
               single area during a single year, based only on one guidebook, and some are part of a
               larger history project, which takes information from interviewees and provides a
               space for continual community building, through memory sharing. The initial goal was
               to map out the locations of feminist restaurants and cafés, the types of women’s
               spaces that I have chosen to focus on, within the United States and Canada from 1972
               to 1989, a process never before completed. From this map it is possible construct a
               sense of what the feminist and lesbian community in a particular space and time
               looked like. A large, public map served the goal of drawing attention to the legacy
               of the women founders of feminist restaurants, cafés, and coffeehouses who made this
               project feasible by making this information as publicly accessible as possible and
               also by developing new forums in which former participants could expand their
               community, during a time when many women’s spaces are closing or have closed. Greggor
               Mattson shared a similar motivation. He explains I like making
                  Google maps because they help me visualize things alongside other sets of data...
                  for example, I can use Social Explorer to eyeball whether it resembles population
                  density, or I can use Google's Street View to have a look at the building and
                  neighborhood that the bar is/was located in
               . The map was both beneficial for visualizing results and
               analysis. He realized that these images could be useful for his readers, noting that,
                  I guess I felt like I'd gone to this trouble of helping map
                  where these lesbian bars had been, that I might as well share it with
                  others
               . Maps allow users to interact with information and
               provide powerful visuals. The time has come to take space seriously, not just
               intellectually but methodologically, in researching the past; creating publicly
               available maps enables this pursuit. 
         

            Format and the Individual
            Choices regarding format also shapes the way that users interact with the site and
               understand the motivations and intentions of the creators. Mattson’s and my site
               explicitly mention our larger academic projects with which the public sites are
               correlated. The matter is more complicated with Lost Womyn’s Spaces. Kurth notes,
                     I chose the format I have so that I would be
                     highlighting individual places, and highlighting the details of that particular
                     place's existence. I like specificity. I think that theoretical generalizations
                     are often in danger of wandering too far afield if care is not taken. The trade
                     off is that some readers may get caught up in the details, and not be able to
                     see the patterns I think are pretty clear that run across the histories of many
                     former women's places. Clearly some readers are only interested in a particular
                     bar they used to go to back in the 80s, and that's fine. I have sometimes
                     thought I should write some sort of essay highlighting the patterns with all
                     the documentation I have collected, but honestly, I don't know how many would
                     be interested and I really don't have the time.
                  
            She does actually include some editorializing information within her posts, supplying
               commentary in the margins. While Kurth states that the scrapbook style can be
               utilized as users wish, she also somewhat directs readers toward her argument, noting
                  I think my motivation has been pretty much the same, which is
                  to create an outlet for a very wide range of lost women's spaces. But the more
                  places I collected, the more I saw certain patterns that most don't know, so I
                  like to highlight those and bring them to the attention of readers
               . Between March 2011 and June 2019, she wrote over 652
               posts. Most posts focus on the history of a single space and are typically a
               collection of newspaper articles, advertisements, entries on review sites such as
               Yelp, and whatever photos and other information she can find pasted in what she calls
               her blog scrapbook formatting. However more significantly, Lost Womyn’s
               Space’s format reflected Kurth’s desire to provide records of a smattering of spaces
               that users can engage with as desired, rather than be directed. Kurth believes that
                  it's fun to have a blog to throw things on that are
                  interesting. There is so much available on the Internet right now that really
                  needs to be curated in some way to make it more accessible in a single
                  location
               . Having read all 652 posts, these arguments begin to come
               through clearly, yet if a user just reads one or two posts, the details of the
               scrapbook format tend to dominate reader experience. 
             What is clear is that each website’s specifics relate to the individuality of their
               creators. As each of these three projects are created primarily by one person, our
               individual experiences, motivations, educational backgrounds, and biases shape the
               projects. Our geographic focuses are influenced by language and cultural knowledge.
               Even when Kurth has tried to include information from countries around the world, she
                  realized pretty early that Google search engines keep
                  corralling me back to English language sites, which means the focus is on English
                  speaking countries. Occasionally I'd figure out a strategy to break free, but I
                  haven't found as much as I would like outside the US, Canada, UK, etc.
               . Apart from geographic positioning, our training has
               shaped our methodologies in creating these websites. I had previously worked as a
               research assistant which tracked changes in every edition of the Canadian Medical
               Directory and that influenced my methodology to track edition changes in directories
               and guidebooks. While we all worked on related topics, our specific training and
               skills impacted our methodological choices and thus the end product. And so, while
               these projects are for the greater public and larger community, each site carries its
               author’s fingerprints. Having an individual’s viewpoint does not negate the
               usefulness of these sites, as individuals also shape documentation in community
               archives. However, it is this tie to the individual that puts these projects in
               danger. 
         

            Failures and Finishing
             None of these projects were built in a single attempt, but rather were evolving
               undertakings where the creators have adapted, changed, and experimented. Jan Kurth
               has worked on her site since 2011, my site went live in 2015, and Mattson’s page with
               maps launched on September 17, 2016. Each creator dealt with failures that required
               innovation. Mattson had difficulties with his social media accounts. His Twitter
               project (@WhoNeedsGayBars) never really took off like he thought it would. He
               originally believed that users would communicate with him and follow the project
               through Twitter, but most of his followers were bots. Rather than functioning as a
               news stream about gay bars, as it was originally intended, Mattson uses his site as a
               way to be able to scroll through a timeline of articles .
               I had a similar experience of making assumptions about what users would want and
               initially completely missed the mark. I spent months researching different map-making
               applications that would allow users to upload information to the site. I experimented
               with Nunaliit, Postscrap, Google Social Maps Experience, and Esri’s Story Map
               Crowdsource (beta), and eventually chose Story Map.Picking the right kind of
                  software to create a public map that invited user feedback was particularly
                  difficult in 2013. At first, there was no application that directly suited my
                  needs. Initially I considered Nunaliit and Postscrap, both developed by University
                  of Carleton geographers. Neither fit the exact needs of the project because of the
                  frameworks they necessitated. Further, the Google Social Maps Experience did not
                  give the researcher oversight and editing capabilities over the content, leaving
                  the opportunity for the map to be trolled. On that application, if a map was
                  publicly available, anyone could add or delete data and, because of this, users
                  might be less likely to feel safe uploading their content knowing that it could be
                  changed or deleted by anyone. In 2016, Esri launched Story Map, a map builder that
                  allowed anyone to create an account or use one’s Google profile or Facebook
                  account to post onto the map. Story Map Crowdsource (beta) is an ArcGIS web
                  application designed to collect photos and captions from anyone and display them
                  on a map that Esri kept in beta until 2018. The application was easy to use and
                  configure, and could be used in a web browser on laptop and desktop computers,
                  mobile phones, and tablets. Contributors can sign in with their Facebook, Google,
                  ArcGIS account, or participate as an anonymous guest. Further, creators of the map
                  have oversight over the content. The program thus allows for a good balance of
                  permitting users to not have to commit too much personal information in order to
                  participate, but still know that their contribution is relatively safe. There are
                  some drawbacks however, besides the $2,500 annual subscription fee, which was
                  thankfully covered by McGill University. It was not possible to upload or create a
                  non-editable basemap without it being at risk of deletion, due to the Beta status
                  of the program. Ideally it would have been possible to just export my master
                  Google Map as a kml file, convert it to an ArcGIs readable file, which is readable
                  by ArcGIS, the software Esri relies upon, and then use those points as a
                  background layer over which users would be able to only edit a top layer. Also,
                  currently, users are supposed to upload a photo and do not have the option to
                  solely upload text. As a workaround, I suggested that users just upload a photo of
                  a square and then write their text, but this situation is less than ideal. A
                  positive aspect of this system is that the Esri program is quite user friendly and
                  requires very little web literacy, relative to other mapping software. However,
                  despite the friendly interface, some of these issues dissuaded some potential
                  users. Another issue is that, unlike QGIS, which uses Python, the Esri site does
                  not allow for the development of plugins in the Beta version. Nonetheless, in
                  September 2016, the Feminist Restaurant Crowdsource StoryMap launched and was
                  embedded in The Feminist Restaurant Project website.
                  And after all of that- no one used it. Users preferred emailing me about their own
                  narratives or communicating with me in other ways. The site’s users were not
                  interested in actually making the map themselves, despite saying that they were.
                  People liked the idea of it existing and talked about that being an exciting
                  option but ultimately were not interested in map making. It turns out that my
                  simpler Google maps were preferable for the communities I was engaging
                  with. I later learned that users preferred to communicate with me via email
               and have me make the changes on the map, rather than each person altering the map
               herself. These stories of failure also point to the fact that these projects can
               continuously be improved, begging the question: can a lost project ever truly
               be complete?
            Unlike a published book, public history websites can be updated ad infinitum, forcing
               creators to decide when to end the project. Placing parameters on a project allows
               for a sense of completion. Mattson chose to restrict his project to the 10-year
               timeframe of 2006-2016. However, he explains that I've got a
                  larger project that is using LGBT guidebooks to track the closures of bars for
                  lesbians, and this mapping project turned out to be just an early version of the
                  larger one. In those early stages I thought I was going to find that gay bars were
                  just closing, but it turns out it's a much more complicated picture. Even for
                  lesbian bars, at least three have opened this year. No one has created a Found
                     Womyn's Spaces Blog, so tracking only the closures of what are, in the end,
                  small businesses, doesn't capture the new ones that arise
               . While the Mapping Lost Bars project is complete, it is
               part of a larger, ongoing endeavor. For my project, the completion of my dissertation
               produced one kind of ending. However, as I turn my dissertation into a book
               manuscript, I continue to update the site. Also, as I publish more information about
               the topic of feminist restaurants, including academic articles and non-academic
               books, I include that information on the website. The maps I built originally in 2015
               based off of the women’s/lesbian guidebooks, a kind of methodology that Mattson has
               begun to likewise use to track bar closures, have only been updated a few times since
               the website originally launched. I have considered working with a research assistant
               or information studies scholar to digitize and make word searchable every copy of
               Gaia’s Guides and map every single kind of business mentioned with color codes. I
               have also considered making the map specific down to addresses, rather than just city
               centers and include photos, histories, and personal stories, similar to the NYC LGBT
               Historic Sites Project website. However, I currently do not have the resources to
               enact these changes. After years of keeping The Feminist Restaurant Project updated,
               my work on the site has slowed. Jan Kurth shares a similar sentiment stating,
                     I suppose I could quit at any time and it would be
                     more or less complete. I still see mention of lost lesbian bars now and then,
                     so I'll add those as time permits. Or maybe search for an old ad for a ladies
                     cafe from 1900. But because of a lot more demands on my time these days, I just
                     don't have the same hours to devote to this as I used to. I don't really see an
                     "end goal" as the thing doesn't really have a beginning. It is what it is, I
                     suppose.
                  
            
            Mattson did most of his work over eighteen months. I spent four years actively
               updating the site. Jan Kurth has spent seven years on her site but has decreased her
               rate of posting over the past three years. Between June 2019 and June 2020, she did
               not write a single post. These projects point to the difficulties of sustaining these
               kinds of ventures. “Lost” spaces keep being lost. History keeps expanding. An
               individual’s resources, however, have limitations. The topic of endings speaks to
               larger questions regarding maintenance and preservation. 
         

            Preservation: is lost space doomed to be lost? 
             The process of finding lost spaces is about creating a record. The projects
               discussed in this article host their records online. Rapidly changing file formats,
               domain name ownerships lapsing, and new technologies threaten preservation. The
               struggle to keep resources up-to-date and accessible has led historians and
               archivists to fear that the current era will be the digital Dark Ages for future
               generations. Websites disappear. Head of the British Library's web archiving program,
               Stephen Bury, explained how the program preserved important records that only existed
               online, noting that if we hadn't done that nobody would have
                  access to the information, the photographs, the interviews on that site
               
               
               .Ian Milligan’s WARC project offers another
                  approach to web archiving in a way that allows historians to more easily access
                  data. This project also connects to his work on WALK (Web Archives for
                  Longitudinal Knowledge). Keeping websites functioning and up-to-date is a
               specific struggle that requires constant maintenance, necessitating labor and
               financial resources. While the British Library has financial resources for this kind
               of work, all three of the projects surveyed in this article are maintained by
               individuals without any dedicated institutional funding.
            Maintaining digital resources, especially projects independent of large institutional
               resources, is difficult. Greggor Mattson explains that his site will live on my Google page forever, I guess, but until you asked it never
                  occurred to me that it might be something that would interest an archive. But it's
                  true: who archives the exteriors of the lesbian bars of Salt Lake City or
                  Tulsa?
               . Kurth said she has not given thought of how to preserve
               the work but is interested in ideas. I, too, am unsure of how to proceed. I built the
               site on Google’s Blogger platform so that I would not have to pay hosting fees and
               just pay a modest fee of around fifteen dollars yearly to maintain my domain name.
               However, the site is vulnerable to the whims of Google, which could decide to end
               Blogger and Google Maps. The site also requires frequent maintenance and updates. All
               of this work depends on my donated labor and is vulnerable to my own mortality . Outside of saving the posts as Word file documents and
               saving them on external hard drives and digital storage, personal attempts at
               preservation flounder. When I posed this question to readers of my site, the only
               solution offered was the Internet Archive . The Internet
               Archive, a 501(c)(3) non-profit, is building a digital library of Internet sites and
               other cultural artifacts in digital form; for example, it saved copies of The
               Feminist Restaurant Project 27 times between May 9, 2015 and August 24, 2018. Despite
               the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine preserving 341 billion web pages over the past
               twenty years, it is only useful if users know what they are searching for. Also, it
               seems precarious to depend exclusively on this single site. While the Internet has
               been touted as a democratization of knowledges and a tool for making knowledge more
               accessible, the ephemeral quality of digital resources challenges this narrative of
               accessibility. How do we as public historians and archivists preserve digital
               projects? Is our work fated to disappear?
            As scholars Marika Cifor and Stacy Wood demonstrate, archives and public history
               projects centered on marginalized, particularly LGBTQ+ communities have often decided
               to remain independent and not join with an institution. Elise Chenier likewise
               explains that one of the major concerns expressed about the
                  current shift of LGBTQ materials from community-based archives to institutional
                  libraries, archives, and special collections is that collections will no longer be
                  shaped by LGBTQ praxis
               . They report that organizations such as the Lesbian
               Herstory Archives (LHA) are decidedly suspect of the long-term
                  investment in and commitment to these initiatives [and as a result] many
                  organizations chose to keep collecting efforts autonomous and community driven,
                  ensuring that collections, policies, and materials were not subject to changing
                  priorities within universities
               
               
               . However, as evidenced above, by the example of the
               British Library’s Web Archiving project, institutions provide more funding stability
               and are not predicated on one individual’s circumstances in the same way. 
            Perhaps some compromise can be made. Ann Cvetkovich has proposed Queer Archive Activism that calls for something beyond the financial and
               infrastructural support of the institution, but also requires space for active
               engagement with materials and a space for housing materials that push against
               traditional archival notions of evidentiary value .
               This debate between institution and community driven projects continues 
               . Online history projects serve a kind of counter
               narrative to the erasure or marginalization of LGBTQ+ histories; however, with their
               creation comes new challenges. Since these digital history projects are different
               than community archives and rather than dependent on a small group are so tied to one
               individual, institutionalization within an archive that has the financial and
               technological resources to sustain or retain the project is necessary. To be
               incorporated within that institution would help maintain these projects, which serve
               as valuable resources to understanding LGBTQ+ spatial histories. Moving away from a
               burden on the individual and towards institutionalization will give these projects a
               greater chance of survival. Ideally, community members will be included and the kind
               of engagement that Cvetkovich proposes can exist. As Kurth states, If somebody else wants to take one or more of these places and do
                  more research that's great! Or even come up with their own observations and
                  generalizations based on the data. I have no problem with that at all. I welcome
                  it
               . Mattson and I share a similar sentiment, hoping that our
               work of collecting and retaining will be built upon. In order for the future work to
               be done, these sites must be preserved and institutionalization will enable this
               work. 
         

            Conclusion
            The stakes of preserving the history of lost LGBTQ+ spaces are high. Directors of the
               Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada, Michelle Schwartz and Constance Crompton
               discuss how history-making practices of lesbian feminists offer a model of cultural
               history preservation and transmission for those who create digital resources. They
               write that while this history-making situates researchers and
                  their sisters in relation to lost history, there is something in the perpetual
                  reinvigoration and revisiting of these lists and projects, often started anew
                  every decade, which leads us to ask about the lack of cultural transmission
                  between lesbian generations
               . In particular, they argue that even though individuals
               should maintain a right to privacy and a right to be forgotten, we must also weigh the danger to both feminism and queer politics of hiding our
                  history, forcing each new generation to start anew, with only the haziest
                  stereotypes about previous generations to draw on for strength, or worse, to look
                  on with derision, against the threat of confrontation, doxing, or violence to
                  named activists
               . Without proper preservation lost history projects
               risk being lost or re-forgotten, forcing future generations to repeat the work
               of recovery.
            This article has focused on online history projects that center women’s, lesbian, and
               queer women’s spaces within a greater narrative of reclaiming LGBTQ+ spaces as a way
               to study histories of marginalized peoples. Jan Kurth’s Lost
                  Womyn’s Space, Greggor Mattson’s Mapping Lost Lesbian
                  Bars, and my own project The Feminist Restaurant
                  Project use crowdsourcing, social media, visuals, and mapping in order to
               inspire other researchers, contribute to the collective memory of LGBTQ+ communities,
               and further the creators’ other work. Lost space projects are important. These
               digital projects highlight lost or marginalized historical actors. In the case of the
               endeavors studied in this article, women’s, lesbian, feminist, and queer spaces bring
               attention to histories that have been lost or forgotten and speak to larger
               conversations within history, archival research, and digital humanities about the
               need to document and preserve materials and stories of marginalized communities.
               However, as these projects rely on the efforts of individuals, and are divorced from
               institutional support and self-funded, they are vulnerable to being re-lost or
               re-forgotten. Institutionalization is necessary for their survival and can free
               future generations from needing to repeat this labor. To institutionalize or archive
               an individual project merely ends a single iteration of the work. By preserving these
               sites, my hope is that future generations will build upon and adapt these projects to
               new futures and circumstances.
         

            Acknowledgements
            I would like to acknowledge the helpful feedback I received when presenting this
               research at the Association of Canadian Archivists in 2019. 
         
