Title:  Cross-codex Learning for Reliable Scribe Identification in Medieval
					Manuscripts
Volume:  018
Issue:  1
Date:  23 February 2024
Abstract:  
				Historic scribe identification is a substantial task for obtaining information about the past. Uniform script
					styles, such as the Carolingian minuscule, make it a difficult task for classification to focus on meaningful
					features. Therefore, we demonstrate in this paper the importance of cross-codex training data for CNN based
					text-independent off-line scribe identification, to overcome codex dependent overfitting. We report three main
					findings: First, we found that preprocessing with masked grayscale images instead of RGB images clearly
					increased the F1-score of the classification results. Second, we trained different neural networks on our
					complex data, validating time and accuracy differences in order to define the most reliable network
					architecture. With AlexNet, the network with the best trade-off between F1-score and time, we achieved for
					individual classes F1-scores of up to 0,96 on line level and up to 1.0 on page level in classification. Third,
					we could replicate the finding that the CNN output can be further improved by implementing a reject option,
					giving more stable results. We present the results on our large scale open source dataset – the Codex
					Claustroneoburgensis database (CCl-DB) – containing a significant number of writings from different scribes in
					several codices. We demonstrate for the first time on a dataset with such a variety of codices that
					paleographic decisions can be reproduced automatically and precisely with CNNs. This gives manifold new and
					fast possibilities for paleographers to gain insights into unlabeled material, but also to develop further
					hypotheses.
			
Full Body Text: 

				1 Introduction
				In recent years, there has been a notable surge in the digitization of historical documents, allowing for
					machine processing and providing unprecedented opportunities for researchers, including palaeographers. A
					pivotal challenge lies in the identification of scribes, recognizing the hands responsible for manuscript
					creation. However, this task is inherently time-intensive for researchers like palaeographers and
					codicologists, constraining its scope.
				Simultaneously, the differentiation and recognition of scribal hands represent an essential methodology. This
					capability facilitates the determination of dates, specific scribal hands, or the geographic origins, enabling
					the formulation of insights into the trajectories of medieval scribes across diverse monasteries and
					scriptoria. Such information contributes significantly to our understanding of dating, place of origin, and
					insights into the scribes themselves and their organizational structures , , .
				In European scriptoria the script Carolingian minuscule was used until the second half of 12th
					century for writing and copying books (codices). This Latin script was the first standardized script in the
					medieval period. Although codices typically lack specific notations regarding which scribe wrote particular
					sections, the identification of scribes across various codices is invaluable for understanding scriptoria
					organization and the movement of codices and scribes between monasteries.
				The historic auxiliary science of paleography addresses, among other aspects, the identification of scribes
					based on distinct, scribe-typical features in their writing. However, given the sheer volume of codex pages,
					this task remains tedious and time-consuming, demanding a high level of domain expertise. Automation through
					machines holds promise for expediting and enhancing the assignment of scribal hands, thereby relieving
					palaeographers from laborious and repetitive tasks, making the process faster and more comprehensive.
				For instance, the library of Stift Klosterneurburg, amassed over the past 900 years, boasting nearly 300,000
					copies. This remarkable collection, dating back to the 12th century, exemplifies the potential of automated
					techniques in efficiently identifying scribes within the vast repository of codex pages .
				Consequently, only a limited amount of medieval codices has been investigated with a focus on scribe
					identification. The automation utilizing pattern recognition and machine learning allows for larger amounts of
					material. However, to the best of our knowledge data of most automation-based approaches are either limited to
					even only one , ,  or a few different codices or include material from way larger time periods
					(e.g. , ).
				To overcome these shortcomings, we investigate automated scribe identification on a large dataset we
					compiled: The CCl-DB . This dataset contains 51 individual codices with a total
					amount of 17071 pages. These codices originate from the library of Klosterneuburg Abbey and were written in
					the late 12th century in Carolingian minuscule , .
					The scarcity of information about the scribes underscores the significant value of this new dataset and its
					associated processing capabilities.
				We are aiming to answer two central questions:
						Can the scribe assignments coming from decades of work by paleographic experts , ,  be successfully
							modelled and predicted?
						If so, can we use the models to predict scribes for codex pages that have unclear scribe assignments
							or no scribe assignments at all?
					A substantial potential data specific risk seen in work by others that could render our work useless is
					that we could model not only script specific features but also book specific features such as the parchment
					and page margins. To mitigate this risk, we identified scribes that have been found in at least 3 codices. The
					subset we use contains 25200A typical single column page contains 31 or 32 lines. The vast majority of
						our books is in single column layout, hence we can roughly estimate that the 25200 lines correspond to 800
						pages. random lines uniformly distributed over 7 scribes in 31 different historic codices, in order
					to train the models to recognize the scribe without codex specific features (see
						Figure 1).
				In the last decade, convolutional neural networksRecently, artificial neural networks have demonstrated
						remarkable efficiency in handling unstructured data, including images, text, and speech. Convolutional
						Neural Networks (CNNs), as a specialized architecture, have proven highly beneficial in image processing by
						adeptly learning spatial hierarchies of features. (CNNs) have proven to efficiently classify writers
					in modern and historic context and other tasks such as segmentation ,
					optical character recognition , and writer identification , .
				For our classification model we compared several general purpose object and concept detection CNNs as well as
					specific architectures for scribe identification (see Table 3). Surprisingly, the
					classic AlexNet  provided the best trade-off between F1-score and time. We
					show that we can distinguish the scribes described by paleographic experts and even identify potential wrong
					scribe assignments. Furthermore, in combination with the reject option introduced by Cilia et al. (2020a) we demonstrate that we can reliably predict the scribes for codices
					with unclear or missing scribe assignments.
				
					Examples from the CCl-DB  of three lines of different codices from one
						scribe. The ink and parchment appearance differs, although it’s written from the same scribe (class A 30)
							, . Top: CCl 206, middle: CCl 197, bottom: CCl
						217.
					
					Three differing lines of handwritten Carolingian miniscule
				
				In this paper, we focus on three major issues:
				
					the importance of cross-codex based training data for automatic scribe identification
					the feasibility of training a model based on scribe assignments by the paleographers Haidinger (2010, 1983, 1991) and Lackner (2012)
					the necessity of exploiting the confidence in scribe predictions to reveal uncertainties in the
						dataset.
				
				The latter is a central requirement, as there is no objective ground truth for scribe assignments for the
					medieval codices we are using. Our contribution in this paper is threefold:
				Firstly, we demonstrate the necessity of book independent training of scribe models, which has been neglected
					in other studies. Secondly, we demonstrate that contrary to the results of Xing and Qiao (2016) standard architectures are sufficiently accurate to reliably identify
					medieval scribes in a classification pipeline. Thirdly, our work consequently facilitates comprehensive and
					convincing studies on large datasets and allows new insights into the historic monastic life and the
					relationships between the monasteries.The code for the experiments is publicly accessible: https://gitlab.rlp.net/studiengang-digitale-methodik/abschlussarbeiten/ma-repo/-/tree/main/experiments
				
				The paper is structured as follows: after an overview about related work in Section
						2 we outline the dataset in Section 3. In Section 4 we explain the applied methods for scribe identification. We show and discuss the results
					in Section 5 and finally conclude the paper in Section
						6.
			

				2 Related work
				Computer-aided historic handwritten document analysis includes segmentation, text recognition, dating and
					writer identification as well as verification. Segmentation usually separates the written or drawn content
					from the carrier material (such as parchment or paper) , . Based on this, a possible next step is handwritten text recognition (HTR)
						. Either the segments or the written content alone or a combination of both
					modalities allow further investigations like dating, writer verification ,
						 and identification , , .
				Different processes for scribe identification can be used, such as text-dependent and text-independent.
					Text-dependent  methods allow identifying the writer on particular characters or
					words, whereas text-independent  approaches can be applied on new unseen
					content. Two kinds of handwritten text patterns can be used: on-line and offline writer identification.
					On-line  systems work with time series of the formation process, while off-line
						 solutions are limited to the images of the written text document.
				Writer identification is a strong topic in document analysis and therefore much discussed. In the last years,
					a variety of solutions have been provided. These methods can be grouped into codebook-based and codebook-free
					methods. Codebook-based refer to a codebook that serves as a background model. This model is based on
					statistical features like in . The codebook-free methods include for example
					the width of ink traces, which was used from Brink et al. (2021) to
					predict the writer in medieval and modern handwritten documents, or the hinge feature provided by  in order to identify writers in handwritten English text in the IAM-dataset . Further, there have been strong results in using the Scale-Invariant Feature
					Transform (SIFT) for writer identification , ,
						.
				In recent years, the number of Deep LearningDeep learning is a subset of machine learning that involves
						neural networks with multiple layers (deep neural networks) to model and process complex patterns in
						data. (DL) based studies in document analysis increased drastically , , . As mentioned in the introduction, the
					interest in using such techniques is due to their ability to provide powerful state-of-the-art solutions in an
					efficient and reliable way. During the training, the DL model learns the best fitting features for the
					classification. Therefore, no handcrafted features are required. For example, Fiel and Sablatnig (2015) demonstrated the strong performance of DL by employing CNNs for scribe
					identification on modern datasets. Xing and Qiao (2016) performed a writer
					identification on the modern IAM and the HWDB1.1 dataset. They developed a special multi-stream CNN
					architecture based on AlexNet and outperformed previous approaches on handcrafted features. Cilia et al. (2020a) demonstrated a comparison between deep learning and handcrafted
					features on the Avila Bible that is written in Carolingian minuscule. These classical features,
					as Cilia et al. call them, are handcrafted features, that have been developed in cooperation with
					paleographers. The results of their studies emphasize the effectiveness of deep learning features in contrast
					to the handcrafted features.
				In our research, we investigate scribe identification in contrast to writer
					identification, since the specific individual of the writing is generally not known for our material. Scribe
					identification is discussed in a medieval context only in a very limited range, like at the International
					Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR) competitions  or in
					conjunction with the Avila bible . However, the aforementioned datasets are of
					limited use for our goals. The Avila bible is literally only one codex and consequently does not allow
					cross-codex scribe identification. The datasets used in the historical ICDAR competitions ,  span time periods of many centuries, and
					hence include different scripts and carrier materials. Thus, scribe identification in the large amounts of
					medieval codices in Europe’s libraries is still a challenge and our approach allows novel insights as it
					focuses on a wide range of codices of several scribes in the short period of the late 12th century.
			

				3 Dataset
				We perform experiments on a subset (see Table 1) of seven scribes provided by
					the CCl-DB . We selected the scribes which have contributed to as many books as
					possible to allow cross-codex evaluation. Samples in the dataset were handwritten on parchment in
						Carolingian minuscule (see Figure 1 and Figure 2) on one- and two-column pages. These codices have been written down in the scriptorium of
					Klosterneuburg in the last third of the 12th century. The data is provided by the Scribe ID AISee: https://research.fhstp.ac.at/en/projects/scribe-id-ai
					 project and has been labelled by paleographic experts based on the activity of the paleographers
					Haidinger (2010, 1983, 1991) and Lackner (2012). 52 labelled codices
					are provided in the CCl-DB. This database enables new possibilities within document analysis and especially in
					handwriting recognition.
				
					Subset of the CCl-DB. The dataset for our experiments is a subset of the seven common scribes of the
						CCl-DB . We generated a dataset, with two groups of codices – the Training
							Codices and the Separate Codices. From the Training Codices we choose for every class
						3600 random lines, that are uniformly distributed over all books. In total these are 25200 lines that are
						separated into training, validation and test data (Test A) according to the ratio of 60%, 20% and 20%
						respectively. The separate books are used for an extra test set Test B. There are up to 3000 lines of one
						class, depending on the codex-size.
					
						Class
						Training codices (Test A and Test B)
						Separate codices (Test B only)
					
					
						Lines per codex
						#Codices
						Codices
						Lines per codex
						#Codices
						Codices
					
					
						A 30
						450
						8
						30, 31, 197, 206, 226, 246, 256, 257
						1500
						2
						32217
					
					
						A 259
						1200
						3
						209, 259, 949
						1754
						1
						706
					
					
						B 259
						720
						5
						259, 622, 706, 212, 671
						1439
						1
						246
					
					
						A 20
						1200
						3
						21, 28, 39
						3000
						1
						20
					
					
						B 20
						900
						4
						22, 195, 216, 764
						119
						1
						20
					
					
						A 215
						1200
						3
						215, 219, 703
						3000
						1
						245
					
					
						A 258
						1800
						2
						258, 707
						3000
						1
						203
					
				
				
					Image data of the CCl-DB  (CCl 20, S. 3r, hand A 20 ). The CCl-DB provides the codices page by page (left) and on line-level
						(right-top). The line-level images are produced automatically by the segmentation of Transkribus . The neural network classification works with squared images, therefore we
						cropped the line images into squares and resized them into the network input size.
					
					A page of text divided into lines, then into individual glyphs
				
				To the best of our knowledge, there is no comparable database available that provides the workings of many
					medieval scribes in various codices and in such a short period of time.
			

				4 Methods for Scribe Identification
				This section will introduce the pipeline of our line-based scribe identification approach. The pipeline is
					grouped into three main parts (see Figure 3). In the first part – the image
					preprocessing – we focus on providing the following network input images that are reduced to their scribe
					specific information. The second part presents the neural network classification approach. Here we compare
					different CNNs as image classifiers for scribe identification. Finally, the third part covers the
					post-processing which generates the final score based on line- and page-level. This is where we introduce the
					computation of the line score and the reject option – a method to improve the prediction. All parts will be
					detailed in the following.
				
					Overall procedure of the proposed scribe recognition system. The rounded boxes symbolize data, whereas
						the angular boxes show processes.
					
					Flowchart of image processing steps resulting in page and line scores
				
				
					4.1 Image preprocessing
					The dataset contains not only the codex pages, but also the extracted lines. The line data is usually
						correctly extracted from the pages, however there are some small snippets with no noticeable content in the
						dataset. As image lines are generally of wide aspect ratio, we use a simple heuristic (\(\text{width}/\text{height}\leq5\)) to skip these uninformative
						snippets already in the step of preprocessing.
					For studying the optimal input image data we generated grayscale images and masked grayscale images
						additionally to the RGB data (see Figure 4). When we maskedImage masking
							is a technique of selectively concealing or revealing specific portions of an image. In this example,
							masking is done by removing the parchment/background in the image, to focus the model's attention on the
							features of the handwriting. the images we followed the example of De Stefano et al. (2018). We applied their fixed threshold value, equal to 135, to
						separate the ink and the parchment of the grayscale images (see Figure 4). In
						related work , , , , binarization is often applied to text images. However, since our
						masking does not work reliably enough to produce meaningful binarization, we omit this step in this
						work.
					
						Example for the preprocessing (CCl 212, S. 1r, hand B 259 ). The lines of
							the CCl-DB  are provided as RGB images (top). From these, we converted the
							images to grayscale (middle). The masked grayscaled images are produced by removing the background from
							the ink.
						
						The three-step preprocessing sequence for scribe identification
					
					As already mentioned, the lines of the CCl-DB are of different aspect ratio, but the networks we
						implemented are working with a fixed input size. In order to handle the different lengths of the lines, we
						followed the patch scanning strategy of Xing and Qiao (2016). First, the
						images have been resized in height to the specific network input image height, while maintaining the aspect
						ratio of the line. Afterwards, we cropped the lines from left to right into patches (see Figure 2). This sliding window comprises the network specific input image width. Due to the
						large dataset (see Table 1), there is no need for data augmentation.Data
							augmentation can be used to enlarge the dataset. In image classification it involves applying various
							transformations (such as rotation, flipping, and scaling) to the existing training dataset to create
							additional diverse samples, enhancing the model's ability to generalize to different variations of the
							input images. Hence, we generated patches with no overlap. Only one overlap occurs at the last
						image of each line, as the last patch of the line is generated by positioning the sliding window at the end
						of the line. Finally, we scaled and normalized the patches.
				
				
					4.2 Patch level classification
					Xing and Qiao (2016) achieved high identification accuracies with their
						customized CNN’s on the line level data of the IAM  dataset. They optimized
						AlexNet to the task of writer identification on the IAM dataset and denoted the architecture Half
						DeepWriter. Next, they developed the DeepWriter architecture, which is an improvement of Half DeepWriter
						that enables the computation of two sequential image patches in a single pass with a multi-stream
						architecture. Xing and Qiao showed that DeepWriter produces the best results on the line level data of the
						IAM dataset. Therefore, we implemented these three auspicious architectures as per description of Xing and
						Qiao (2016), when we tested the potential of preprocessed images on our
						data (see Table 1).
					Additionally, we compared several other general-purpose object and concept detection architectures in our
						study to find the best one suited to our specific data. For this purpose, we used models provided by
						Torchvision  (see Table 3) and only adapted the
						input layer to the grayscale images and the output layer to the seven classes.
					As shown in different studies, pre-training and fine-tuning a CNN can lead to better results  , . Xing and Qiao (2016) demonstrated this on the IAM  and the HWDB  dataset. Therefore, we trained the described models on the IAM dataset,
						fine-tuned them on our data and compared the results with the from scratch trained weights.
					The models have been trained with a batch size of 32 over 10 epochs with a learning rate of \(1∗10^{−5}\) on ADAM. The error was calculated with the cross
						entropy. Over all ten epochs, the instance of the model that performed best on the validation data has been
						saved for the next steps of the experiments.
				
				
					4.3 Postprocessing
					We pursue a patch, line and page level classification, but as already described, the network classification
						is on patch level. To compute the line and page score, we follow the example of Xing and Qiao (2016). They calculate the final score vector \(f_i\) for the \(j^{th}\) writer,
						of all patches \(N\) of one line: \(f_i=\frac{1}{N}\sum{^N_{i=1}}f_{ij}\). This averaged Softmax output serves as
						the basis for the final step of the post-processing – the reject option.
					Cilia et al. (2020a) proposed the reject option to generate more
						reliable results for the writer identification on the Avila bible. They showed that sometimes it is better
						to withdraw a precarious decision than accepting all predictions. In such a case, they reject the prediction
						with the reject option.
					We used the line score as a probability distribution to check the probabilities for all writers. As Cilia
						et al. explained, the error-reject curve shows the impact of the reject rate to the wrong predictions and
						allows finding the optimal threshold for rejecting a prediction. Our reject rate is given by the line score
						of one writer. The reject rate corresponds to the wrong predictions.
				
			

				5 Results
				The purpose of this study was to train a model that classifies reliable and efficiently scribes in
					cross-codex data. We want to enable the automatic continuation of the work of paleography experts following
					their example, in order to allow research in large scale. In this study we would like to find a model that is
					not only reliable but also fast in processing, as it is the basis for research on active learning.
				In Table 2 we show the importance of cross-codex test data and the risk of
					overfitting.
				In the evaluation of our scribe classification pipeline, we found: 
						Image preprocessing plays a key role in cross-codex scribe identification. In comparison to RGB
							images, masked grayscale images roughly doubled the F1-score in the classification task.
						Further, we showed that AlexNet provides very fast, and among the most reliable predictions in
							classifying the scribes of our data set.
						Contrary to expectations, pre-training the network on the IAM database leads to worse results, which
							is why we omitted this step.
					
				Applying the best fitting trained model, it turned out that it is very effective and even indicates incorrect
					data.
				Moreover, we introduce the reject option on our dataset in order to get rid of precarious classifications and
					found that it underlines the results.
				Finally, we deployed the pipeline to processes open paleographic topics.
				
					5.1 Cross-codex data
					The CCl-DB provides handwritings of several scribes in different codices. Therefore, we compared two test
						sets (see Table 2) to check if the networks tend to learn codex-specific
						features. For this experiment we trained the architectures AlexNet, Half Deep Writer and DeepWriter.
						Referring to Xing and Qiao (2016) these networks are suitable for
						handwriting identification. We found, that the test set Test B which contains test samples from books which
						have not been used for training (see Table 1) is more comprehensive than Test A
						because all three trained networks performed better on Test A whether the input images have been RGB
						grayscale or masked. We conclude, that the networks learned codex-specific features in Test A. Therefore, we
						used the test set Test B for further experiments to obtain more reliable results.
					
						F1-score for image preprocessing on patch level. Preprocessed input images and their impact on the
							classification of the test data. The experiment was performed on the three different networks AlexNet,
							Half DeepWriter and Deepwriter. As a result, the averaged F1-score is given. We provide two F1-scores of
							separate test sets (see Table 1).
						
							Data
							Network
							RGB
							GS
							GS mask
						
						
							Test A
							AlexNet
							0.25
							0.56
							0.64
						
						
							Deep Writer
							0.25
							0.44
							0.57
						
						
							Half Deep Writer
							0.25
							0.41
							0.54
						
						
							∅
							0.25
							0.47
							0.58
						
						
							Test B
							AlexNet
							0.30
							0.53
							0.60
						
						
							Deep Writer
							0.26
							0.32
							0.42
						
						
							Half Deep Writer
							0.35
							0.30
							0.38
						
						
							∅
							0.30
							0.38
							0.47
						
					
				
				
					5.2 Classification pipeline
					 To find the best type of input image for the CNN classification, we preprocessed the dataset in three
						different ways. We compared RGB images with grayscale and masked grayscale images and found that masked
						grayscale images produce the best F1-score in the test data (see Table 2).
						Consequently, the following experiments are based on this powerful image preprocessing. The masking has
						proven to be effective enough even though we used a simple threshold-based algorithm that sometimes does not
						reliably distinguish between ink and parchment. Hence, we could replace it in further studies by a better
						learning-based solution.
					
						Network performance on patch level. Nine different CNN architectures are trained on the data of Table 1 to compare their performance on patch level. The weighted averaged
							F1-Score we use, is measured on Test B (see Table 1) and rounded to two
							decimal places. The training-time is given in rounded minutes. The models marked by * originate from the
							torchvision library.
						
							Network
							F1 Test B
							Time
							Image (height, width)
						
						
							Densenet*
							0.61
							503
							224, 224
						
						
							AlexnetNet
							0.60
							115
							227, 227
						
						
							ResNet18*
							0.56
							164
							224, 224
						
						
							Inception v3*
							0.55
							683
							299, 299
						
						
							VGG*
							0.53
							610
							224, 224
						
						
							SqueezeNet*
							0.50
							135
							224, 224
						
						
							MNASNet*
							0.43
							196
							224, 224
						
						
							DeepWriter
							0.42
							66
							113, 226
						
						
							Half DeepWriter
							0.38
							62
							113, 113
						
					
					As there are different networks available for image classification, we compare in Table 3 nine powerful architectures. AlexNet achieves with an F1-score of 0.60 on patch level and
						115 minutes training time the best trade-off between F1-score and time. Only DenseNet achieved a small
						improvement of 0.01 in comparison to AlexNet but with a training time of 503 minutes it is much less time
						efficient. Even though latest state-of-the-art models performed better, with a growing number of parameters,
						the processing time would be impractical for our purpose, and as already shown (see
							Table 2) data-centric approaches such as masked grayscale images are more influential. Given these
						F1 and training time results, we claim AlexNet to be best suited for our purposes and thus used it for all
						further experiments.
					To understand whether pre-training is beneficial, we follow the example of Xing and Qiao (2016). Accordingly, we pre-trained AlexNet on 301 writers of the IAM dataset
						and fine-tuned the model on the CCl-DB data. The pre-trained and fine-tuned model generates an F1-score of
						0.58 whereas the from scratch trained model outperformed this result with an F1-score of 0.60 on page level.
						Because of the lower F1-score of the pre-trained and finetuned model model, we assume that there are not
						enough shared features between the CCl-DB and the IAM dataset. However, as shown by Studer et al. (2019), models in general benefit from pre-training. We assume, that larger
						and more comprehensive datasets than the IAM handwriting database could improve our model.
				
				
					5.3 Automatic paleographic classification
					To figure out, which reliability values can be reached by the trained AlexNet, we evaluated the data of
						Test B. The main experiments are performed on line level (see Figure 7), but
						we also provide test results on patch and page level (see Table 4).
						Furthermore, we show the confusion matrix of the same test data on page level in Figure 5. We observe, that the line level classification generally reinforces the patch level
						results and the page level classification generally reinforces the line level results.
					Another particularity in Table 4 and Figure 5
						are the dichotomous scores. Five of seven classes are predicted well, such as F1-scores up to 1.0 on page
						level and 0.96 on line level in the case of A20 (see Table 4). Only the two
						classes B 20 and A 215 seem to be less precisely predicted on the test data. We observe low F1-Scores of 0.0
						on page level as well as 0.24 and 0.06 on line level respectively. However, the low predictions for the two
						classes B 20 and A 215 strengthen the hypothesis of a powerful model as investigations of our paleographic
						partners revealed the labelling of these classes to be most probably incorrect. The paleographers actually
						labeled this test data as several not defined classes. Thus, the classification of the two classes proposed
						by the network might indeed correspond to the correct scribes and could therefore give new insight. However,
						confirmation by future research using our approach would be needed.
					
						Results of Test B. F1-score on Test B(see Table 1). The F1-score is
							measured on patch- (p) and line- (l) and page-level (pg). The weighted averaged test data are random lines
							of unseen books, as these lines are of various length, they result in a different number of patches. Due
							to the image preprocessing the total of samples is slightly lower than in Table
								1.
						
							Scribe
							F1-p
							F1-l
							F1-pg
							#-p
							#-l
							#-pg
						
						
							B 259
							0.60
							0.76
							0.85
							31309
							1340
							42
						
						
							A 259
							0.79
							0.94
							0.98
							34004
							1672
							52
						
						
							A 30
							0.62
							0.76
							0.74
							56173
							2805
							66
						
						
							A 20
							0.90
							0.96
							1.00
							71565
							2814
							72
						
						
							B 20
							0.05
							0.24
							0.00
							1957
							111
							3
						
						
							A 215
							0.07
							0.06
							0.00
							65689
							2897
							92
						
						
							A 258
							0.68
							0.79
							0.83
							67520
							2893
							96
						
					
					
					
						Confusion matrix of the data of Test B on page level (see Table
							3).
						
						a matrix showing truth vs prediction where light colors represent higher scores
					
				
				
					5.4 Reject Option
					 To investigate whether implementing a reject option improves results we tested the five classes (B 259, A
						259, A 30, A 20, A 258) on it. These are the classes shown previously without conflicts in the test data of
						Test B. Figure 6 shows that increasing the reject rate minimizes the error.
						The reject curves of Figure 6 drop quickly, indicating a strong influence of
						the threshold. As Cilia et al. (2020a) explained, the reject option is
						therefore suitable for the scribe identification on the CCl-DB. Therefore, we choose a reject option based
						on the threshold of 40 %, as it ensures low error with high sample rate. As class B 20 and A 215 are
						difficult to evaluate from the test data, the threshold is adapted to 60%.
					
						Error-reject curves for five different scribes on the data of Test B on line level (see Table 1).
						
						a line graph where high steady y-values drop sharply after 40%
					
				
				
					5.5 Into the wild: Using our model on data with unknown scribes
					The central aim of our approach is to contribute new insights for paleography. Therefore, we examined
						sections from the codices that the experts limited to one scribe, although they could not determine the
						exact individual. As shown in Figure 7 the trained model contributes
						meaningful classifications for these parts. The first plot can be considered as reference, this is the part
						of CCl 214 written by A 30. In this example, the model recognizes class A 30 as main class. The remaining
						six plots can be differentiated into two groups. On the one hand there are plots b, d and f which give
						significant results that refer to one scribe class B 20, A 30 and A 215 respectively. On the other hand,
						there are plots like in c, e and g that produce diffuse classification, not focused on one class. We
						conclude that these less significant predictions are caused either by scribes the model hasn’t learned yet
						or by more than one scribe.
					
						Scribe identification on line level and with reject option. All figures are based on the parts of one
							scribe. These new codices are labeled with one given (a) and six unknown scribes (b-g).
						
						7 comparative bar graphs where the "reject option" yields more favorable results
					
				
			

				6 Conclusion
				In this paper, we want to study the question of how to train a reliable and efficient model that allows
					cross-codex scribe identification in the strongly standardized medieval Carolingian minuscule of the CCl-DB.
					To this aim, we first figured out the risk of codex specific overfitting and showed the importance of
					cross-codex data to overcome this issue. We also found, that the reduction of RGB-images to grayscale masked
					images helps the network to focus on scribe specific features and leads to significantly better results.
				After comparing several networks, AlexNet was used in our pipeline to generate a classification on patch,
					line and page level. Finally, we improved the final score by implementing the reject option.
				One of the limitations of the proposed method is the basic segmentation, which is challenging on the historic
					parchment. This limitation leads to a natural direction of future work, focusing on improving the segmentation
					method that also allows binarization. The outcomes of these investigations currently form the foundation for
					advancing automated scribe identification. The recognition system described in this paper has been integrated
					into the backend of an active learning application, while concurrently, we are collaboratively developing an
					intuitively accessible application with continuous annotations in close cooperation with paleographers. The
					inclusion of a visual interface will empower experts to scrutinize and refine predictions, facilitating an
					iterative process of retraining our model and validating it against new scribe hypotheses. These findings aim
					to unlock novel possibilities and analytical tools, fostering a more profound comprehension of diverse
					medieval scriptoria. Going forward, this research endeavors to bring researchers closer to addressing open
					questions regarding the organizational aspects of scriptoria in the high medieval monasteries of (Lower)
					Austria, with additional evidence and interpretations serving as valuable support.
			

				
				
					Funding
					This work has received funding from the Lower Austrian FTI-Call 2018 under grant agreement No FTI18-004
						(project Active Machine Learning for Automatic Scribe Identification in 12th Century Manuscripts). Moreover,
						the work was supported by Erasmus+ from the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD).
				
				
					Acknowledgments
					We would like to thank the team of the Klosterneuburg abbey library, as well as the team of the institute
						of Creative\Media/Technologies of the St. Polten University of Applied Sciences for their help.
				
			
