Title:  Open, Equitable, and
               Minimal: Teaching Digital Scholarly Editing North and South
Volume:  016
Issue:  2
Date:  25 June 2022
Abstract:  
            
            In this paper, we present our preliminary reflections on whether minimal computing as
               a practice can extend beyond computing done under some
                  technological constraints to served as a common ground between different
               digital humanities research dynamics in the Global North and South. We explore this
               question by commenting on our experience in developing and teaching an undergraduate
               course to students enrolled from both the University of Maryland, College Park in the
               United States and Universidad del Salvador in Buenos Aires, Argentina. The class was
               delivered for its first iteration in September–November 2020 and introduced students
               to digital publishing and textual scholarship of bilingual Spanish and English texts,
               presenting minimal computing as a shared set of values including: use of open
               technologies, ownership of data and code, and reduction in computing
               infrastructure.
         
Full Body Text: 


            Introduction
            What if minimal computing principles extended beyond computing
                  done under some technological constraints
               , but also were at the core of a global digital
               humanities commons? Could this commons model a set of shared principles and
               technologies to empower students and scholars to work autonomously on their own
               projects? With these questions in mind, researchers from the University of Maryland,
               College Park in the United States and the National Scientific and Technical Research
               Council (Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, CONICET) in
               Argentina designed a joint course, delivered for the first time from
               September–November 2020, to teach minimal computing approaches to North and South
               American students. The class introduced students to digital publishing and textual
               scholarship with minimal computing presented as a shared set of values: use of open
               technologies, ownership of data and code, reduction in computing infrastructure and,
               consequently, environmental impact.
            Minimal computing can be a solution for the development of projects in the Global
               South, where access to infrastructure such as web hosting or even reliable and
               affordable Internet access is limited for humanities students and faculty. Our
               course, which will continue through 2022 at minimum, positions minimal computing as
               an approach that can bring together students from the North and the South in the same
               class — through video conference and other means — to discuss and address the
               barriers and opportunities for a more open and equitable global digital
               humanities.
            In this essay we will discuss: 1) the open and minimal technologies we use for
               teaching students to create digital scholarly editions and why we have chosen them;
               2) the bilingual teaching materials adopted and why we chose them; and 3) how
               students collaborate online in Spanish and English in small cross-institutional
               groups using Spanish and English texts from early colonial times in the Americas.
            Through our work on this course, we are not only offering training on specific
               minimal computing skills but are also contributing to much-needed analysis of the
               different technological and academic contexts around the world: issues related to
               infrastructure, language, digital literacy, and Open Science practices. We seek to
               raise awareness about the different kinds of digital humanities around the world,
               which will both benefit our students and make a case to the global digital humanities
               community that technology cannot be owned by anyone, but must be used and contributed
               to by all.
         

            From Global to Open Digital Humanities
            While Anglophone digital humanities has established itself as part of many graduate
               and postgraduate programs, summer schools, centers, labs, books, and journals, the
               Latin American and Spanish humanidades digitales is still defining itself and
               pondering how to devise a curriculum of its own .
               However, both share a defining feature: their continuous growth as part of our
               contemporary digital and digitized world. This shared feature has led many scholars
               to redefine their work under the impact of the digital and to consider the
               consequences of a global turn that has put into question many aspects of their
               academic, linguistic, and technical practices . 
            The debate over a global digital humanities resulted in a considerable shift
               in 2013 when the Global Outlook Digital Humanities (GO::DH) Special Interest Group of
               the Alliance for the Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO) was founded. GO::DH
               pointed out the importance of problematizing digital humanities as a field built and
               understood from multiple perspectives , something that the
               Alliance for Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO) addressed both in DH2015 in
               Australia — named Global Digital Humanities — and in the
               panel on diversity in the field of digital humanities at DH2016 in Kraków . This trend is also confirmed by the annual Global
               Digital Humanities Symposium that has been taking place at Michigan State University
               since 2016 and in initiatives such as the IFLA Special Interest Group More
                  information about the Digital Humanities/Digital Scholarship Special Interest
                  Group of the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions
                  (IFLA) can be found at https://www.ifla.org/ES/node/25695.  and the Asociación Argentina
               de Humanidades Digitales (AAHD) 2016 conference, Local
                  Constructions in Global Contexts
               . Programme and Proceedings of the AAHD
                  Conference Local Constructions in Global Contexts  is
                  available at https://www.aacademica.org/aahd.congreso.  Another relevant event
               that proves how the global dimension of digital humanities has had an impact on its
               organizational core is the process initiated in 2016 with the goal of changing the
               governance and the financial model of ADHO, expanding its boundaries to regions of
               the Global South . 
            Nonetheless, despite the benefits that we could expect from a global digital
               humanities, it is crucial to remember that the concept of the global is
               complex and even contradictory, especially when related to technology in all its
               facets. In the context of global digital humanities, technology includes:
                  software architecture, or the availability and cost of software
               solutions and the expertise to develop and adopt them; infrastructure as
                  hardware, or the availability and cost of computers, peripherals, and other
               instruments capable of supporting the research software and approaches a digital
               humanities project may need; and infrastructure as long-term
                  preservation, or the strategies, data management plans, and institutional
               support needed for guaranteeing the availability of digital humanities research
               outputs in the future. This technology, as Anne Cong-Huyen argues, is never
                  neutral or truly global:
            [D]igital and electronic technologies are of particular
                  importance because they are often perceived as being neutral, without any
                  intrinsic ethics of their own, when they are the result of material inequalities
                  that play out along racial, gendered, national, and hemispheric lines. Not only
                  are these technologies the result of such inequity, but they also reproduce and
                  reinscribe that inequity through their very proliferation and use, which is
                  dependent upon the perpetuation of global networks of economic and social
                  disparity and exploitation.
               
            The term global moreover, is itself a paradox: global impacts
               are perceived differently at local and regional levels, and there is no single and
               unique process of globalization, but rather a set of different processes with global
               dimensions. For example, while Global North digital humanities scholars have focused
               on understanding diversity and awareness of linguistic privilege, interrogating the
               degree to which global technological practices can exclude participation in the field
                  
               
               
               
               , the Spanish-speaking humanidades digitales situation is
               multifaceted. Undoubtedly, even though Spain and many countries in Latin America and
               the Caribbean share a language, their social, cultural, epistemic, and economic
               contexts are completely different. Spain is a country in the European Union, while
               Latin America is the most unequal region in the world that groups more than twenty
               countries that have been experiencing the impact of labor-saving technologies since
               the beginning of the century . Also, it is important to
               note that in Latin America the free, public dissemination of research has long been
               understood primarily as a public good managed by the academic community. Scielo, the
               largest open access harvesting platform in the region, was founded in 1997, five
               years before the 2002 meetings in Budapest, Bethesda, and Berlin that produced the
               first open access declarations 
               
               . Non-commercial, open access publication — without
               article processing charges (APC) An APC is a fee paid to the publisher to make
                  an article free at point of access. Whilst Open Access principles promote free
                  availability of research and scholarly output, research papers are not cost-free
                  to produce. The cost of publication is moved from the reader (via subscriptions
                  and pay-walls) to the author (via the APC) . —
               is the standard method of dissemination in Latin America and is widely understood as
               a key engine of knowledge democratization.
            Reflections on how digital humanities could benefit from open approaches such as
               these have been part of manifestos and debates in the last ten years but have rarely
               been systemized. Todd Presner made the first emphatic assertion: The digital is the realm of the open: open source, open resources [...]. Anything
                  that attempts to close this space should be recognized for what it is: the
                  enemy
               . One year later, the Paris Manifesto focused on the
               technical aspects of what open means in digital humanities: [W]e call for open access to data and metadata, which must be
                  documented and interoperable, both technically and conceptually
               . However, many other scholars use the term open to
               represent values of collaboration 
                or authority . According to Kathleen Fitzpatrick, The key problems
                     that we face again and again are social rather than technological in nature:
                     problems of encouraging participation in collaborative and collective projects,
                     of developing sound preservation and sustainability practices, of inciting
                     institutional change, of promoting new ways of thinking about how academic work
                     might be done in the coming years
                  . In the past few years, in part due to the
               influence of scholars from the Global South, the concept of open digital humanities
               scholarship has been given greater consideration. In a workshop at the 2018 ADHO
               conference, the debate was framed in this way: 
            What would it take to bring DH [digital humanities] into a more
                  global openness, not only in terms of access but also in terms of methods, best
                  practices and opportunities for collaboration? And what could this openness look
                  like set against the backdrop of the long-standing and highly developed open
                  access movement in Latin America and the Caribbean? 
            Any reflection on a global digital humanities should think and teach our students
               about the many important questions related to power and inequality, like the extreme
               asymmetry in research outputs between scholars from well-resourced and
               not-so-well-resourced countries, sometimes understood in terms of Global North and
               South . And by outputs we do not only mean articles or
               books, but also the core of digital humanities scholarship: online web-based projects
               and the ways in which we teach them.
         

            Open and Global Digital Scholarly Editing through Minimal Computing
            In recent years, Open Science has emerged as: 
            [...] the practice of science in such a way that others can
                  collaborate and contribute, where research data, lab notes and other research
                  processes are freely available, under terms that enable reuse, redistribution and
                  reproduction of the research and its underlying data and methods.
               
            
            Digital technologies and infrastructures play a significant role in the open
               dissemination of knowledge. Surprisingly, even though Digital
                  Humanities is a technologically embedded field and epistemic technologies are bound to play a significant role
               , digital humanities critical literature hasn’t focused
               on the benefits of Open Science for enabling collaborative, scalable, and long
               lasting global research. Marcel Knöchelmann argues that there is not an open
                  discourse in the humanities comparable to those in the sciences . For example, digital scholarly editing and
               digital scholarly editions (DSEs) are not always perceived as open.
             If editing is without doubt one of the oldest scholarly
                  activities within the Humanities
               , DSEs are at the core of digital humanities . While not all textual scholars might rely on the same
               definition of DSEs, they recognize their features and uses . Free, open standards such as the ones developed by the Text Encoding Initiative
               (TEI), along with eXtensible Markup Language (XML) technologies, such as eXtensible
               Stylesheet Language Transformations (XSLT) and XQuery, and dedicated software
                  Some examples are TEI Boilerplate, Juxta, Versioning Machine, TextGrid, Ediarium,
                  eLaborate, Edition Visualization Technology, and CETEIcean. have
               characterized the digital editing field. The scholarly editions themselves, however,
               haven’t always been successful as open products of research. Bodard and Garcés posed
               this issue when they claimed that, analogous to the Open Source Software movement,
               DSEs — which they call Open Source Critical Editions or OSCE — should
               be licensed for reuse, including all sources, data, methods, and software . While it is common practice to make TEI data publicly
               available, the debate over how DSEs need to be structured to be truly open is
               still ongoing and best practices have yet to be established. Vanessa Hannesschläger,
               for example, has recently surveyed licenses appropriate for DSEs powered by TEI and
               singled out Creative Commons ones as appropriate for an international context and for
               enabling an open culture of reuse with a global impact; however, there has yet to be
               widespread agreement with this proposal . 
            From a Global South perspective, the DSE field is perceived as being dominated by
               standards and technologies that are still unfamiliar to scholars; not surprisingly,
               these methods are typically described in the context of Anglophone projects . Indeed, beyond some very specific projects and
               initiatives, multilingual resources related to DSEs, such as tutorials, software,
               books, and articles, are generally difficult to find in languages other than English.
               Moreover, the use of proprietary software for most editorial work has become a
               barrier for extending the DSE practice beyond Northern academies. Most DSEs
                  rely on TEI documents encoded and processed with the help of the popular software
                  Oxygen XML Editor, which requires the purchase of a license. Most training and
                  teaching is also done using Oxygen, which has established a de facto
                  monopoly on DSEs production in the Global North. Indeed, [d]igital scholarly editions are expensive to make and to
                  maintain
               . As such, long-term web hosting, preservation, and
               access to servers pose a significant obstacle for not-so-well-funded scholars who
               lack access to grant funding or other institutional resources. Overall, DSEs require
               substantial infrastructure and advanced technical skills, while diverse needs,
               capacities, priorities, languages, and academic traditions may require different
               features from DSEs at a global scale.
            With that in mind, how can DSEs, one of the crown jewels of digital humanities , become global? From our perspective, this can be
               achieved by establishing a digital commons. The commons can be defined
                  as resource[s] shared by a group of people that is subject to
                     social dilemmas
                  . When the GO::DH Minimal Computing Working Group
               started a debate on power and inequality in digital humanities from a technological
               perspective, its intention was not to simply criticize or mourn a lack of diversity,
               but to establish an alternative discourse and create a new set of commons, namely
               technology of disobedience, architecture of necessity, and the moral modulor . The principles of minimal computing turned into new ways of
               undertaking digital humanities work and collaborating to building an alternative
               digital epistemology that has found a practical outlet in minimal DSEs with
                  Ed., Ed is a Jekyll theme for digital editions, developed by Alex Gil and
                  available at https://github.com/minicomp/ed. a tool for building minimal DSEs
               without elaborate text encoding. 
            For these reasons, minimal computing informed the design of our joint course that
               teaches digital publishing and textual scholarship with minimal computing and text
               encoding. Specifically, we highlighted minimal computing as a shared set of values
               such as the use of open technologies, ownership of data and code, and reduction in
               computing infrastructure. The following question drove our course development: Could minimal computing provide a set of shared principles and
                  technologies to empower students and scholars to work autonomously on and have
                  more control over the future of their own projects?Canagarajah
                  writes in A Geopolitics of Academic Writing,
                  Periphery students are taught to be consumers of center
                     knowledge rather than producers of knowledge
                  . We further considered: What if minimal computing extended beyond ‘computing done under some
                  technological constraints’ by standing at the core of a global Digital Humanities
                  commons, overcoming notions such as center and periphery, North and South?
               and Could minimal computing serve as a common ground for
                  Northern and Southern digital humanists?
            In Latin America, conversations on open and free technologies have been part of the
               Open Science agenda since the early 2000s, when the term technological sovereignty
                began to be used by Latin American activists who wanted
               to have more control over the software that they and their governments used. The
               Latin American Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) movement is aligned with the
               Latin American Open Science movement. Both share a strong sense of common ownership
               for the common good. Based on this, many networks like reGOSH have highlighted how
               the region could benefit from the development of open scientific tools, as a way of
               overcoming dependence on equipment suppliers in the Global North and increasing its
               digital autonomy. reGOSH is the network for free-libre technologies for science
                  and education in Latin America: https://regosh.libres.cc/en/home-en/.  However, as we discussed
               above, Latin American countries have the most unequal income distribution in the
               world which results in research inequalities across the region . As a result, the allocation of resources for research in
               Latin America is in great disproportion to those in developed countries. This is the
               case of HD CAICYT Lab, the digital humanities laboratory at Argentinian CONICET,
               which has been doing digital humanities research with very limited funding and
               technological support from the institution since 2016. The lab is part of
                  CAICYT’s institutional project, where challenges for its growth include the
                  scarcity of human resources and specific funding. Digital humanities project
                  funding is not common in the region, so sustainability depends mostly on external
                  funding and collaboration. The lab, nonetheless, carries on work in an open
               research context aligned with the Argentinian national law on open access and the
               Open Science environment in Latin America. HD CAICYT Lab has been creating minimal
               editions via a workflow built around Recogito, an open source semantic annotation
               software developed by Pelagios Network , incorporating
               TEI markup and rendering the edited texts in static sites built with Jekyll and
               GitHub pages. In 2016, Susanna Allés-Torrent led a minimal computing workshop at the
               Second International Conference of the Asociación Argentina de Humanidades Digitales
               (AAHD) in Buenos Aires, Argentina . Scholars who
               attended the event felt empowered by the possibility of working autonomously on their
               own editions, and minimal computing was understood as a solution for the development
               of projects where access to infrastructure such as web hosting or even reliable and
               affordable Internet access is limited for humanities students and faculty. For our
               lab, HD CAICYT, minimal computing turned into the solution for computing done under
               technological limitations, as well as for producing our own
                  scholarship ourselves
               .
            Minimal computing has become part of HD CAICYT Lab’s digital humanities standards and
               commons, integrating with our principles of openness: open corpora, documentation,
               collaboration, software, and publishing . See
                  Jekyll’s perspective on openness, collaboration, and code of conduct: https://jekyllrb.com/news/2017/10/19/diversity-open-source/. 
               Since the Lab is unable to buy software or pay for servers and hosting, adopting
               minimal computing strategies created the conditions necessary for our work to be part
               of the global digital humanities landscape. As such, we practice minimal computing
               beyond its definition of simply computing done under some
                  technological constraints as it becomes our primary instrument for any
               form of digital humanities. See for example the digital scholarly edition of an
                  Argentinian chronicle called Historia de la Conquista del Río
                     de la Plata, better known as La Argentina Manuscrita, written by
                  Ruy Diaz de Guzman in the early seventeenth century, available at https://arounddh.org/en/la-argentina-manuscrita. 
            
            The Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (MITH) at the University of
               Maryland has adopted minimal computing strategies primarily for digital preservation.
               MITH migrated a number of websites and web applications to static sites in order to
               reduce infrastructure demands and increase their longevity  and posed the minimal computing archetypal question: What do
                  we need?
                as one of the guiding principles for future and current
               projects. In working with communities in and around the University of Maryland
               campus, MITH staff works with and trains collaborators around minimal technologies
               that allow them to curate, maintain, and, most importantly, own community archives
               independently of MITH’s and the university’s infrastructure. One example is the
                  Lakeland Community Archive Project, which documents a historic African American
                  community before and after segregation and contributes to an understanding of
                  urban renewal's impact on communities of color in College Park, Maryland, USA,
                  available at https://mith.umd.edu/research/lakeland/.  More specifically to
               DSEs, the prominent Shelley-Godwin Archive (S-GA)  has adopted technologies atypical for a
               TEI-based project from the start, with an eye towards Linked Open Data
                  integration Particularly in relation with the then nascent International
                  Image Interoperability Framework: https://iiif.io. and towards the reduction of the infrastructural
               footprint of the project. This led to a case-study experiment aimed at enabling
               offline use of the archive inspired by minimal computing principles to increase its availability to a larger number of communities with
                  variable access to the Internet
               . TEI publishing in S-GA is handled directly in the
               browser, avoiding server-side transformations typical of many TEI projects that
               require substantial server infrastructure to be maintained and kept online long term.
               Partly informed by this experience, Raffaele Viglianti worked with Hugh Cayless on
                  CETEIcean, CETEIcean is available at https://github.com/teic/ceteicean.  a JavaScript library for
               publishing TEI (and other XML) documents within an HTML page .
            The different approaches to minimal computing and DSEs, context-dependent for HD
               CAICYT Lab and strategic for MITH, formed the basis of our collaboration on the
               course that we teach to undergraduate students in Buenos Aires and Maryland: Digital
               Publishing with Minimal Computing. Our combined experiences present our students with
               a perspective on minimal computing that is not entirely dependent on digital
               humanities practices in the Global North, but rather one that is based on a shared
               digital commons. Focusing on minimal computing allows us to teach the fundamentals of
               scholarly editing and digital publishing through free and open tools while engaging
               with issues of content ownership on the web that extend beyond textual scholarship.
               Our course challenges students to publish without relying on institutional
               infrastructure while keeping a critical eye towards commercial infrastructure,
               particularly in relation to data ownership and preservation. While this comes with an
               initially steep learning curve for discovering and adopting new digital tools, it
               also teaches students how to manage the fate of the resources they create.
         

            Digital Publishing with Minimal Computing: Humanities at a Global Scale
            In December 2019, we proposed a course titled Digital Publishing with Minimal
               Computing: Humanities at a Global Scale The bilingual public website for the
                  course is available at https://mith.umd.edu/minimaldigipub/.  to the Global Classroom
               Initiative (GCI) program at the University of Maryland. This program offers support
               for the development of courses to be taught in collaboration with a higher education
               institution outside of the United States, with the goal of establishing courses that
               expose students to work that is cross-cultural, project-based, and virtual; the GCI
               argues that these courses mirror the work students will encounter throughout their
               lives. While this outcome is somewhat dependent on the students’ career choices and
               opportunities, it is evident that globalization shrinks the
                  world, bringing a wider range of cultures into closer contact than ever before 
               . Thus, preparing students to participate in a globalized
               world is a worthwhile goal, particularly if this can be done in a way that fosters
               intercultural competences. According to UNESCO, Intercultural competences refer to having adequate relevant knowledge about
                     particular cultures, as well as general knowledge about the sorts of issues
                     arising when members of different cultures interact, holding receptive
                     attitudes that encourage establishing and maintaining contact with diverse
                     others, as well as having the skills required to draw upon both knowledge and
                     attitudes when interacting with others from different cultures
                  . The COVID-19 pandemic also exacerbated the
               virtual nature of this contact, as we adapted to rely even more heavily on
               technological links to collaborate both locally and globally.
            The course, which involves students from the Universidad del Salvador (USAL) in
               Argentina and from the University of Maryland (UMD) in the United States, The
                  instructors in Argentina teach at Universidad del Salvador but are affiliated with
                  the Argentinian Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
                  (CONICET). has received funding for at least three iterations between 2020
               and 2022, with a blend of online and in-person learning. Our plan was to have
                  in-person lectures with a shared audio/video link joining the two classrooms
                  together. Given the global pandemic, however, the first iteration of the course
                  was fully online for all students in 2020 and online for Universidad del Salvador
                  and hybrid for University of Maryland students in 2021. It is centered
               around a group project in which students collaborate virtually to create a bilingual
               (Spanish and English) digital edition of a multilingual colonial era text, This
                  text is a travelogue written by a Basque trader called Acarette Du Biscay and its
                  publishing history is truly multilingual. Acarete's travels were published in his
                  native language, French, in the Relation des voyages du Sr…
                     dans la rivière de la Plata, et de-là par terre au Pérou in 1672, as
                  part of volume IV of the famous Thevenot Collection of
                     Relations De Divers Voyages Curieux, and in 1696, independently, in the
                     Relation des voyages dans la rivière de la Plate.
                  Two years later the 1698 London edition came to light in a collection entitled
                     Voyages and Discoveries in South America, and
                  later as an individual book by Samuel Buckley's printing press as An Account of a Voyage up the River de la Plata, and Thence over
                     Land to Peru: With Observations on the Inhabitants, as Well as Indians and
                     Spaniards, the Cities, Commerce, Fertility, and Riches of That Part of
                     America. It was later translated from English to Spanish by Daniel
                  Maxwell, and published in La Revista de Buenos Aires,
                  in May and June 1867, as Relación de los viajes de Monsieur
                     Ascarate du Biscay al Rio de la Plata, y desde aquí por tierra hasta el Perú,
                     con observaciones sobre estos paises.  while learning about
               digital humanities approaches to literary studies, digital publishing, and history.
               The group project involving students from both institutions facilitates the
               cross-cultural collaboration that is central to GCI courses. Project-based learning
               is also an effective learning paradigm in which students
                  actively construct their knowledge by participating in real-world activities
                  similar to those that experts engage in, to solve problems and develop
                  artifacts
               . 
            This approach is not unfamiliar to digital humanities pedagogy , given that digital humanities research itself tends to be
               scaffolded through project work that results in the development of artifacts such as
               tools or digital publications . It is also
               connected to a multiliteracies approach, which brings together linguistic diversity
               and multimodal forms of expression and representation in response to changes in
               globalized technological environments such as the Internet, and the growing
               linguistic and cultural diversity due to increased transnational migration 
               
               . Teaching through a minimal computing lens, moreover,
               greatly benefits from projects that exhort students to think both globally and
               locally by recognizing the technological affordances they have access to (as well as
               why and how) and by confronting the limitations and constraints that work against
               them, whether in hardware, software, education, network capacity, power, or indeed
               self-imposed limitations for pedagogical purposes. In other words, we train our
               students to recognize the privileges of having access to state-of-the-art
               computational resources as well as to devise strategies to circumvent limitations
               they may encounter by adopting minimal computing techniques. Students (and experts)
               from both cultural contexts are likely to encounter such limitations to varying
               degrees. Even those who have access to infrastructure through their institutions or
               future employers will encounter issues with preservation and portability of the
               digital publication projects that they have created. Learning to deploy minimal
               approaches can contribute to the viability of a digital humanities project and give
               students greater control over the future of their own work. This mimics and models to
               our students the role, as we have discussed above, that minimal computing can play in
               establishing open and global approaches for digital humanities research and pedagogy
               that willfully reduce the gap between Global South and Global North
               contributions.
            The nature of the cross-border collaboration between students is online and virtual,
               given their geographical separation. They attend virtual lectures and collaborate
               online via messaging and code sharing platforms, with the support of the instructors.
               This kind of engagement is often referred to as Virtual
                  Exchange
               
                or Collaborative Online International
                  Learning (COIL) . The COIL Institute for Globally
               Networked Learning in the Humanities at the State University of New York was among
               the first to explore the applicability of this approach to humanities disciplines
               through an National Endowment for the Humanities grant. The final white paper reports
               on the twenty-four courses taught as part of the project and summarizes the surveys
               completed by instructors and students . The results
               highlighted how COIL courses offer a form of internationalization at home and a
                  low-cost alternative to study abroad exchange programs, which are typically
               accessible to a very limited number of students, at least in the United States . More importantly, the study identified clear merits of a
               project-based, cross-cultural approach to education in the humanities:
            To no surprise, most [survey respondents] cited the access to
                  different cultural points of view as adding that something extra to the
                  course. They found that this element increased student motivation, led to more
                  in‐depth learning and helped students be more willing to see ideas, texts, works
                  of art, etc. from different perspectives. In some ways it was as if the students
                  felt they had to perform better because they saw their partner class as a new
                  audience particularly during synchronous audio/video sessions and in asynchronous
                  discussion forums.
               
            Our course applies the COIL approach to teaching digital scholarly editing through
               the lens of minimal computing, which, in itself, is an instrument for fostering
               international competencies in both student and expert work towards a more open and
               global digital humanities practice. Creating a course of this kind is necessarily a
               collaborative process that takes time and requires exchange of ideas among
               instructors. Over the seven months between first developing our GCI project and the
               first iteration of the course in September 2020, we discussed our pedagogical
               priorities, developed the syllabus, and created multilingual student resources such
               as slides, tutorials, and guidelines. This includes resources and materials we
                  have previously developed, like the TTHub, https://tthub.io/, a hub of tutorials, presentations and materials in
                  Spanish related to TEI training, or the bilingual Taxonomy of Digital Research
                  Activities in the Humanities/Taxonomía sobre Actividades de investigación digital
                  en humanidades (TaDiRAH): https://vocabularyserver.com/tadirah/es/index.php.  English is
               typically assumed to be the language of global communication, playing an important
               role in both disseminating and seeking out information. As Ana Balula and Delfim Leão
               argue, In terms of information availability, which underpins the
                  co-construction of knowledge, the use of English as lingua franca promotes the
                  dissemination of research outputs and breakthroughs
               . Nonetheless, Ángela Giglia highlights the more
               localized nature of humanities discourse: SSH [Social Sciences
                  and Humanities] research is often grounded in specific cultural or geographical
                  areas, hence the persistence of native languages opposed to English as lingua
                  franca in STEM [science, technology, engineering, and mathematics]
               . Multilingualism and bibliodiversity, or the
               diversity of academic content, are essential both at the national and international
               levels to preserve research in a wide range of global and local topics, studied from
               different epistemic and methodological approaches and inspired by various schools of
               thought and expressed in a variety of languages . 
            We conduct shared lectures and communication between students in each group in
               English but facilitate learning and project work by providing bilingual course
               material. Because language is a primary medium in the transmission of culture and
               ideas, we also assign readings in both languages, trying to find papers that deal
               with similar topics and allowing students to choose between them . In fact, Argentinian students learn
                  differently from the U.S.-based students in the course, as they go through a
                  two-fold process: they learn new digital humanities concepts and practices related
                  to minimal computing and DSEs while they improve or practice their English
                  language skills.  This is meant to both facilitate content acquisition and
               expose students to contributions that are not exclusively Anglo-centric when learning
               about digital humanities and DSEs in particular. We use recommendations from
                  the GO::DH Translation Toolkit: the whispering approach , translating and writing down (on a whiteboard or in a
                  chat) the keywords, titles, and words we may identify as obscure. The Translation
                  Toolkit is available at https://go-dh.github.io/translation-toolkit/about/.  Moreover, we
               have seen that exposure to both languages enhances the virtual exchange
                  experience; Multilingualism and cross-institutional experience was
                  informally identified by University of Maryland students as a major reason for
                  enrolling in the course. Moreover, a survey conducted by Universidad del Salvador
                  students about their own experience also mentioned positive assessments of the
                  multilingual approach to the course .  in
               addition to learning from bilingual resources, the groups create bilingual websites
               and work with source material in both languages. In adopting this strategy, we are
               following UNESCO’s report on intercultural competences: 
            Multilingualism (communicative competence in multiple languages)
                  and translation (conveying the same idea through different languages) are [...]
                  requirements for intercultural dialogue, and indications of intercultural
                  competences, enriching each group’s understanding of the other(s) as well of
                  themselves. 
            In preparing bilingual materials for the course, we kept these principles in mind and
               invested time in creating resources that would be useful outside of the immediate
               course context. To date, our primary contribution has been translating Amanda
               Visconti’s Jekyll tutorial on the Programming Historian
               into Spanish. The original Programming Historian tutorial in English is
                  available at https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/building-static-sites-with-jekyll-github-pages.
                  The Spanish translation is available at https://programminghistorian.org/es/lecciones/sitios-estaticos-con-jekyll-y-github-pages.
                This translation not only involved lexical and grammatical choices but also
               extralinguistic adaptations such as changing the screenshots. This decision was
               motivated not only by the presence of text in English in the images but also by the
               layout differences between the macOS and Microsoft Windows. The original tutorial is
               based on macOS and is infrequently used by Latin American students because of the
               elevated price of Apple computers. In order to make the tutorial accessible to our
               public, we provided priority to installation instructions for Windows and reproduced
               all the visual aids for a Windows environment. The translation labor related to
                  digital humanities tutorials or educational resources always involves a situated
                  approach. As Allés-Torrent and de Rio Rande note of TEI materials, It is not enough for the Spanish-speaking community to translate
                     [these texts], since it is necessary to re-create the problems and adapt
                     existing materials to their own needs and examples
                  .  We also created an extension
               to the free code editor Visual Studio Code, called Scholarly XML, Scholarly XML
                  is available at https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=raffazizzi.sxml.
               that provides functionalities essential to learning and encoding TEI, such as XML
               validation and code completion suggestions. Despite their function in TEI pedagogy,
               these features typically require complex installation or are otherwise only available
               through commercial software. Other extensions for Visual Studio Code or for
                  other free code editors typically require Java tools to be installed to access XML
                  validation and code completion. We found this to be an obstacle when teaching TEI
                  with a minimal computing approach and thus developed an alternative that works
                  within Visual Studio Code without needing additional tools.
            
            Since the majority of minimal computing aspects of the course are centered around
               project-based learning (PBL), we conclude this section by describing how we
               scaffolded the course activities through Joseph Krajcik and Phyllis Blumenfeld’s five
               key features of project-based learning . The first
               feature is identifying a driving question that relates to authentic activities
               undertaken by researchers in digital humanities (more specifically in digital textual
               scholarship), such as, How do websites help us give new life to
                  historical texts? Second, we explore the driving question via situated learning
                — that is, by working in a real-world context. Minimal
               technologies for building websites allow our students to learn by doing with tools
               that make it feasible to engage with the driving question, but that are also used by
               professionals to develop open digital humanities artifacts. The third feature is
               engaging in collaborative activities to solve problems; students tackle the question
               and learn skills in groups made of individuals from both institutions, which, as
               explained above, is essential to the development of intercultural competences. The
               fourth feature recommends that PBL be scaffolded with learning
                  technologies that help [students] participate in activities normally beyond their
                  ability
               . In our case these technologies include
               bilingual learning materials and online collaboration channels that we establish
               together with the students’ input. While minimal computing technologies should, by
               definition, be within the students’ ability, our goal is to have the students
               leverage these technologies to answer the driving question and engage with textual
               scholarship work that will likely be unfamiliar to them. Finally, the fifth feature
               is that students create artifacts that address the driving question and that are
                  publicly accessible representations of the class’s
                  learning
               . Through structured assignments, each group
               creates a bilingual public website containing the encoded and edited text, together
               with paratextual content documenting their collaborative process and their engagement
               with the driving question.
         

            Conclusions
            In designing this course, we have had the unique opportunity to bring together
               digital humanities and humanidades digitales practices from the Global North and
               South. This joint effort has prompted us to reflect on what is common and shareable
               in our approach to digital scholarly editing: how, and in what ways, is knowledge
               exchanged in different cultural, linguistic, and technological literacies? 
            Minimal computing, understood not just as a response to technological constraints,
               but rather as an intentional methodological stance, strikes us as fundamental for
               building a shared commons that is both open and global. Moreover, we are building a
               bilingual syllabus (readings, tools, and project-based learning activities) centered
               on minimal computing as a way of countering epistemic and knowledge inequity . Our work purposely moves beyond a North-to-South approach to
               curriculum and knowledge exchange to a synergetic North-and-South one, aimed at
               empowering knowledge creation in the language(s) in which an individual is most
               comfortable.
            We are aware that minimal computing, and to some extent project-based learning, are
               approaches developed in the North, and adopting them under the guise of an
               internationalization agenda brings risks, such as overlooking local practices when
               building and sharing knowledge in the classroom. We are also conscious that while
               technology can increase access to knowledge, it may entrench cultural imperialism.
               Nonetheless, we envision a middle ground by adapting tutorials and educational
               materials, as well as balancing Spanish and Anglophone authors in the bibliographies
               students should be reading. In this sense, our course emphasizes a pedagogy of
               multiliteracies and a polycentric digital humanities perspective.
            The first iteration of the course in 2020 concluded successfully, with an enrollment
               of 23 students (11 at UMD and 12 at USAL). After the course, USAL students continued
               to collaborate through presentations on their experiences with minimal computing at
               different events, including a presentation  at #NoviembreHD, a one-month congress organized by the
               Argentine Association of Digital Humanities (AAHD) ,
               and a poster at the Global Digital Humanities Symposium, organized by the University
               of Michigan . Several students also started their own
               digital publishing projects with the technologies they learned. Cristian Suárez
                  Giraldo started a digital edition of a 19th century Colombian text, available at
                     https://suarezg106.gitlab.io/conversacion-eafit/. Gabriel Calarco
                  developed a digital edition of a Hispanic medieval text, available at https://github.com/gabrielcalarco/-Ecfrasis-en-el-Libro-de-Alexandre.
                This is evidence that the course is not only creating a favorable environment
               for collaboration and exchange, but also is providing participants with the tools for
               independent work in the field of digital scholarly editing.
            By preparing for this course, we not only developed training on specific minimal
               computing and text encoding skills, but we also engaged with different technological
               and academic contexts around the world by addressing issues and perspectives related
               to infrastructure, language, digital literacy, and Open Science. Our continued
               challenge is uncovering how our work teaching minimal computing can effectively
               advance a more open and global digital humanities. We aim at moving beyond the limits
               of the course itself, by upholding approaches to pedagogy and digital humanities
               research that work towards what we claim should be a core tenet for the global
               digital humanities community: that technology should be owned by no one and used and
               contributed to by all.
         
