Title:  Power and Precarity:
               Lessons from the Makers by Mail Project
Volume:  016
Issue:  2
Date:  25 June 2022
Abstract:  
            
            This article examines notions of precarity within the Makers by Mail project to
               interrogate the relationship between minimal computing methodologies and academic
               austerity. Doing so pushes us to reconsider the question What do we need? to
               center not only technological tangibles but also human(e) requirements for effective
               and ethical engagement. While this piece focuses on Makers by Mail, we hope our
               experience can bring attention to the ways in which precarity operates and is
               operationalized by individuals and institutions to reinforce traditional notions of
               power, limiting opportunities for marginalized peoples and groups. We hope that our
               experiences offer insight into the lives of precarious digital humanists, and that
               they continue pushing our field to reconsider when and how we support digital
               scholars and their projects. There are many ways to push against precarity in digital
               humanities — providing better contracts, paying higher wages, offering funding
               opportunities, developing mentorship networks, giving appropriate credit, supporting
               career growth, and promoting structural change. Any of the above can help shift our
               work away from precarity and toward praxis — working with and supporting communities.
               While minimal computing methodologies can help us alleviate some of the structural
               inequalities within higher education, we cannot achieve maximum justice until we
               address the problem of precarity within our own communities.
         
Full Body Text: 

        
         Making is a fraught process. As Dave Gaertner notes, the maker movement is “deeply
            rooted in the colonial heteropatriarchy,” favoring activities that result in increased
            capital — the development of technical skills and the production of new technologies,
            rather than the relationships between makers and their communities . So, how can digital humanities — a field deeply invested in maker
            culture — develop strategies for people-first approaches to technology? 
         Makers by Mail, a project launched in 2016, was developed as a people-first approach to
            making. Inspired by projects like the DHMakerBus, as well as the fields of public
            humanities and, more recently, digital community engagement (DiCE), we sought to develop
            a maker community that leverage[d our] knowledge of the digital as a tool of community
               building  . Aware that [t]he standpoints of the
            marginalized, the knowledge that is generated from their unique and particular social
            locations, thus offers important epistemological resources in any quest to create a more
            just world, we sought to build a making community responsive to the needs and
            positionalities of our users . We cite Virginia Eubank’s Digital Dead End specifically because, like Makers by Mail, it
            challenges the construct of the digital divide by promoting community-engaged
            technology praxis based on active listening, a process that repositions expertise as
            belonging to the user rather than a project developer or institution .
         Makers by Mail accomplished these goals by developing a new maker infrastructure — one
            that sent makers materials directly to users and that developed kits and teaching
            materials based on their needs and feedback. Specifically, Makers by Mail shipped
            technologies to community partners via Priority Mail, a consistently-priced and
            relatively low-cost shipping option. Partners only incurred the cost of shipping, plus
            the value of any lost or damaged parts. As such, participants gained access to
            fabrication technologies without having to incur costs for purchase or maintenance.
            Sample lesson plans were shared along with the technologies; however, user-developed
            designs and lesson plans were encouraged. In particular, the project encouraged
            participants to share their creations with the Makers by Mail community by posting them
            to our blog and/or teaching commons. These user-developed projects and lesson plans
            helped us better understand the needs of our both our local users — public libraries,
            educators, and individuals in Iowa — as well as our digital humanities community:
            educators and scholars committed to interrogating ideologies and environments for who
               gets to make, who can maintain, and who must source  . 
         Questions about power and belonging are not incompatible with the maker movement. As
            Emily Chang, Joy Rankin, and Melissa Terras have noted, perceptions about who should
            make are often limited to those backed by powerful institutions and positionalities
              . Matt Ratto and Megan Boler view making
            as an activity that provides both the possibility to intervene substantively in systems
            of authority and power and that offers an important site for reflecting on how such
            power is constituted by infrastructures, institutions, communities, and practices
            . 
         Makers by Mail challenged notions of power by building a distributed making model with a
            human-centered approach. Often bound by a specific geography and context, traditional
            makerspaces can face accessibility issues from a number of vectors, such as cost,
            location, audience, and material. These factors can make it difficult to live out
            minimal computing’s ethos of maximum justice, which asks practitioners to:
         
            Reduce the use of technological, cultural, social, and economic barriers to increase
            entry, access, participation, and self-representation in computing and
         Build systems/projects premised on social justice and difference, not white supremacy
            and settler colonialism. 
         The Makers by Mail project sought to address both issues by 1) providing technology
            education that is both accessible and affordable for individuals and groups with limited
            access to other makerspace programs and 2) developing relationships with traditionally
            marginalized groups. We were moderately successful within our spheres of influence: in
            2016, Boyles was involved in local and international digital humanities communities and
            Petersen was a member of organizations serving public and academic libraries. However,
            the project's distributed making model conflicted with institutional notions of who
            should make, increasing the precarity of both the project and its community. Further,
            these power dynamics inhibited the project’s access to the resources and support needed
            for growth and sustainability. 
         Precarity is a frequent issue for makers and makerspaces, as they are often dependent
            upon limited labor and funding resources. As Boyles et al. note, Many digital humanists,
            as well as their critics, have noted the stratification of labor in the digital
            humanities and the scarcity of resources available to sustain those various classes of
            workers and the larger collaborations or centers to which they contribute .
            Minimal computing’s relationship to precarity cannot be ignored. In an
            environment of increasing austerity — both academic and otherwise — minimal
            methodologies encourage innovation in the face of scarcity. As Alex Gil notes, Minimal
            computing does not stand in as a universal call, but rather as a space for new questions
            and practices, an injunction to constantly repeat the question, ‘what do we need?’ . 
         Minimal computing responds to this question by operating, and even excelling, in
            conditions of precarity. Minimal approaches require minimal resources, reducing barriers
            to access and inclusion. This philosophy is particularly compelling, as it extends
            beyond the walls of the university into communities that have traditionally been
            excluded. The Makers by Mail project was drawn to this methodology, as we believe that
            our greatest responsibility as scholars is to extend public knowledge and to work for
            the betterment of society. Minimal methodologies also made it possible for us to succeed
            in spite of our own precarity, in terms of positionality, resources, and support.
         At the same time, we acknowledge that minimal computing cannot address the broader
            inequities within our institutions and, in fact, may even demonstrate that scholars,
            researchers, teachers, and practitioners can do more with less. One term for
            understanding this phenomenon is resilience, or the process of adapting well in the
               face of adversity, trauma, tragedy, threats or significant sources of stress .
            In our ongoing community-engaged scholarship, we, the principal investigators of
            Makers by Mail, have seen resilience weaponized against vulnerable peoples and groups.
            In particular, the term resilience was used to downplay government failures in
            post-Hurricane María Puerto Rico by drawing attention to the incredible recovery work
            implemented by local grassroots community organizations. As Yarimar Bonilla and Marisol
            LeBrón note, The much-touted resilience of Puerto Ricans thus needs to be itself
            understood as a form of trauma: years of abandonment by local and federal governments
            have forced community to take care of themselves .
         While the contexts in which resilience is applied vary greatly, rhetorics of resilience
            have become increasingly popular tools for downplaying precarity, austerity, and
            vulnerability. Makers by Mail demonstrates the complex relationship between power,
            precarity, and minimal computing by demonstrating how minimal methodologies alleviated
            elements of our precarity while simultaneously exacerbating it in others. 

         Project Strengths, or How We Operationalized Precarity with Minimal Methodologies
         Minimal computing made it possible to launch the Makers by Mail project with limited
            financial and institutional resources. As Alex Gil and Élika Ortega articulate, minimal
            computing can refer to a variety of activities and approaches, including minimalist
            hardware, eliminating clutter [...] ease of use, ease of creation, increased access,
               and reductions in computing . In the development of its
            kits, Makers by Mail followed two distinct approaches to minimal computing.
         The first embodies the values of increased access and ease of use. Makers by Mail’s
            initial offering was a surveillance camera kit using littleBits and a digital camera.
            Intuitive, modular, and easily constructible, littleBits are a fantastic resource for
            introductory making, providing an easy access point to understand circuitry. This kit
            was designed for users seeking to enhance their digital literacy in a fun and accessible
            way. Since acquiring littleBits can be cost-prohibitive, Makers by Mail provided an
            affordable method of access by charging users only for the cost of shipping rather than
            for the technologies, allowing them to experiment with the littleBits on a provisional
            basis before making a larger time or financial investment. 
         The second approach emphasizes minimalist hardware, working with communities to build
            basic servers. Using a Raspberry Pi 3 Model B and step-by-step instructions, this kit
            walked participants through the steps of building a locally hosted web server. As this
            is often a daunting task for individuals, testing out the process of building a server
            prepared participants to understand their own hardware, host games, securely store
            information, and more. While this kit asked users to engage in more advanced computing
            than the littleBits kits, it was designed using minimal computing technology. In
            essence, the kits’ Raspberry Pis are computers stripped down to include only the most
            necessary components; however, this approach can make Raspberry Pis more, rather than
            less, complicated. For example, while Raspberry Pis have enough hardware onboard to
            allow for a wide array of computing projects, their stripped-down nature requires users
            to attach peripherals to fully engage with the system. As Gil and Ortega note, minimal
            computing does not always equal minimum effort . In this
            case, our community felt that access to a completely private, locally-hosted server was
            worth the barriers to access.
         Our team also turned to minimal computing to address infrastructural issues by returning
            to the question, What does the project need? We focused on rapid prototyping with
            technologies owned or borrowed by the collaborators, providing space to experiment and
            play. We settled on United States Postal Service (USPS) Priority Mail shipping for
            distributing kits, solving the question of distribution scale. We relied upon existing
            connections for user testing, garnering feedback from relevant user groups. The
            precarity necessitating these solutions — our positionality as a graduate student and a
            postdoctoral fellow — lent its own affordances, given that our supervisors and the
            institution had few expectations regarding our research topic, project scope, or
            publication record.
        
            Rapid Prototyping
        
         At the project’s onset, the project collaborators had a series of connections within
            various Midwest public libraries, a library graduate program, and the digital humanities
            community. Leaning on these relationships, our team was able to rapidly prototype kits
            and develop ideas in a variety of communities. Small focus groups and pop-up events
            provided venues for participants to give feedback on the clarity of directions, ease of
            assembly, entertainment factor, and more. This feedback gave us the opportunity to
            iteratively revise our kits, resulting in improved instructions and kit contents. For
            example, after some public librarians expressed uncertainty over where they would have
            patrons hook up Raspberry Pis, we revised the Server Kit to include a miniature
            touchscreen monitor.
        
            Distribution
      
         In the developmental process of Makers by Mail, our project team centered a need for
            portability and scalability. As we sought to provide accessible and affordable
            technology education, we wanted our kits to be able to be easily distributable while
            maintaining transparency and consistency of costs to users. Ultimately, we settled on
            using USPS Flat Rate shipping boxes for the distribution of our kits. Costing the same
            for anywhere in the contiguous United States, these boxes were freely available and
            consistently dimensioned, allowing us to accurately state the cost of shipping any
            number of kits. Building Makers by Mail with these shipping boxes in mind, we were able
            to keep participant costs down and choose technologies, packaging, and instructions that
            could be easily transported, reused, and replicated.
        
            Broad Connections
         
         An additional strength of the Makers by Mail project was its broad focus on college-aged
            and adult audiences. Many conventional makerspaces and maker initiatives have been
            targeted either towards introducing elementary or middle school students to technology
            or to the heavily tech fluent. While K-8 initiatives serve as an exhilarating way to
            engage youth with technology, these introductory resources can appear too simple for
            adult audiences, failing to build an interest in more in-depth maker technologies.
            Likewise, tools geared towards the tech-fluent — CNC machines, woodworking equipment, 3D
            printers, or laser cutters — often exclude and intimidate adults first starting out with
            critical making. For these reasons, our team focused on developing kits aimed at college
            students and adult audiences. With public library programming garnering interest from
            broad age ranges and technological fluencies, we focused on developing adaptable kits
            that could be informative and accessible for beginners while allowing for ample remixing
            and play. With this unique introductory adult focus, Makers by Mail presented the
            possibility of broad connections in public libraries, community organizations, college
            classes, and other academic programs. Partnered with its ease of distribution and
            scalability, the kits could readily be mailed to a diverse array of users.
Project Challenges, or the Harms of Precarity
         While the project has many strengths, minimal computing methods could not address the
            broader issues of precarity within the institution and community. In particular, our
            positionalities — as a postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student — limited numerous
            opportunities for project growth and sustainability, including the project team’s
            ability to build community, acquire funding, and collaborate effectively.
         
            Community-building
        
         The Makers by Mail project was designed to foster community-building and collaboration,
            but we had limited experience developing relationships with organizations outside the
            academy. Hoping that the project would serve as a springboard for community-building, we
            launched a publicity campaign, reaching out to local schools and public libraries as
            well as presenting at conferences including the Iowa Library Association’s (ILA) annual
            conference, the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO) annual conference,
            and Implementing New Knowledge Environments (INKE). Doing so generated interest in the
            project and led to meaningful conversations on best practices for implementing the kits
            in classrooms and workshops with a handful of collaborators testing the kits at their
            own institutions.
         One of the most important lessons we learned is that relationship-building should always
            come before project development and implementation so that community organizations can
            communicate needs, share priorities, and offer feedback on content and direction.
            Failing to do so results in a misalignment of priorities in which scholars are placing
            their needs before that of the community. This, in turn, leads to complications or
            relationship dynamics that reinforce harmful top-down power structures between the
            institution and the academy.
         To address these concerns, the Makers by Mail project conducted focus groups to test out
            a variety of kit designs; however, our participants were limited to a handful of
            graduate students and public library patrons. The feedback these groups provided was
            valuable but lacked the broader representation needed to develop kits that were dynamic,
            useful, and accessible to our desired audience: marginalized communities throughout
            North America and the Caribbean.
         Since both principal investigators were on limited term contracts — Petersen was in the
            last year of his Master’s in Library and Information Science and Boyles was in the first
            year of a two-year postdoctoral fellow position — there was not enough time to build
            long, sustained collaborations with community organizations. Perhaps the biggest lesson
            learned during the launch and deployment of Makers by Mail is that community-building
            takes time. In fact, we are still actively building relationships with many of the
            partners we first contacted in 2016, especially those who are collaborating with us on
            the Archivo de Respuestas Emergencias de Puerto Rico — our current community-engaged
            digital humanities project.
         
            Funding
         
         The Makers by Mail project received a microgrant from the Association for Computers and
            the Humanities (ACH), which allowed our team to purchase the technology needed to
            develop one of the three available kits. It soon became clear, however, that most other
            sources of funding — both internal and external — were dependent on the project having a
            tenure-track faculty member listed as principal investigator. With these funding
            limitations, the project became more reliant on personally owned technology, loaned
            materials, and tenuous collaborations.
         These challenges were most explicitly seen in the development and adaptation of kits,
            particularly when trying out new technologies. Although our team and focus groups
            expressed interest in an array of other kits, including basic circuits and wearable
            computing, we were limited in our ability to purchase and test new technologies and
            frequently barred from educator discounts or negotiated university pricing. For example,
            after our team expressed an interest in developing a Radio-Frequency Identification
            (RFID) Arduino kit, one collaborator ultimately acquired the necessary supplies by
            asking for them as a birthday gift. 
         For the long-term success of this project, Makers by Mail would need a more robust
            funding structure, both to replace materials and to maintain the currency of the kits.
            Some of the initial technologies used in our kits proved relatively frail, particularly
            when repeatedly used or distributed. LittleBits proved particularly susceptible to
            damage, with replacement components running between five and fifty dollars each. Outside
            of the core technologies, each kit also necessitated consumables — packing tape for
            shipping, instruction cards, batteries, and more — which added small costs over time.
            Alongside the need to replace components, some amount of funding would be needed to
            update the circulating kits. For example, since we acquired the materials for the Server
            Kit, multiple new generations of Raspberry Pis have been released. Although the
            project’s early third generation Raspberry Pis work well, if one breaks, it will become
            increasingly difficult to find an exact replacement. Likewise, new generations of kit
            components may feature different computer architecture or functionality with
            peripherals, requiring revised documentation and more replacement components. In many
            instances, updated or replacement components are fine; however, others have difficulties
            interfacing with older parts or require more capital investment to revise the kits.
         
            Collaboration
         
         For a brief period of time, the Makers by Mail project included a third principal
            investigator — a tenure-track faculty member at the University of Iowa. Initially, this
            collaboration was successful; the three of us communicated well and complemented one
            another. Over time, however, the unequal power dynamics among the principal
            investigators — reinforced by the institution — proved to be highly problematic.
         For example, only tenure-track faculty members were eligible for internal grants. This
            meant that what little internal funding we acquired was under the sole control of the
            tenure-track faculty member, who opted to use the funds to purchase littleBits against
            the advice of the other collaborators. This choice was particularly contentious because,
            as Kim Martin notes in her review of the project, [L]ittleBits, while great for
            sparking curiosity, break quite frequently and require batteries to operate. While the
            only other consumable in the kits at the moment is duct tape, one can imagine this
            number growing as the projects expand, and these costs, in addition to replacements for
            obsolete technology, have to be accounted for as the project grows . This
            choice ultimately hurt the project’s long-term sustainability by ramping up costs that
            could not be absorbed by the project’s budget.
         Additionally, only tenure-track faculty members could be listed as principal
            investigators for most internal and external awards. This led to issues with credit, as
            most official documentation, including that disseminated by the institution, gave
            recognition solely to the tenure-track faculty member. When our faculty collaborator
            refused to address these inequities, the three of us parted ways. The dissolution of
            this collaboration was particularly painful, as the tenure-track faculty member claimed
            rights to all technologies — even those purchased with funding awarded to the three of
            us. This effectively bound the project to the University of Iowa, making continuation of
            the project difficult once the two precariously positioned project collaborators had
            left the institution.
         
            Teaching Commons
         
         Alongside the acquisition and distribution of technologies, a crucial element of Makers
            by Mail has been the development of related teaching materials. To go along with the
            makers kits, our team intended to include physical copies of instructional materials, a
            print facilitators guide, and supplemental online resources in a Teaching Commons. These
            supplemental materials were meant to be a backbone of the Makers by Mail project,
            allowing groups to experiment with a variety of lessons, target activities to their
            specific interests, troubleshoot malfunctioning technologies, or even begin developing
            their own kits. Unfortunately, the Teaching Commons never came to fruition, with only
            physical copies of instructions provided with the kits. Uncertainty about the project
            and collaborators’ academic futures paired with regular remixing of kits resulted in the
            Teaching Commons always being a next step in the process that was never
            developed. Before this project could ever truly prove broadly successful,
            reconsideration and development of the Teaching Commons would be a must.
         In her review of Makers by Mail, Kimberley Martin points out this necessity, stating,
            Makerspaces, no matter where they are located, are made possible, and even profitable,
               by the community members that frequent them . With this consideration of
            community in mind, were we to revamp the project, our team would likely reconsider where
            the Teaching Commons is housed. Although having these resources directly on the site is
            beneficial, Makers by Mail would likely reach a broader audience if the instructional
            materials were also housed in a collaborative network like Humanities Commons or HASTAC.
            Inclusion on these sites would tap into a network of like-minded scholars and help
            establish connections within the academic community; however, this transition alone
            would not break down the cultural and technological barriers Makers by Mail seeks to
            address.
         
         
Conclusion
         This article has examined notions of power and precarity within the Makers by Mail
            project to interrogate the relationship between minimal computing methodologies and
            academic contingency. Doing so pushes us to reconsider the question What do we need? to center not only technological tangibles but also human(e)
            requirements for effective and ethical engagement.
         While this piece focuses on Makers by Mail, we hope our experience can bring attention
            to the ways in which precarity operates and is operationalized by individuals and
            institutions to reinforce traditional notions of power and limit opportunities for
            marginalized peoples and groups. We hope that our experiences offer insight into the
            lives of precarious digital humanists, and that they continue pushing our field to
            reconsider when and how we support digital scholars and their projects.
         There are many ways to push against precarity in digital humanities: providing better
            contracts, paying higher wages, offering funding opportunities, developing mentorship
            networks, giving appropriate credit, supporting career growth, and promoting structural
            change. Any of the above would have helped shift our work away from precarity and toward
            praxis — working with and supporting communities.
         While minimal computing methodologies can help us alleviate some of the structural
            inequalities within higher education, we cannot achieve maximum justice until we address
            the problem of precarity within our own institutions.
