Title:  Slow Listening: Digital Tools for Voice
                    Studies
Volume:  017
Issue:  2
Date:  7 July 2023
Abstract:  
                Sound studies in general, and voice studies in particular, present particular
                    challenges for digital humanities scholarship. The software tools available to
                    digital humanists who want to study performative speech are less familiar and
                    less developed for our uses, and the user base is also much smaller than for
                    text mining or network analysis. This article provides a critical narrative of
                    our research and an outline of our methodology, in applying, developing and
                    refining tools for the analysis of pitch and timing patterns in recorded
                    performances of literary texts. The primary texts and audio considered are
                    poetry readings, but the tools and methods can and have been applied more widely
                    to podcasts, talking books, political speeches, etc.
            
Full Body Text: 

                1.


                
                    Pitch contour in Drift. John Ashbery reading The
                            Painter, ll. 9-10, 92nd St. Y, New York, NY, 1952
                    Pitch contour line chart of the spoken sentence Try using the brush as a means to an end
                    
                


                All speech is performative, to some degree, and any text can be performed. Many
                    have been, and we have digital access to many audio recordings of such
                    performances. Which aspects capture our attention when we listen to — and study
                    — these recordings as performative speech? When speech happens so fast? When
                    tone of voice matters as much, if not more than, semantics? 
                            I'm not angry! The young woman insists — and
                            we believe her angry tone of voice, not her words. see 

                When we listen to a speaker, we guess at the speaker's mood and identity, we
                    weigh semantics against tone — her tone of meaning ...
                        without the words in Robert Frost's phrasing — and interpret
                    accordingly . How far can we trust our ears? How
                    do our brains process a voice? How do we filter a voice through our personal
                    history of listening experiences, however much we intend to listen with an open
                    mind?

                Scientific approaches, from phonetic linguistics and the neuroscience of speech
                    perception, offer some answers — but as a rule, they have avoided the cultural,
                    aesthetic, historical and political questions that humanists like to ask. And
                    they rarely take, as their object of study, something like a poetry recording.
                    If they do, they aren't likely to bring knowledge of literary or performance
                    history, or Erving Goffman's concept of frame analysis , to bear on an individual performance of a literary
                    or dramatic text for a particular audience. Not only that, the software tools
                    used by linguists are not designed for the noisy, older recordings common in the
                    audio archive of, for instance, poetry readings. Few humanities scholars,
                    moreover, are trained in audio signal processing or linguistic analysis.

                Sound studies in general, and voice studies in particular, do not dominate
                    digital humanities scholarship and probably never will, amid our overwhelmingly
                    visual and textual culture — no matter that we are living in the Golden Age of
                    the Podcast. In practical terms, this means that the software tools available to
                    digital humanists who want to study performative speech are less familiar, and
                    less developed for our uses, than tools for text mining or network analysis, for
                    instance. The user base is also much smaller. These are all challenges we have
                    faced in choosing from the available tools for our research in voice studies,
                    and in developing new digital tools. But the digital study of literary
                    recordings has advanced in the last decade, and its future looks bright.
            

                2.

                Before we discuss those tools, however, some theoretical framing of our approach
                    to digital voice studies is in order. Close listening remains an inspiring
                    concept that, through the influence of Charles Bernstein's Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word
                    , has generated considerable scholarship on poetry
                    recordings. Despite the fact that Bernstein co-founded one of the largest online
                    archives of poetry audio, PennSound, close listening, when practiced in
                    published scholarship, has often maintained too much distance from actual
                    recordings of poetry reading. Cantankerous old-school scholars used to complain
                    about theoretical readings of literature that fly 10,000
                        feet above the text. Much work in sound and voice studies is still,
                    to our frustration, visual and textual — published in print form, without audio
                    recordings linked or embedded in the work, maintaining and enforcing a distance
                    from the audio by failing to make interaction with audio an essential part of
                    scholarship about it.While it isn’t possible to embed audio files in
                            this article, we do provide stable links at zenodo.org. When
                    published electronically, work in sound studies does increasingly embed audio
                    and allow for interaction with it,See, for instance, the Soundbox
                            project, developed at Duke University: . but there is a
                    long way to go to make this the norm in the field.

                In The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound
                        Reproduction, Jonathan Sterne advances a persuasive critique of
                    conventional assumptions about hearing versus vision, which he calls “the
                    audiovisual litany,” including the notions that “hearing tends toward
                    subjectivity, vision tends toward objectivity” and “hearing is a temporal sense,
                    vision is primarily a spatial sense” . Of course,
                    vision is no more objective than hearing, and both hearing and vision function
                    spatially and temporally. A child looking for her mother, for instance, can call
                    out, Where are you? And the mother can simply say In
                        here, because she knows the child can tell where in the house her
                    voice is coming from. Nevertheless, a photograph stays still when we study it.
                    And the words of a poem by Emily Dickinson, even as we recognize that no version
                    of the poem is authoritative, hold still on the page while we study them. A
                    recording of the same words does not, nor do our impressions of what we heard.
                    Perhaps we liked the performance, or we didn't, or we liked some things about
                    it, and we try to explain why. Perhaps we mistrust ourselves, and feel we need
                    to listen again. 

                Why does this matter to the study of poetry and poetry performance? Because
                    poetry is an oral form, and scholarly work on poetry performance and other
                    performative speech is still in its impressionistic infancy. When we listen to a
                    voice, Feeling is First (with nods to E.E. Cummings and Lauren Berlant), and our
                    inchoate feelings about voices bear scrutiny. As we have written elsewhere , the complexity of our perceptions of
                    voices highlight the fact that poetry is, after all, stylized communication. It
                    calls on deep, evolutionarily old neural pathways that support language as
                    speech, but not language as written. Writing is a recent kludge, an addon, not a
                    deep, inevitable function of the human brain like speech — and even deeper and
                    older are the vocal elements that create the tone of a voice, apart from words
                    or semantic meaning (think grunts, sighs, etc.). 

                What are often called paralinguistic elements of the voice, the pitch, the
                    intensity, the tempo, etc., are also pre — linguistic — preceding our knowledge
                    and development of language, and triggering emotional responses that have little
                    or nothing to do with the semantics of words. As such, the tone of voice exerts
                    a direct emotional impact that is wordless, as when we hear a baby's cry — or
                    when we hear a speaker's tone of voice conflicting with the semantic meaning of
                    her words, as when someone angrily insists, I'm not
                        angry! we cannot ignore these elements if we really want to
                    understand the experience of poetry, or of any performative speech.

                Studying performative speech should also mean listening to ourselves listening,
                    like the proverbial recursively self-conscious ethnographer. In The Race of Sound: Listening, Timbre and Vocality in African
                        American Music, musicologist Nina Sun Eidsheim discusses the
                    question we ask when listen to a voice, Who is this?
                    . We ask this question of an unknown caller
                    when we answer the phone. Indeed we ask it when we hear any disembodied voice,
                    anywhere, as we try to pin down the speaker's identity — and thus radically
                    reduce that voice's individuality to conform to or be rejected by our
                    expectations. Eidsheim calls Who is this? the acousmatic question,
                    after Pierre Schaeffer, who derive[s] the … root [of
                        acousmatic] from an ancient Greek legend about Pythagoras's disciples
                        listening to him through a curtain, and she argues that it relies on
                    fundamental misunderstandings of the human voice and our own listening
                    practices, particularly in regard to vocal timbre. 

                Accordingly, she argues that the acousmatic question is largely impossible to
                    answer, and that it is, in fact, the wrong question to ask. She offers three
                    correctives to it: 1) Voice is not singular; it is
                        collective; 2) Voice is not innate; it is
                        cultural and 3) Voice's source is not the
                        singer; it is the listener
                    . That is, everyone is trained throughout
                    their lives, whenever they vocalize and someone makes comments about their
                    voice, to then adjust it to match the culture's expectations of how they should
                    sound, in Foucauldian fashion — as a condition of
                        participation in a culture. Scholarship on poetry readings and
                    performative speech too often tends toward confident judgments about performance
                    styles, with little acknowledgment of the complexity of listening, or of the
                    influence of the listener's own aesthetic, cultural and ideological biases and
                    preferences in regard to performance style.See our discussion of
                            Raphael Allison’s Bodies on the Line: Performance
                                and the Sixties Poetry Reading (2014) in . See also Leslie Wheeler, who asserts that
                            contemporary American poets, as observed at the 2006 Associated Writers
                            Conference, typically do not display emotions at
                                their readings but instead tend . . . to manifest intellectual
                                detachment, if not in the poem’s words then through carefully
                                neutral delivery
                            . This may sound intuitively
                            accurate, but what does neutral delivery mean? Might the display of some
                            emotions come across as vocal restraint? And so on.

                If we are always performing for and listening to others listening to us, then we
                    never simply use our natural voices, because there is no such thing as a natural
                    voice unaffected by cultural training. Nor is there such a thing as a neutral,
                    singular, objective listener. Yet scholarship on poetry readings and
                    performative speech tends toward confident judgments about performance styles,
                    with inadequate acknowledgment of the complexity of listening, or of the
                    influence of the listener's own aesthetic, cultural and ideological biases and
                    preferences in regard to performance style. See our discussion of
                            Raphael Allison's Bodies on the Line: Performance
                                and the Sixties Poetry Reading (2014) . See also Leslie Wheeler, who asserts that
                            contemporary American poets, as observed at the 2006 Associated Writers
                            Conference, typically do not display emotions at
                                their readings but instead tend ... to manifest intellectual
                                detachment, if not in the poem’s words then through carefully
                                neutral delivery
                            . This may sound intuitively
                            accurate, but what does neutral delivery mean? Might the display of some
                            emotions come across as vocal restraint? And so on. 
                

                As Eidsheim paraphrases James Baldwin, one is always hearing
                        one's voice through the ears of others
                    . And we are always listening to others'
                    voices through the ears of others, wondering: would others agree with my
                    judgements about this voice? We listen to other voices through the ears of
                    others; just as we never simply use our natural voices because there is no such
                    thing as a natural voice unaffected by cultural training, nor do we listen in a
                    way that is free of cultural training. There is no such a thing as a neutral,
                    singular, objective listener. What we can do, following Eidsheim, is acknowledge
                    the role of the larger culture in co-creating our voices and listening habits,
                    the ways we speak and the ways we hear one another in different contexts. And we
                    can bring another digital perspective into our listening practices — that is,
                    the quantitative data perspective of audio signal processing, and the
                    visualization of that data.

                What follows is a critical narrative about the tools we have used and helped
                    develop in our research, adding that digital perspective, and some highlights of
                    the resulting research and its implications for literary study. These digital
                    tools can enable humanist scholars to practice slow listening in
                    the study of performative speech, to refine and test our impressionistic
                    understandings of a given recording. Slow listening involves 1) repeated
                    listening, with traditional close reading of the text; 2) scrutiny of our
                    listening habits, assumptions, biases, and expectations, often based on the
                    author's apparent identity and our own listening histories; 3) quantification of
                    sonic patterns, such as pitch, timing, and intensity, as physical phenomena; and
                    4) sound visualization, specifically pitch contours (which simply show
                    intonation patterns, or the rise and fall or steadiness of pitch over time), and
                    timing patterns (including pause duration and speaking rate), and intensity
                    patterns (volume or amplitude).

                In this approach, we make an analogy to the practice among some musicians of
                    slowing down a musical recording — say, a piano or saxophone piece with a very
                    fast tempo — to understand and practice a technique, often by transcribing it.
                    (Thanks to Alexander Ullman for alerting us to the term for this practice,
                        slowdown(ing).) This is not precisely what we are doing, but
                    performative speech, like music, rewards scrutiny with insight. Such scrutiny
                    can illuminate (there's the hegemony of the visual for you) our listening habits
                    and perceptions, and trends in particular genres of performative speech over
                    time. This is particularly true when we find ourselves questioning our
                    perceptions and impressions, and when sound visualizations and data — about,
                    say, pitch, timing and intensity, derived from signal processing of a speech
                    recording — do not neatly match up with our impressionistic perceptions of a
                    recording, or a body of recordings, or simply push us to refine or describe our
                    impressions more precisely.
            

                3.
                Our collaboration in testing and developing tools for critical voice studies
                    emerged from an effort to visualize and quantify what is popularly known as Poet
                    Voice. We aimed to confirm whether it exists, and if it does, to capture it in
                    the wild, and at a larger scale; that is, to find examples of it not only by
                    listening with our own ears, but by searching for particular pitch and timing
                    patterns in poetry recordings that we and other listeners might agree sound like
                    Poet Voice. 

                I know it when I hear it, many listeners might say
                    confidently about Poet Voice, echoing Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart's
                    insistence that, although he could not define hard-core pornography, he could
                    recognize it on sight . In the case of
                    pornography or obscenity, we know that cultural background and personal
                    experience influence what viewers find offensive. But what about a poetry
                    performance style that no one seems to like, which no one wants to admit to
                    using, and yet seems to be so widely employed that any poetry lover — or NPR
                    listener — feels they can recognize it? 

                Early on, without any digital tools to augment or refine our perceptions, one of
                    us defined Poet Voice, or monotonous incantation, as speech employing a repeated
                    cadence within a narrow range of pitch, and imposing that cadence on each line
                    of a poem, regardless of the mood or semantics of the words spoken . A few key points about speech perception:
                        pitch and timing are fundamental to the perception of tone of
                    voice. Is a speaker's voice especially high or low? How much do they vary their
                    pitch, and for what apparent semantic or affective reasons? Do they speak
                    quickly? Slowly? At a moderate, predictable pace? Do they pause often? Briefly?
                    Long and awkwardly? Suspensefully? And so on.

                We began our collaborative research with a few samples of Poet Voice by Natasha
                    Trethewey 
                    
                        audio clip of Natasha Trethewey
                    
                     and Louise Glück 
                    
                        audio clip of Louise Glück
                    
                     — two poets who are often mentioned as using it — and, by considering only
                    measures in pitch and timing discussed below, found other poets apparently using
                    it as well, in a study of sample recordings of 100 American poets . These other poets included Cecilia Llompart
                    reading Omens
                    
                        audio clip of Omens
                     and Matthew Zapruder reading When It's Sunny
                        They Push the Button. 
                    
                        audio clip of When It's Sunny They Push the
                                Button
                    
                     In the case of Llompart, we were not familiar with her work before we
                    sampled it for the study. In the case of Zapruder, whom we count as a pleasant
                    acquaintance, we were a bit chagrined to learn that, according to the data, he
                    seemed to use Poet Voice in this recording. Speaking impressionistically,
                    Zapruder's reading voice has some affinities with the likes of singer Bill
                    Callahan, whose voice music critic Amanda Petrusich describes as a heavy baritone that is somehow both entirely affectless and
                        drenched in feeling
                    . Why is it that we might appreciate low
                    affect in male poets or singers, perceived as such through a narrow pitch range,
                    yet readily find more pejorative examples of Poet Voice used by female than male
                    poets? 

                Might this suggest an element of unreflective sexism in our own and others'
                    perceptions of Poet Voice? Are we more likely to use Poet Voice as a critical
                    term about women poets? Do women poets use it more often than men? Or do we
                    expect men to sound low-affect, flat or incantatory (think of William Butler
                    Yeats and Allen Ginsberg), and don't expect women to sound high-affect, if
                    that's what Poet Voice even is? Few listeners would agree on whether a given
                    sample of apparent Poet Voice displays restrained affect, or false affect, or no
                    affect. Perhaps we just don't want to believe that our friends might use Poet
                    Voice, because we are used to hearing it as a critical term, if not an insult? 

                Interestingly, in a popular rant against Poet Voice, poet Rich Smith complains
                    about contemporary poets using Poet Voice (including Glück, Trethewey and
                    Gregory Orr), but claims that Poet Voice is an effective
                        and affecting style when practiced by, for instance, Yeats . 
                        audio clip of Yeats
                     Ginsberg also uses a very monotonous speaking style in Howl, yet, as with Yeats, the effect seems to us more
                    sermonic than Poet Voice. 
                        audio clip of Allen Ginsberg reading Howl
                    

                We encourage readers to take a moment to listen to the samples linked above of
                    Glück, Trethewey, Llompart, Zapruder, Yeats, and Ginsberg to discover whether
                    they agree that the poets are using a similar speaking style. For contrast to
                    the above samples of Poet Voice, we also provide a link to a sample from Rae
                    Armatrout, a conversational poet who uses contrastive pitch, less regular
                    rhythm, and a wider pitch range.
                        audio clip of Rae Armatrout
                    

                In using digital tools to analyze and visualize acoustic signals, we treat
                    neither the tools nor the resulting data as supremely objective and corrective,
                    but rather use the perspective they provide to complement and sometimes refine
                    or check our own, inevitably idiosyncratic, aural perceptions and impressions.
                    Beyond Poet Voice, we were, and are, interested in exploring trends and changes
                    in performance styles over time, and changing tastes in performance styles, not
                    only in poetry recordings but other genres of performative speech, such as
                    political addresses, sermons, and radio broadcasts.

                To visualize, interpret, describe and quantify patterns in pitch and timing for
                    our research on poetry performance, we wanted one or more open-source,
                    user-friendly tools that could easily and accurately visualize pitch contours,
                    or intonation patterns, with the text aligned beneath the contours. We wanted
                    our tools to be user-friendly for the humanist, not requiring much, if any,
                    programming skills to use. Yet we also want to enable users to apply them with
                    some basic knowledge about speech production and perception, and about signal
                    processing. Additionally, we want these tools to provide numerical values
                    measuring pitch (in Hertz) and timing (in seconds) for further analysis, and
                    possibly other data about the voice, including intensity, breathiness, nasality,
                    etc.

                There is a long history to the hope that, by tracking pitch, we might measure and
                    visualize vocal patterns of expression. In 1853, Edouard-Leon Scott de
                    Martinville began creating what he called phonautograms, a
                        visual record of the pitch of someone's voice, how loudly he spoke, and with
                        what emphasis. He felt that this represented our living speech, our essential character even, and he regarded Edison's invention of the phonograph in 1877, as
                        pointless, because it reproduced sound instead of writing it
                    .

                As we have written elsewhere , pitch has
                    long been neglected in the study of prosody in poetry, despite much interest in
                    its role among prominent poetry scholars such as I.A. Richards, who wrote in
                    1926 that [a] more serious omission is the neglect by the
                        majority of metrists of the pitch relations of syllables ... that a rise and
                        fall of pitch is involved in metre and is as much a part of the poet's
                        technique as any other feature of verse, as much under his control also, is
                        indisputable
                     .
                This neglect in 1926 was understandable, due to the lack of tools for pitch
                    analysis. Today, however, there are many commercial and open-source software
                    packages for tracking pitch and performing other speech analysis. For
                    qualitative and quantitative analysis in linguistics, available tools for
                    analyzing pitch and timing variables are called pitch-trackers and
                        forced aligners. A pitch-tracker samples a speaker's pitch,
                    called the fundamental frequency, or f0, at certain intervals, e.g. every 10
                    milliseconds. A forced aligner takes a transcript of a speech recording and
                    aligns it with the recording, delivering timing information. 

                Figures 2 and 3 show the pitch contour for Louise Glück reading a few lines from
                        The Wild Iris
                     in Drift, the open-source
                    pitch-tracker whose development we have overseen, now hosted by SpokenWeb at
                    Concordia University. Figures 4 and 5 show word and pause length data in CSVs
                    for the same recording from Gentle, an open-source forced aligner that Drift
                    works with, and the fundamental frequency for every ten milliseconds in Hertz
                    for two words, It is, from Drift (Both
                    tools are described in detail in section 4). 
                        Pitch contour in Drift. Louise Glück reading The
                                Wild Iris (1992)
                        Pitch contour line chart of the spoken sentence It is terrible to survive as
                            consciousness.
                        
                    
                    
                        Pitch contour in Drift. Louise Glück reading The
                                Wild Iris (1992)
                        Pitch contour line chart of the spoken sentence buried in the dark earth
                        
                    
                    
                        Gentle data: Pause start and end times and pause length. Louise Glück
                            reading The Wild Iris (1992) 
                        Table of duration of words spoken in Figures 2 and 3
                        
                    
                    
                        Drift data: Fundamental frequency every 10 ms in hertz. Louise Glück
                            reading The Wild Iris (1992)
                        Table of times, pitches, and phonemes for all instances of
                                it and is
                        
                    
                



                The pitch contour of Glück's voice shows the fundamental frequency, the vibration
                    rate of the vocal cords in speech, keeping to a narrow pitch range, starting off
                    at 185 Hz, rising to 207 with terrible, and so on; the Gentle data
                    also shows that Glück pauses for almost a third of a second after
                        survive and buried, lingering to emphasize the
                    suffering involved.An average frequency for male voices is 125 Hz, and
                            225 Hz for female voices ,
                            though this can vary by language, region, and many other variables; by
                                male and female in this context, we mean biological
                            sex assigned at birth.
                

                The harmonic frequencies of the fundamental frequency, which follow the formula
                    f1 = 2 x f0, f2 = 3 x f0, etc. as they resonate through the vocal tract, give a
                    voice its unique timbre and distinguish different vowels regardless of the
                            pitch.While linguists typically refer to the fundamental
                            frequency as f0, there is some disagreement about whether to start
                            counting at 0 or 1. The following spectrograph in Matlab
                    illustrates the fundamental frequency of Glü;ck's voice saying It is
                        terrible; again, the fundamental frequency is around 200 Hz; the
                    second harmonic (f1) is at 400 Hz, the third (f2) at 600 Hz, and so on, all the
                    way up the seventeenth harmonic at 3,600 Hz. 
                        Spectrogram of the fundamental frequency (f0) and multiple harmonics
                            of the fundamental in hertz (f1, f2, etc). Louise Glück reading The Wild Iris (1992)
                        Spectrogram of the spoken sentence It is
                                terrible to survive
                        
                    
                




                As a rule, more expressive speakers use a relatively wider range of pitch.
                    However, it is also important to note that pitch perception
                        is not linear; an octave is a logarithmic relation, twice or half a
                    given frequency . For instance, an octave above 120
                    Hz is 240 Hz; an octave below is 60 Hz. This means we do not perceive women as
                    having a wider vocal range than men, although they use a wider range of pitch as
                    measured in Hertz. The same holds for notes on a piano: the octave between C3
                    and C4 uses a wider pitch range than between C2 and C3, but we hear it as the
                    same interval. This makes interpreting linear graphs of pitch a challenge, and
                    thus we display the more perceptually relevant logged pitch values, as with the
                    pitch contour (in Drift, above) of Glück's
                    voice.

                In analyzing the pitch of human speech, we could in theory base our approach on
                    articulation, perception, or acoustics. Measuring articulation — especially, for
                    pitch, the vibration of the vocal folds, but also the movements of the tongue,
                    lips, jaw, etc. — is not usually possible. As humanists, we often work from
                    recorded speech audio, and/or lack the requisite instrumentation to objectively
                    measure vocal fold vibration. Measuring perception would be impractical, even
                    though pitch is perceptual. As phonologist Carlos Gussenhoven explains in Phonology of Tone and Intonation: Unfortunately, listeners lack the appropriate conceptualizations and
                        vocabulary to report their sensations, and are typically incapable of saying
                        even whether a given pitch change represents a fall or rise. Since individual perception is largely a
                        black box process, it may be impossible to say why
                    different individuals report pitch differently, or why they make certain errors,
                    e.g. whether pitch is rising or falling.

                Moreover, the fuzziness and subjectivity of perceived pitch can be an impediment
                    to research because of individual and cultural differences. Our descriptions of
                    pitch, not to mention what pitch range we feel is appropriate for a given
                    speaker in a given context, varies according to culture, among other variables —
                    e.g., the same woman might speak at a higher average pitch and use a wider pitch
                    range in her native Japanese than in American English. Dutch speakers describe
                    pitch as high or low pitch, whereas the same vocal quality is characterized as
                        thin or thick in Farsi . And so
                    on.

                Consequently, the best and most established approach to pitch estimation relies
                    on computational analysis of speech acoustics. A pitch tracker such as we use
                    (Drift) samples the fundamental frequency of a recorded voice — Drift samples it
                    every 10 milliseconds — and is designed to avoid errors as much as technically
                    possible, even with noisy recordings. We strongly advocate this computational
                    approach to speech acoustics because 1) the algorithms approximate perception,
                    in that they rely on similar acoustical features as human listeners do when
                    estimating pitch; 2) computational approaches developed, practiced and vetted by
                    a large number of expert researchers in acoustic analysis are comparatively
                    objective in the sense of being unaffected by a researcher's personal biases
                    about pitch, or by codifying biases explicitly; 3) the techniques can be used on
                    arbitrarily large datasets with minimal additional resources; 4) they are
                    usually reproducible, so results can be replicated within or across research
                    groups, a matter of increasing importance in any field aspiring to rigorous
                    empirical scholarship; and 5) the algorithms themselves can be shared openly,
                    compared, and queried when they yield errors or fail, which they inevitably do
                    sometimes with real data.

                Despite the sophistication of contemporary automatic pitch trackers, errors
                    arise, partly from the limits of the algorithms but partly as a result of the
                    inherent qualities of the human voice as a complex and dynamic time-frequency
                    signal, as the figure showing the harmonics of Glü;ck’s voice suggests. To begin
                    with, voiceless friction [can be mistaken] for voicing, and
                        [so] irregular measurement points may show up during fricatives and releases
                        of affricated plosives. Conversely, [a pitch tracking program] may interpret
                        irregularly voiced signals as voiceless
                    . In non-technical terms, such errors are caused
                    by some unvoiced consonants being incorrectly marked as voicing pitch, and in
                    other cases the pitch value of vowels being missed. If an algorithm makes these
                    errors, they have to be detected by looking at the data, or the visualization of
                    that data, or filtering the data. Thus, robustness to additive noise is an
                    important goal for research on the voice. Not only that, but a  pitch tracker may fail to analyze the voiced signal
                            correctly. When the voice becomes creaky, as it often does at lower
                            pitches, the algorithm may become confused by peaks in the signal that
                            do not correspond to the vibratory action of the vocal folds. If these
                            appear halfway through the period ... they may lead to ... doubling
                            errors… Similarly, the algorithm may miss every second periodicity peak,
                                believing; these peaks determine the sound quality rather
                            than the periodicity (halving errors). Such octave jumps are
                            usually easy to detect: the pitch track shows a sudden change to a value
                            half or double that of the immediately preceding value, while there is
                            no auditory impression that corresponds to that jump.
                

                In the pitch contour above of Glü;ck reading consciousness, for instance, there is an octave jump — a halving
                    error — beneath the syllable ness. Octave jumps and noise errors
                    occur more frequently in noisy recordings, of course, and with programs not
                    optimized for noise. While common in pitch estimation, octave jumps can be
                    addressed with heuristics that constrain the probable pitch range, for instance
                    by gender, or attempt to repair errors posthoc without affecting the basic
                    estimation algorithm, especially with recent advances in pitch-tracking. 

                Many different pitch algorithms have been applied to speech audio, all of which
                    ultimately try to estimate the vocal fold rate. Some deal mainly with the speech
                    as a signal in time, whereas others emphasize frequency representations or first
                    filter speech into different frequency bands before working on it in time. Still
                    others use so-called cepstral analysis, a hybrid time-frequency approach which
                    leverages the fact that in speech production, whatever the vocal folds are doing
                    (mainly creating pitch) is acoustically dissociable from what the rest of the
                    vocal tract is doing (e.g. making vowels and syllables). Today's most frequently
                    used pitch estimation methods, and their accuracy in estimating male and female
                    pitch in clean speech, are discussed in Strömbergsson , pitch-tracking performance on noisy speech is
                    discussed in Jouvet and Laprie .

                In our view, the choice of pitch tracker is less a principled decision and more a
                    pragmatic one, with an eye toward ease of use, having open-source (readable)
                    code, noise-robustness, a low error rate with clean and noisy speech, and ease
                    of integration within a larger workflow. Gussenhoven puts it more succinctly:
                        In practice, the choice of pitch tracker is determined
                        by circumstance and convenience: their evaluation is typically beyond the
                        competence of a phonologist
                    . While we agree with the basic premise, we do
                    insist that researchers using any pitch tracker should have a basic conceptual
                    understanding of how it works under the hood, so they are cognizant of
                    its strengths and limitations.

                In addition to errors that follow from the natural variance and complexity of
                    speech, a potentially greater challenge for pitch trackers is additive noise
                    and, more generally, recording quality. In our work, it quickly became clear, in
                    fact, that tools commonly used by linguists to analyze both pitch and timing
                    patterns in so-called natural speech, recorded in the ideal acoustic conditions
                    of a sound booth, would not work well for research on recordings of poetry
                    readings, which can be noisy, either due to the recording equipment used,
                    background noise at a venue of a poetry reading or, even in the case of highly
                    produced studio recordings, due to age. 

                Praat is a tool both of us have used, to begin research visualizing intonation
                    patterns (MacArthur in 2012 and 2013, prior to our collaboration) and to
                    manipulate pitch for experiments addressing how the brain represents and attends
                    to speech (Miller, since 2009). An open-source program for speech analysis
                    developed in C and C++ at the University of Amsterdam by the phonetic scientists
                    Paul Boersma and David Weenink, Praat was initially released in 2003 and is
                    periodically updated. It uses a time-domain pitch-tracking technique developed
                    by Boersma, which showed great improvement over earlier frequency-domain
                    techniques. Praat identifies the best pitch candidate at any time frame (say,
                    every 10 ms) by finding peaks in the autocorrelation function, which all
                    periodic sounds (including voiced speech) will show. 

                Among its innovations were to deal gracefully with two side effects of typical
                    signal processing that reduce the accuracy of the pitch estimates (specifically
                    correcting for windowing into time frames and sampling). Praat then traces an
                    estimated pitch path across time to determine the final pitch contour,
                    incorporating a cost to minimize excessive voiced-unvoiced transitions
                    and octave jumps. However, Praat is not very user-friendly and has very limited
                    and unattractive data visualization options, and it is not easy to extract the
                    data about pitch and timing from Praat. Linguists who use it write and share
                    scripts to run particular tasks that cannot be performed using the basic Praat
                    interface. For humanists who cannot write code, or simply do not want to spend
                    their time this way, the limitations of Praat quickly become apparent. Praat
                    also provides no simple way to align text beneath speech — that is, to line up
                    the intonation pattern of a line of a poem with the text. 

                A forced aligner that can be used with Praat, called FAVE (Forced Alignment and
                    Vowel Extraction), does not work well with incomplete or flawed transcripts — a
                    problem for large-scale analysis of audio archives for which transcripts may not
                    be readily available, like a poetry archive such as PennSound . Like other forced aligners, FAVE incorporates a
                    “dictionary” of possible words and an acoustic model of speech, in this case of
                    American English, trained on hours of labeled recordings. For the acoustics, it
                    does not represent speech as a complex sound pressure waveform, but rather as
                    much lower-dimensional Perceptual Linear Prediction coefficients, which use a
                    perceptually-inspired front end and in many cases a cepstral analysis to extract
                    speech-relevant (e.g. vowel formant) parameters. The acoustic model in FAVE was
                    built with the HTK Speech Recognition Toolkit, which uses Hidden Markov Models
                    to determine the probabilities of transitions from one state–in this case speech
                    sound or phoneme–to the next. The aligner is therefore mapping a transcript onto
                    best-guess acoustic sequences, giving the timing of all (identified) words and
                    phones. 

                In the midst of frustrations with Praat in 2013, MacArthur joined as a
                    user-tester the NEH Institute HiPSTAS (High-Performing Sound Technologies for
                    Access and Scholarship), directed by Tanya Clement, and tried out the program
                    ARLO (Adaptive Recognition with Layered Optimization) to study pitch patterns in
                    poetry recordings.Please see . A
                    machine-learning speech analysis and visualization tool originally intended to
                    analyze birdsong, ARLO has significant limitations for speech analysis: it
                    displays non-standard spectrograms with unusual time compression, making it hard
                    to perceive speech features, and it requires sizable supercomputing resources to
                    run. As well, many parameters require considerable manipulation to produce
                    accurate pitch values, and pitch data is difficult to extract. The goal of
                        [d]eveloping ARLO as a web-based application that can
                        be leveraged by a wide community of users was abandoned . However, HiPSTAS was invaluable in bringing
                    together communities of scholars interested in studying voice recordings, such
                    as poetry readings and oral histories, and it supported novel research. 
            

                4.
                The potential for digital voice studies research advanced considerably in 2015,
                    when we began collaborating and also met Robert Ochshorn, who at the time was a
                    media-interface researcher in San Francisco at Communication Design Group Labs,
                    conceived by Alan Kay.In 2015-16, MacArthur had an ACLS Digital
                            Innovations Fellowship at the University of California, Davis, with the
                            initial plan of developing a pitch-tracking interface for humanities
                            scholars using Praat and ARLO. CDG, initially funded by SAP, turned into
                            HARC (Human Advancement Research Lab, part of Y Combinator Research).
                            Ochshorn co-founded a start-up, Reduct.Video, in 2017. If the
                    choice of tools is indeed determined by circumstance and
                        convenience, it can help to connect with leading-edge researchers
                    from Silicon Valley. Ochshorn and Max Hawkins had just designed and released
                    Gentle in 2015. 

                Gentle is built on
                    top of an optimal open-source speech recognition toolkit, Kaldi, initially
                    developed at Johns Hopkins University in 2009 . Gentle
                        take[s] media files and their transcripts and return[s]
                        extremely precise timing information for each word (and phoneme) in the
                        media. It was designed specifically to function with more
                    flexibility than FAVE, to be easier to install and use …
                        handle noisy and complicated audio … and … be unusually accommodating to
                        long or incomplete transcripts
                     (It can also produce rough transcripts of
                    the spoken text of a recording from scratch — the degree of accuracy varies
                    according to recording quality, and the errors are entertaining — which can then
                    be corrected and aligned with the recording.) CSVs with the start and end time
                    of each word can be downloaded from Gentle as well; see above sample for the
                    Glü;ck recording. From this data, it's a simple matter to calculate word and
                    pause duration, as well as Words Per Minute, a standard linguistic measure of
                    speaking rate.

                Through Ochshorn, we also learned of a pitch-tracking algorithm developed in
                    2012, better suited to the audio archives humanists study: Noise Robust Pitch Tracking by Subband Autocorrelation
                        Classification, by computer scientist Byung Suk Lee and electrical
                    engineer Daniel P. W. Ellis. The Lee-Ellis algorithm was [t]rain[ed] on bandlimited and noisy speech (processed to simulate a
                        low-quality radio channel) [and] leads to a great increase in performance
                        over state-of-the-art algorithms, according to both the traditional GPE
                        measure, and a proposed novel Pitch Tracking Error which more fully reflects
                        the accuracy of both pitch extraction and voicing detection in a single
                        measure
                    
                

                Ochshorn and Max Hawkins then developed a prototype user-interface for Drift,
                    which combines the Lee-Ellis algorithm for pitch-tracking with Gentle's forced
                    alignment features to visualize text beneath the pitch contour of a given speech
                    recording, showing which words are spoken as the voice rises and falls, remains
                    at the same pitch, etc. (See above pitch contours for Trethewey, Gluck,
                    Llompart, Zapruder and Yeats.) A CSV with time in seconds, pitch in Hertz, words
                    and phonemes can be downloaded from Drift (see figure above). Drift also has
                    potential applications for the hearing impaired, providing a clear visualization
                    of intonation patterns that might complement closed captioning. In addition to
                    the online demos, both Gentle and Drift are available for free download and
                    installation on Macs. 

                The development and dissemination of Gentle and Drift were supported in 2018 and
                    2019 by a NEH Digital Humanities Advancement grant project, Tools for Listening to Text-in-Performance, and continue to be supported by a 7-year Can$2.5 million SSHRC
                    grant project, The Spoken Web: Conceiving and creating a
                        nationally networked archive of literary recordings for research and
                        teaching. 
                    With considerable improvements to both the interface and functionality, thanks
                    to our talented undergraduate research assistants at UC Davis, Richard Kim,
                    Hannan Walliullah and especially Sarah Yuniar, Drift4 was released on
                    November 14, 2022, and is hosted by the SSHRC-funded SpokenWeb project for the
                    long term. 

                In parallel with Ochshorn's development of Gentle and Drift, and also with
                    support from the NEH and SSHRC grants, we have also built a toolbox in Matlab
                    called Voxit, to enable greater ease of data exploration and in-depth analysis
                    (or manipulation) of vocal characteristics. Voxit is a sort of feature-rich,
                    developmental sandbox for large-scale quantitative analysis to complement the
                    simpler and user-friendly Drift and Gentle, which are best for qualitative,
                    visual and small-scale quantitative analysis. The main engines for analyzing
                    speech in Voxit are i) the same Lee-Ellis algorithm for pitch tracking that
                    Drift uses (Subband Autocorrelation Classification), and ii) WORLD, a
                    vocoder-based, high-quality speech analysis, manipulation, and synthesis program
                    developed by Masanori Morise (who also worked with Hideki Kawahara on a
                    predecessor to WORLD, called TANDEM-STRAIGHT). WORLD, which is available in C++,
                    Python and Matlab, estimates speech parameters such as voiced-unvoiced
                    distinctions and pitch, with the particular goal of producing high-quality
                    resynthesized speech with low computational cost. 

                Voxit uses the Lee-Ellis pitch and other vocal/acoustic properties encoded by
                    WORLD to provide vocal prosodic measures that have perceptual importance for
                    speaking style, context, etc., such as pitch range (in octaves),
                        pitch speed (in octaves per second), pitch acceleration
                        (in octaves per second squared), and rhythmic complexity of
                        pauses
                    
                    , and more recently, intensity
                        range and intensity speed (in
                            decibels).Comparing data for intensity — volume or
                            amplitude, in other words, measured in decibels — can be very
                            challenging across recordings, as many variables influence intensity
                            patterns, included the recording space, recording equipment, media
                            format, distance of a speaker from a microphone, etc. However, patterns
                            within recordings can be meaningful. (Drift4 incorporates all
                    of the Voxit prosodic measures as well.) While Voxit does not feature forced
                    alignment internally, it can import the word- and phoneme-level alignment
                    produced by Gentle and derived measures based on the alignment alone, or on the
                    alignment in relation to the other derived speech parameters. It thus offers a
                    powerful and readily extensible toolkit for speech-acoustic-linguistic analysis
                    for humanistic research, particularly for large datasets. 

                To better understand how the two approaches can work, and work together, we
                    encourage users to explore a number of our publications, including Beyond Poet Voice: Sampling the (Non-)Performance Styles of
                        100 American Poets which
                    illustrates the applications of the Voxit toolbox with 100 sample recordings;
                        After Scansion: Visualizing, Deforming and Listening to
                        Poetic Prosody, which walks users through applications of Drift and
                    Gentle with 15 sample poetry recordings; John Ashbery’s
                        Reading Voice, which analyzes recordings from the 92nd Street Y over
                    five decades; and 101 Black Women Poets in Mainly White and
                        Mainly Black Rooms, which further analyzes 203 recordings. 


                To return to Poet Voice, when we analyzed sample recordings of 100 American
                    poets, we found that other pitch and timing patterns — in addition to a slow
                    pace and narrow pitch range — are also important in the perception of this style
                    of reading poetry . 

                Voices that sound, at least to us, like they are using Poet Voice tend to read
                    relatively slowly, with a predictable rhythm, in terms of tempo and pauses,
                    compared to poets we might hear as more expressive or conversational, which tend
                    to exhibit less predictable, and thus more complex, rhythmic patterns. They also
                    tend to change pitch slowly, as well as using a relatively narrow range of
                    pitch, again compared to more expressive or conversational speakers. The
                    following figures show some of these variables for recordings of these poems in
                    their entirety: Natasha Trethewey's Monument,
                    Louise Glück's The Wild Iris, Cecilia Llompart's
                        Omens, Matthew Zapruder's When It's Sunny They Push the Button, William Butler Yeats's The Lake Isle of Innisfree, Rae Armantrout's Heart of It, and the first 2:45 of poets who do not
                    sound, to us, as if they are using Poet Voice. 
                        Pitch Range, Speed and Acceleration in Sample Recordings by Seven
                            Poets
                        Bar chart
                        
                    
                    
                        Rhythmic Complexity of Pauses in Sample Recordings by Seven Poets (a
                            lower value means a more predictable rhythm)
                        Bar chart
                        
                    
                    
                        Words Per Minute in Sample Recordings by Seven Poets
                        Bar chart
                        
                    
                




                From these few samples, we conclude that, when some listeners hear poets read
                    with even just one or two of these characteristics — slow pitch speed, slow
                    pitch acceleration, narrow pitch range, low rhythmic complexity, and/or slow
                    speaking rate — they hear Poet Voice.  Oversimplifications about the voice
                        are hard to escape, as exemplified in the game of telephone that occurred
                        when our research briefly went viral, as in the aggregator Newser’s URL
                        description, Science Proves Boring Poet Voice
                            Exists: . The headline was even worse: Poems May Be Great,
                            but Poet Voice Is the Pits. Newser misread an article
                        that appeared in Atlas Obscura, An Algorithmic
                            Investigation of the Highfalutin' Poet Voice, which in
                        turn brought attention to but caricatured aspects of the longer article
                        published in The Journal of Cultural Analytics,
                        and took its title not from anything we wrote about Poet Voice, but from a
                        quotation from poet Rich Smith’s popular polemic about Poet Voice quoted
                        above, which appeared in City Arts. 
                     In other words, we listen selectively and use fuzzy inference, seeking
                    at least one reason, or apparently objective vocal quality, to support or
                    justify the way we respond to a reading style, whether we like it or not. But
                    Poet Voice is not a monolithic manner of reading poetry, nor, to point out the
                    obvious, is it innately irritating. Poet Voice is collectively constructed, at
                    least in part, in the ears of listeners, as Eidsheim might say. 

                What is potentially transformative about slow listening research, as our work on
                    Poet Voice suggests, is that the digital tools provide a nuanced empirical and
                    quantitative perspective on the intuitions we have developed as, respectively, a
                    poetry scholar, poet and amateur singer with years of experience attending
                    poetry readings and listening to and teaching with poetry recordings
                    (MacArthur), and as a neuroscientist of speech perception and amateur musician
                    with more than a casual interest in vocal performance, in speech and song
                    (Miller). This digital, empirical, quantitative perspective is not infallible
                    nor objective, but it is a very useful complement to our very human
                    perspectives. Both of us are fascinated by (and opinionated about) what makes
                    for compelling performative speech, in teaching, in academic lectures and in
                    U.S. culture at large. And yet we recognize — and these tools have helped us
                    appreciate this point deeply further — that, as we test our own biases and
                    refine our own intuitions in terms of speech perception, we need all the help we
                    can get!

                There is just no reason to rely any longer on older methods of impressionistic
                    generalizing, without recourse to digital tools or computational analysis, about
                    or from a small number of familiar recordings, which are not incorporated into
                    the scholarship published about them, such that readers are not actually
                    listening to the object of study. This has been the typical scholarly approach
                    of close listening. We do not at all mean to disrespect the crucial work of
                    close listening or of Bernstein, who has encouraged our research every step of
                    the way. His former student Chris Mustazza, now co-director of PennSound,
                    characterizes the new approaches we and others are using as machine-aided close listening
                    . The rich intuitions of scholars form an excellent
                    starting point for research on poetry performance, which can benefit enormously
                    from these digital methods. Indeed, it was heartening when Bernstein wrote about
                    our work in 2017: You are certainly doing the work I had
                        hoped might be done .

                And we are not alone. In recent years, a small but growing number of literary and
                    humanities scholars have begun to apply digital sound studies tools to the
                    analysis of speech recordings. Some of this work is led by other fields with
                    more training in the human voice, media history and/or digital tools. For
                    instance, The Oxford Handbook of Voice Studies
                    (2019) edited by Nina Eidsheim, which focuses mostly on voice in song, oral
                    history and political speech, includes pieces by comparative literature scholar
                    Tom McEnaney on the timbre of NPR voices, and film studies scholars Dan Wang on
                        cinematic speech, and Jennifer Fleeger on robot speech in film.
                        The Sound Studies Reader (2012) edited by
                    Jonathan Sterne, also includes pieces on sound in film. The Journal of Cultural Analytics and Digital
                        Humanities Quarterly welcome work on the study of sound in literary
                    recordings, though both are understandably dominated by computational analysis
                    of text and image. The Journal of Interdisciplinary Voice
                        Studies, founded in 2016, also has potential as a place to host
                    scholarship on literary recordings. 

                Drift and Gentle have been applied to many genres of performative speech,
                    including and beyond poetry recordings. Our NEH project Tools for Listening to
                    Text-in-Performance, co-directed by MacArthur and Neil Verma, involved a team of
                    20 user-testers on Drift and Gentle from across the U.S., representing the
                    disciplines of communications, literary studies, film studies, performance
                    studies, media and radio history, comparative literature, science and technology
                    studies, theatre, and media preservation. Initial results illustrate both the
                    potential of this research for all sorts of performative speech, and the way
                    that tools can be applied in unpredictable ways, depending on the object of
                    study and the scholar's interests. For instance, the research group at the
                    University of Wisconsin-Madison used Drift to consider different genres of podcasts and radio …. to analyze potential differences
                        in tone and delivery, and they used Gentle to
                        see if different genres of podcasts have different conventions of duration
                        and WPM [Words Per Minute, or speaking rate] (see .

                In an application we did not anticipate, the Podcastre group also found it useful
                    to use Gentle's ability to create rough transcripts to search for particular
                    vocabulary in podcasts, as a tool to explore which podcasts to study more
                    closely. Gretchen Jude, a performance studies scholar, has used both tools to
                    study the speed and flow of speech as well as hesitations
                        on words, and placement and length of pauses in second-language
                    speakers of English, and Adam Hammond and Jonathan Dick have used both tools to
                    analyze different speakers' performances of T.S. Eliot's The Waste Land, focusing on the question of whether timing and pitch data from Gentle and Drift (and the outputs of the
                        prosodic measures script) can reveal something to a human listener (very
                        familiar with the recordings) that they didn't already know. Our suggestion
                        was that they could, and our example was Eliot's reading of The Waste Land,
                        which the prosodic measures position as one of the most internally varied of
                        the readings we've heard, despite most [human] listeners' sense that he's
                        among the most monotonous
                    .

                Media historian Patrick Feaster (co-founder of FirstSounds.org) has used Gentle and Drift to analyze recordings of
                        Cal Stewart … a well-known phonographic storyteller who
                        recorded dozens of original comic spoken-word selections in the role of
                        Uncle Josh Weathersby between 1897 and his death in 1919…. to compar[e] and
                        contras[t] examples of his work in an effort to trace how his repertoire,
                        style, and dynamic performance strategies evolved over time. Jacob
                    Smith, a media historian at Northwestern, has used Drift to analyze pitch
                    variables in vaudeville ethnic stereotypes as performed on phonograph records
                    from 1905 and 1911 by Ada Jones and Len Spencer, for an essay that appeared in
                        The Oxford Handbook of Cinematic Listening,
                        The Courtships of Ada and Len: Mediated Musicals and
                        Vocal Caricature Before the Cinema.

                Another signal of serious academic interest in the intersection of sound studies
                    and literature is a special section of PMLA in March 2020 devoted to Aurality
                    and Literacy, curated by Matthew Rubery, author of The
                        Untold Story of the Talking Book (2016), and Christopher Cannon.
                    Though it did not much involve directly applying digital tools to literary
                    recordings, one particular piece in that issue articulates both the need for and
                    some of the obstacles to this sort of research on literary audio. As James
                    English argues in Teaching the Novel in the Audio
                        Age, the success of the audiobook, the market
                        for [which] is dominated by literary works, and specifically by novels,
                        which comprise nearly three quarters of all sales, necessitates new
                    pedagogies that incorporate audio versions of literary texts into teaching, as
                    much as the texts themselves. For English, [e]very vocal
                        performance of a novel is an interpretation, a reading as well as a reading
                        out loud and [n]one stands outside what
                        [Matthew] Rubery calls the politics of narration. Thus
                    concerns arise, with the voices of different characters and narrators, about
                    vocal stereotyping according to race, gender, sexuality, (dis)ability, etc. Yet
                    he concludes that these concerns should not be a focus in teaching audio books:
                            The novel is a dialogic form, and even those
                            written in the first person (a distinct minority, by the reckoning of
                            Ted Underwood and his collaborators) incorporate lots of reported
                            speech. Except in the rare case of full-cast audio dramatizations,
                            audiobooks require a vocal performer capable of rendering multiple
                            voices. Conveying social distinctions between characters through faked
                            accents and other tricks of the voice is a skill fundamental to
                            performative work in the medium. Some degree of stereotyping is
                            inescapable
                    The issues around vocal stereotyping can of course be
                            embraced as teachable controversies. But that shifts time and attention
                            away from other interpretative concerns, other teaching that we might
                            have in mind for a class. It also requires of us some new proficiencies
                            with classroom technology. 
                

                Those proficiencies, for English, mostly come down to preparing audio segments
                    from audio books for listening and discussion, accepting the time commitment
                    required, being prepared for the technical difficulties that may arise for both
                    students and instructors — and then contend[ing] with our
                        discipline's entrenched anti-audio prejudices. 

                The methods of slow listening, as we have outlined them above, can be usefully
                    applied to audio books — not to reduce the analysis to finger-pointing about
                    vocal stereotypes, but to help students and instructors alike to think more
                    deeply about the politics of performance and identity, so central to both the
                    dramatization and interpretation. A former undergraduate student of English,
                    Alexander Ullman, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of California, Berkeley,
                    is doing promising such work on audio books and Black/Jewish identity, using
                    Drift and Gentle. Acknowledging in our pedagogy and scholarship that the
                    aural/oral dimensions of literature matter as much as the text, and indeed
                    directly affect the reception and interpretation of the text, extends a long and
                    necessary movement away from New Critical assumptions about the text's primacy.
                    In teaching and studying audio books and other recorded performances of
                    literature, we can learn to register and articulate our own implicit aural
                    biases and preconceptions — and also, perhaps to discover a greater freedom in
                    the choices we make as interpreters and (sometimes reluctant) performers of
                    literature in the classroom. 
            

                5.
                User-friendliness and open-source are two concepts that continue to guide the
                    development of Gentle, Drift, and Voxit. The justifications for open-source
                    software are well-known and persuasive. Familiar as the term
                        user-friendly is, it requires some unpacking. Ochshorn, the interface
                    designer and software developer with whom we have worked closely on Drift and
                    Gentle, is fond of relating an anecdote to illustrate the tension between
                    designing tools that are easy to use, and tools that transparently present the
                    complexity behind their processes and allow the user to interact with the
                    underlying data. The anecdote is from historian David F. Noble's Forces of Production: A Social History of Industrial
                        Automation
                    . Noble writes: 
                         If the relationship between technical people and those
                            who wield social power informs their designs and their estimates of what
                            is possible, so too ... does their relationship with [users] ... Suppose
                            … an engineer designed a machine for his best friend, for her birthday…
                            saying, with true professional pride, Happy birthday. I have built
                                for you my finest machine; it is so well-designed, it can be run by
                                an idiot. No doubt his friend, who does not consider herself
                            an idiot, would be taken aback…. and the engineer would be obliged to
                            try to redesign the machine for someone who was not an idiot. This would
                            be very difficult, given the orientation of his professional knowledge,
                            and he might not even know where to begin. (Of course, he might start by
                            pretending he was designing it for himself.)
                

                The gender of the characters in this anecdote is not accidental, of course. A DH
                    tool like Voyant, some might say, is designed to be run by an idiot — while
                    others would insist that it enables an accomplished historian, for instance, who
                    has spent years mastering their field of the U.S. Civil War, and who is a parent
                    of small children, to engage in DH research in text mining without being obliged
                    to learn to code in their non-existent spare time or go back to school (perhaps
                    on a one-year Mellon New Directions Fellowship) to study computer science.
                    Gentle and Drift, in their ease of use, follow a similar approach as Voyant.
                    Although they feature simple interfaces, however, the data and visualizations
                    they provide require some knowledge of audio signal analysis and speech
                    production and perception to interpret. Praat, in its user-unfriendliness, is
                    obviously designed not for idiots but for patient linguists, for whom spending a
                    time writing scripts to analyze recordings is a more legitimate use of their
                    research time.

                Noble continues the anecdote:
                        However, had [the engineer] presented that same machine
                            to a manufacturer, with the same claim — that it could be run by an
                            idiot — he would probably have run into no such difficulty. Imbued with
                            the philosophy of work simplification and deskilling, desirous of
                            reducing his labor costs and minimizing his labor problems and,
                            because of his rights as an employer, having the power to compel his
                            workers to do idiot work, the manufacturer would probably have found his
                            machine quite satisfactory. Indeed, it is his criteria, embedded in the
                            engineer's art, that shaped his design in the first
                        place
                


                We are not, in collaborating with Ochshorn on the development of Gentle and
                    Drift, developing a product for sale, and the knowledge production that
                    academics are engaged in is not, of course, idiot work. Rather than deskilling,
                    we aim to draw on the different skills of researchers from different
                    disciplines, as collaborative, cross-disciplinary work allows. 

                There is considerable value, as Ochshorn suggests in Intimacy and Interface (a survey of his work that also functions as
                    a sort of manifesto about his approach to interface design), in interfaces that
                    allow us to interact directly with the data that software allows us to analyze,
                    and to understand something of the processes involved. Emphasizing the
                    hermeneutic work of interface design and digital media analysis, he writes:
                        
                        Intimate interfaces cannot be wireframed or otherwise faked.
                            They are a lens more than a frame.
                        Repetition can lead to new discoveries. Use is not “monotonous” and
                            therefore automation is never the goal.
                        Meaning “passes through” the system. “The answer” is never directly
                            modeled, but occurs in the heads of humans.
                        Programming intimate interfaces is more intimate than using them. And
                            since this intimacy is fundamentally lingual, it is a non-intuitive
                            process poorly served by “end user” tooling.
                        [...] Search, and re-search, must be processes of acquiring
                            intimacy[,] not abstracting to an outline or de-skilling to a workflow.
                                
                        
                    
                

                 While Drift and Gentle are not the most innovative examples of Ochshorn’s
                    creations — some of those, developed for working artists, allow for novel
                    interactive research with film and video, and can be sampled in a talk he gave
                    at Google Brain in 2017 — they provide both ease of interaction with the object of
                    study (in our research recordings of performative speech) and direct access to
                    the underlying data. They provide a lens; they are a means to an end that tries
                    not to obscure the means; and they encourage small-scale, intimate, qualitative
                    research as a necessary prelude to large-scale, quantitative research. 

                Our own collaboration honors the fact of disciplinary expertise — Ochshorn's
                    skill in and knowledge about interface design, object-oriented programming, and
                    audio signal processing are complemented by MacArthur's intimacy with poetry as
                    an oral form and her capacity to pose rich questions about poetry performance
                    and literary history, and by Miller's understanding of speech production and
                    perception, audio signal processing and quantitative analysis. The years of
                    training and experience that each of us brings to the collaboration cannot be
                    underestimated. In DH, of course, it is not unusual that technical expertise is
                    provided by men expertise is provided by men (Ochshorn and Miller), though they
                    do not provide only that, nor that the woman participating in the collaboration
                    (MacArthur) has acquired new technical knowledge in order to carry out the
                    research.

                In An Information Science Question in DH Feminism,
                    Tanya Clement writes: In digital humanities, the
                            technology of mastering technology has been considered a productive
                            means of combatting what is considered the general “degree of ignorance
                            about information technology and its critical relevance to humanities
                            education and scholarship”  ...
                            [t]here has been much debate in DH about whether designing and building
                            tools gives one an indispensable knowledge of its processes and whether
                            or not women and people of color (and others) are precluded from these
                            activities for a variety of very real and very situated reasons. In this
                            sense, the rhetoric of mastery over technology can be
                            intellectually prohibitive since it threatens an advancement of
                            knowledge production from other perspectives
                        


                While we agree that, on the one hand, requiring — much less fetishizing —
                    technical mastery in DH research can lead to the exclusion of valuable and novel
                    perspectives from DH research, we also have practical objections to the
                    requirement of technical mastery. To be precise, we resist expectations that
                    collaborative researchers can or should, on the fly or on the cheap, acquire
                    real expertise in one another's disciplines. Beyond the political and economic
                    problems with asking graduate students and scholars in the humanities to master
                    digital technologies or acquire advanced coding skills — which must inevitably
                    take time away from the primary study of, for instance, literary history — it is
                    practically inefficient not to collaborate across disciplines on the development
                    of tools such as Gentle and Drift and the Voxit toolbox, and in the research
                    applying them to poetry recordings. 

                At the same time, it would be all too easy for a literary scholar with no
                    background in linguistics, data visualization or quantitative analysis to
                    misunderstand Gentle and Drift and the data they provide. Thus our approach in
                    developing these tools, training users to apply them, and developing tutorials
                    and documentation, has been to emphasize ease of use and access to data while
                    also educating users on the basics of speech production and perception, audio
                    signal processing and quantitative analysis. We are now at work on a Slow
                    Listening book project, in collaboration with Neil Verma and Christopher Grobe,
                    that will offer a history of machine-assisted voice analysis, a critical
                    theoretical approach, a linguistically grounded method, and four case studies,
                    providing models for future research, from literary performance and AI voices to
                    radio drama and podcasts.

                The image at the outset of this article, a pitch contour in Drift, visualizes the
                    pitch of John Ashbery's voice, in a 1952 reading of his sestina The Painter, at the 92nd Street Y in New York. The painter in the poem
                    aspires to paint the sea. Eventually, he gives up, and leaves the canvas blank.
                    The text shown in the pitch contour is line 9 of the poem, articulating advice
                    given to the painter by the people who lived in the
                        buildings, who watch him work at his impossible task: Try using the brush / As a means to an end. Select, for a
                        portrait, / Something less angry and large, and more subject / To a
                        painter's moods (ll. 9-12). The Painter
                    almost too neatly thematizes Ashbery's poetic ambitions — not only to represent,
                    but to enact on the page the big impossible subject of consciousness unfolding
                    in time, here symbolized by the changing face of the sea, as it constantly moves
                    and shifts. This is an apt figure for the experience of listening in real time.
                    Sound, and the human voice in particular, elude our perceptual grasp, much as
                    the sea slips through our fingers, to mix metaphors. But these tools, we hope,
                    extend the possibilities for listening more slowly and thoughtfully.

            
