Title:  A Life Lived in Media
Volume:  006
Issue:  1
Date:  25 January 2012
Abstract:  

            Research since the early years of the 21st century consistently shows that through
               the years more of our time gets spent using media, that being concurrently exposed to
               media has become a foundational feature of everyday life, and that consuming media
               for most people increasingly takes place alongside producing media. Contemporary
               media devices, what people do with them, and how all of this fits into the
               organization of our everyday life disrupt and unsettle well-established views of the
               role media play in society. Instead of continuing to wrestle with a distinction
               between media and society, this contribution proposes we begin our thinking with a
               view of life not lived with media, but in media. The media
               life perspective starts from the realization that the whole of the world and our
               lived experience in it are framed by, mitigated through, and made immediate by
               (immersive, integrated, ubiquitous and pervasive) media.
         
Full Body Text: 
A Life Lived in Media

            Media Life
            In this article, we argue that an additional ontological turn should take place in
               the way we understand and use media. Media have become so inseparable from us that we
               no longer live with media, but in media. We bring together
               and evaluate fundamental media theories with specific reference to the so-called
                  media generation to interrogate our argument of media's
               ontological possibility, under several distinct terms: the (inevitable) disappearance
               of media from active awareness (invisibility), the productive approach
               to the lifeworld that media engender (creativity), the way people and
               institutions adapt to the criteria for mediated inclusion (selectivity),
               and the restructuring of social bonds in media (sociability). We
               conclude by locating the answer to the all-important so
                  what question in considering life as a work of art in media.
            Research in countries as varied as the United States, Brazil, South Korea, The
               Netherlands, and Finland consistently shows how through the years more of our time
               gets spent using media, and how concurrent use of multiple media has become a regular
               feature of everyday life. With close to two billion people using internet on a
               regular basis and well over four billion mobile phone subscriptions in the world (at
               the time of writing this piece), media can not just be seen as types of technology
               and chunks of content we pick and choose from the world around us — a view that
               considers media as an external agent affecting us in a myriad of ways. If anything,
               today we have to recognize how the uses and appropriations of media penetrate all
               aspects of contemporary life, how media are not just both artefacts and contents (as
               McLuhan envisioned), not just units consisting of queer couplings between hardware
               and software (as Ian Bogost and Levi Bryant suggestSee .), not even an infrastructural combination of
               their material conditions, what people do with them, and how all of this shapes and
               is shaped by people's everyday social arrangements (as proposed by Leah Lievrouw and
               Sonia LivingstoneSee 
               ). There is no external to the media in our lives. In this paper, we explore
               the implications of this premise.
            The whole of the world and our lived experience in it can and perhaps should be seen
               as framed by, mitigated through, and made immediate by pervasive and ubiquitous
               media. This world is what Roger Silverstone (2007), Alex de Jong and Marc
               Schuilenburg (2006) label a mediapolis: a mediated
               public space where media underpin and overarch the experiences of everyday life.
               However, a paradox of pervasive and ubiquitous media is their increasingly
               invisibility; they are so embedded in our lives that they disappear, which would
               suggest we inevitably lose ourselves in media. [T]he dominant
                  information technologies of the day control all understanding and its
                  illusions, writes Friedrich Kittler in the foreword of his work on
               emerging media in the 19th century, and in the process 
                  what remains of people is what media can store and
                     communicate
                  
               . Media, in other words, make us lose ourselves. Quite literally, sometimes, as
               Kittler remarks in a 1998 speech in honor of British music theorist and composer
               Brian Eno: 
                  music shows us that a culture is only as popular as it can
                     lose itself in its own technologies
                  
               . When media become both ubiquitous and invisible, we may very well be losing
               ourselves in our technology to the extent that it generates our lives on the basis of
               a specific set of rules, codes and protocols. As Brian Arthur states in his take on
               the evolution of technology: 
                  this thing that fades to the background of our world also
                     creates that world
                  
               . From a perspective that aims to resolve the false dichotomy between machines
               (cf. media) and humans (cf. life), we would prefer to argue that the thing is us as
               much as it is itself.
         

            Media's Invisibility
            Jay Bolter and Richard Grusin have argued that the contradictory and ambivalent ways
               digital media operate in our culture today mean that 
                  digital technologies are proliferating faster than our
                     cultural, legal, or educational institutions can keep up with them 
                  
               . They suggest this ambivalence stems from the double logic of remediation
               embedded in all media. On the one hand, media make themselves known to us by remixing
               their properties: today's phones include music players, video screens, and so on; any
               television show or advertisement uses conventions and formulas from previous programs
               and formats; and, as we have seen, people are in their daily activities concurrently
               exposed to multiple media. Bolter and Grusin suggest that media work very hard to
               make themselves invisible. For example, there is the tendency of media artifacts to
               become so big they drown out everything else (wall-sized TV's, such as Panasonic's
               fittingly titled Life Screen ) while also shrinking to
               near-invisible proportions (computer chips as brain implants allowing people to give
               computer commands and play games without moving a muscle, such as the BrainGate
               sensor by bio-tech company CyberkineticsSee http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00912041.). 
            As media become invisible, they become all-powerful. We propose that the key
               challenge of the digital humanities in the 21st century is, or will be, the
               disappearance of media. What we therefore aim for in this text is an understanding of
               the different ways those things taken for granted that make up our day-to-day
               existence have become automated, augmented and organized through media. The human
               experience of space-time relationships in the course of the twentieth century, as
               exemplified by the increasing speed of travel and telecommunications, represents a
               change in people's sense of reality itself . Media become
               the playground for a search for meaning and belonging — not just by consumption or
               what David Harvey calls a flexible accumulation of
               artifacts and ideas that would make up a fragmented sense of self-identity, but also
               by producing, co-creating, redacting and remixing 
                  a whole series of simulacra as milieux of escape, fantasy,
                     and distraction
                  
               . With Harvey, we do not see people as hapless victims of this seemingly
               disjointed worldview. We locate the potential power of people to shape their lives
               and identities and produce themselves (and therefore each other) in media.
            Media-centric theories such as Marshall McLuhan’s ideas of media as extensions of
               man, Michael Callon and Bruno Latour’s insistence on the agency of non-humans, and
               Friedrich Kittler’s call for an ontology of media can be considered to be among the
               first steps to an ontological turn in the relationship between humans and media. From
               a society-centric take on the role of media in everyday life, arguments developed by
               various authors signal an ongoing convergence of the social and material dimensions
               of media. Consider for instance the work on media ecology by Neil Postman and Lance
               Strate (), and on media and social theory (, , , , ). In order to provide studies of the digital and the
               human with a sophisticated perspective that would do justice to the contemporary
               fusion of media with all other aspects of society, Hjarvard proposes mediatization as a conceptual innovation, which suggests
               that 
                  [c]ontemporary society is permeated by the media, to an
                     extent that the media may no longer be conceived of as being separate from
                     cultural and other social institutions
                  (; see also )
               . The media life perspective is not so much a synthesis of earlier approaches
               coming from either a medial or social point of view, but rather seeks to move beyond
               such categories.
            Since 2006, the Educause Center for Applied Research (ECAR) conducts annual surveys
               and interviews with thousands of undergraduates at US colleges and universities about
               the role of information technologies in their lives. In its 2008 report a quote from
               one of their teenage respondents is used to illustrate the broader trends borne out
               of the data: 
                  I don't look at it as getting on the
                        Internet. The Internet is a part of life. It's a lifestyle
                  
               . The 2010 report opens with another student's sentiment expressed in that
               year's study: 
                  My laptop is my life.
                  
                A poll of more than 27,000 adults across 26 countries (commissioned by the
               BBC) conducted by GlobeScan found that four in five adults (79%) regard internet
               access as a fundamental human right . A 2002 report on people's
               use of media in general and mobile communication in particular by the anthropological
               agency Context describes the emergence of a mobile life
               as follows: A [c]onstant awareness of wireless finally wanes
                  when people are truly living a mobile lifestyle, seamlessly integrating
               wireless into everyday life such that 
                  where people find it difficult to live a life without
                     wireless
                  
               . Reports on media life by scholarly groups, media companies, and market
               research firms in for example the US (Pew Internet & American LifeSee http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2009/5-The-Mobile-Difference--Typology.aspx.),
               Germany (GoldMedia and BitkomSee http://www.bitkom.org/de/themen/36444_55033.aspx.), the UK (LSE
               and The Carphone Warehouse GroupSee http://www.mobilelife2008.co.uk., Ofcom
                  http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/consultations/msa.), across
               Latin America (Synthesio
                  http://synthesio.com/corporate.), and globally (Comscore MobiLens,
                  http://www.comscore.com/Products_Services/Product_Index/MobiLens.
               The Nielsen Company
                  http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/category/online_mobile. and
               others consistently claim that many, if not most users cannot imagine a life without
               networked media in general and mobile devices in particular.
            In this abundantly mediated and progressively mobile lifestyle media are such an
               augmented, automated, indispensable and altogether inalienable part of one's
               activities, attitudes and social arrangements that they disappear — they essentially
               become the life that people are experiencing on a day to day basis. Most authors of
               reports about people and their media scramble for concepts to label, classify, claim
               and tame them, as the Digital Generation, iGeneration (also known as Generation Z or
               the Internet GenerationSee http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generation_Z
               ), Net Geners, Generation Upload (as coined by a 2009 Vodafone marketing
               campaign in GermanySee http://blog.vodafone.de/2009/07/08/wer-ist-die-generation-upload
               ), and Generation C (where C stands for Content; coined by trendwatching.com
               in 2004See http://trendwatching.com/trends/GENERATION_C.htm
               ). Such terms are generally used for people born after the early 1990s who
               grew up after the fall of the Berlin Wall (1989) and the proclaimed end of the Cold
               War (1991), after the Tiananmen Square protests and subsequent massacre in China
               (1989), after the release of Nelson Mandela (1990) and the end of Apartheid in South
               Africa (1994), after the end of military regimes and dictatorships across Latin
               America (Argentina, 1983; Brazil, 1985; Suriname, 1988; Chile, 1990), as well as
               after the introduction of the World Wide Web and the digital mobile phone in
               1990.
         

            Media's Creativity
            Much can be said about the lack of generalizable evidence that would support a notion
               of either discrete or durable generational difference when it comes to a life lived
               in media. The rhetoric of the digital native is
               certainly flawed in many ways . On the other hand, it
               does seem that children and youths experience the world and their role in it with
               media functioning as a precondition. Considering a wide range of trends and theories
               across several academic disciplines, Norm Friesen and Theo Hug make a compelling case
               for considering the mediatic a priori for 
                  the perception of time, space, and the shaping of attention
                     and communication
                  
               , particularly when it comes to meeting the challenges of educating today’s
               youth. In a review of the role media play in children's everyday lives around the
               world, David Buckingham and Liesbeth de Block note how 
                  media that our children experience are […] a mixture of the
                     national, regional and global. These media can serve to maintain national
                     allegiances and offer a view of the world that reconnects children with another
                     history or opens a window to a new world
                  
               . Buckingham and De Block emphasize an additional layer of media immersion at
               work, for example when it comes to the ongoing fusion and hybridization of local
               idioms and traditions with global media brands and genres. What makes this work
               significant for the concerns about media life is how it reminds us of the ways in
               which media activities and practices can only be understood in a broad context that
               includes both material and spatial considerations, reflecting a nuanced take on how
               the social arrangements of media both stretch existing ways of doing things and
               making sense of the world across cultural and spatial boundaries, while at the same
               time functioning to articulate and demarcate local communities and identities.
               Perhaps it is safe to say that the consequences and articulations of media life are
               more visible in the everyday lived experience of the young.
            Many if not most of the trends signaled here are neither exclusive to networked and
               mobile communication devices, nor are they uniquely supercharged by children or
               teenagers’ use of them. Historicizing the role media play in everyday life and
               analyzing the remediation of old and new devices, functions, and forms consistently
               confirms such a caveat to many claims made in the literature. Yet we argue that the
               media life perspective considers such developments regardless of whether one sees
               continuity or change; analyses of media can take a leap of faith towards a
               post-historical being in order to understand people's current mediatization. The
               interpenetration of media in all aspects of people's lives suggests how the
               boundaries one perhaps all too quickly draws between different types of media (analog
               or digital), different modes of being (public or private), and different groups of
               people (in the center or the periphery), are, if anything, in flux. When the
               organizing categories and principles of life are in constant motion, uncertainty
               reigns. Vilém Flusser's notion of a being in a world of absurd
                  chance
               Quoted from Vilém Fluser: A brief introduction to his media philosophy, a text
                  originally written for a lecture Siegfried Zielinski held in Boston.
               characterizes people’s experiences of a life lived in media from two angles: on the
               one hand as cut off from history with calculated strategies as a last resort
               providing control, and, on the other hand, as having reached the
                  goal, which they were longing for right from the beginning: the digital code is
                  the most perfect method to change the world however you like it. We
               suggest that a media life perspective aims for the latter while focusing on the
               first; people are doing more than just killing time in a game of chance and
               probability — they are in fact looking at and engaging with the world around them
               (as) in media with an eye to create and redact it. 
            Society in the digital age has become increasingly organized around the various ways
               to organize and diversify the intertwined or networked processes of production and
               consumption. Theorizing the way media function in our everyday life as
               indistinguishable from our bodies, senses and experiences begins with an awareness of
               media as industries (casting people in roles of production and consumption) and
               techniques (governing the way people access their world through physical as well as
               sensory experiences). As such, the ongoing convergence of production and consumption
               of media across companies, channels, genres, technologies and culture  is also reflected in the convergence of other aspects of
               our everyday life, for instance between self and social identities (especially on
               social networking sites), between work and play, and due to time-space compression,
               the convergence of the local and the global. If anything, the logic of media must be
               seen as dissolving the distinctions drawn all too easy between humans and machines,
               or, as Lev Manovich (2001) articulates, between culture and computers. To this one
               should add how cyberspace, internet, and other networked technologies are not
               particular to specific devices or practices anymore, as today a wide variety and ever
               expanding set of artifacts (and what people do with them) are networked. 
            A media life perspective unsettles the key organizing categories of the study of
               communication and the role of media in people’s lives: production, content, and
               consumption. Certainly, the problematic nature of such categories has been
               highlighted in the past. One could think of Stuart Hall’s notion of media as encoded
               and decoded with (invariably contested) meanings, to challenge a dominant paradigm
               where mediated messages were generally seen as transmitted. We might also consider
               James Carey’s equally formidable challenge to the sender-message-receiver or
               transmission model of communication by emphasizing the ritualistic nature of the way
               people use media and technology to make sense of their world. Work in the field of
               media anthropology also stresses the linked and circular nature of the production and
               consumption of culture. Scholars in media studies, sociology, informatics, and
               geography similarly have critically articulated the categories of media production
               and consumption within the parameters of the capitalist (and distinctly cosmopolitan)
               project, rather than within the material practice or lived experience of how people
               actually use and make media. An early example of such work would be John Thompson's
                  The Media and Modernity
                , where he carefully defines any form of mediated and
               quasi-mediated communication as produced and received in differentiated contexts that
               blur boundaries between space and time, as well as between public and private
               domains. Thompson particularly takes aim at the misleading concepts of mass media and mass
               communication, arguing that in a digital age the wide variety of and availability and
               access to media forms signal much more complex, dialogic and differentiated forms of
               communication. Manuel Castells’s more recent book Communication
                  Power
                extends Thompson’s original argument with the concept
               of mass self-communication: where people self-generate messages (generally about
               themselves), and decide which messages are self-directed and self-selected (in terms
               of how sources, channels, and receivers are identified and used).
            A life lived in media inspires a creative outlook on
               one's world — as if reality is something one can zoom in or out from as viewed
               through a camera (or by swiping one's fingers on a touchscreen display), or move up
               or down in like we are used to when channel surfing. What media's creativity
               requires, then, is a set of life skills that are premised on a multimedia literacy:
               an ability to both read and write media. John Hartley () underscores such
               a literacy in a take on media life that suggests individuals are becoming part of a
               global redactional society, where the core competences
               once exclusively associated with professional media workers – their ability to
               effectively find, create and gather, select, edit, disseminate and redistribute
               information — are necessary for everyone to attain in order to guarantee continued
               existence in a networked information age. This phase in our history is furthermore
               one of networked individualism, concludes Barry Wellman on the basis of a
               decades-long research project on the implications of what he calls a 
                  triple revolution
                  
                of the proliferation and differentiation of the personal internet, the
               personal mobile accessibility of information and communication, and a turn from
               densely-knit groups to sparsely-knit networks (including family households) based on
               personal connections and relationships. Wellman suggests that high speed
               place-to-place communication (i.e. internet) supports the dispersal and
               disintegration of organizations and communities, whereas high speed person-to-person
               communication (i.e. mobile connectivity) supports the dispersal and
               role-fragmentation of workgroups and households .
            Our networked individualism experienced in a redactional society can thus be seen as
               both the consequence and cause of media life. This does not mean there are no
               structures of support and social cohesion anymore, nor does it suggest that our
               concurrent immersion in media makes us more (or less) sociable. Writing with Carolyn
               Haythornthwaite, Wellman underscores that 
                  [e]ven before the advent of the Internet, there has been a
                     move from all-encompassing, socially-controlling communities to individualized,
                     fragmented personal communities
                  
               . Media amplify and possibly accelerate existing social tranformations in ways
               that can be attributed to an improvement of our real or perceived chances for
               survival in a world of increasingly stretched social relations. Seen as such, the
               increasingly lifelike nature of media — including the contemporary design and
               development of ubiquitous computing (e.g. applications and uses that become so second
               nature to us that they disappear from consciousness), haptic technologies (cf.
               touchscreens) and natural user interfaces (such as the motion sensor devices in
               gaming consoles: Nintendo's Wii, Microsoft's Kinect, and PlayStation's Move)
               — further contribute to a role of media in our lives that is immediately interfaced
               with our living environments (including our bodies).
            Looking at reality framed by media — from a joystick to a computer mouse, from a
               remote control to a motion sensing device — makes it seemingly subject to one's own
               experience of it. On the one hand, today's media can be seen as 
                  intrinsically solipsistic
                  
                technologies, enabling the ongoing retreat of people into their very own
               quasi-autonomous and narcissistic 
                  tele-cocoon
                  
               , 
                  mediasphere
                  
               , or 
                  personal information space
                  
               . On the other hand, this individualized immersion instantly and kinetically
               connects people with others anywhere else, thus turning their very own societal
               bubbles of space into fully mediated spaces of global coexistence. Seen either way, a
               life in media is at once connected and isolated, requiring each and every individual
               to rely on their own creativity to make something out of life: not just to give it
               meaning, but to symbolically produce it.
            The media's creativity connects to a broad and influential strand of thinking — both
               in academia and professional fields – regarding the increasing significance of
               culture and creativity in the economy at large(as for example the work of Richard
               Florida and John Howkins attest to). Néstor García Canclini  observes along these lines a global reconstruction of
               world culture and local creativity under the paradigms of technology and the market,
               and advocates vigilance in this process. More concretely, such viewpoints can be
               linked to Maurizio Lazzerato’s critique of the rise of immaterial labor as the new
               form of work organization in contemporary global capitalist society. Immaterial labor
               refers to the changes taking place in workers’ labor processes in the manufacturing,
               knowledge and creative industries (including for example journalism and advertising),
               where the time-tested craftsmanship involved in direct labor tends to shifts to the
               currently more privileged yet self-deleterious skills of the information age —
               cybernetics, computers, and mediated communication. Immaterial labor also refers to a
               parallel process of commoditization of activities that can be roughly labeled as
               traditionally being part of the realm of social skills: assigning status and building
               reputations (within specific communities of interest), maintaining and structuring
               social relations (in teams and networks), including identity play and performance.
               Nick Couldry, Göran Bolin, and others have extended these notions to articulate a
               perspective on immaterial media landscapes, where what
               is produced by people can be seen as existing increasingly in the realm of views,
               attitudes, symbols and ideas, yet has direct consequences for concrete social and
               political realities.
            There runs a parallel argument through these and other more or less recent
               observations about the apparent immaterial, post-materialist and dematerialized
                  weightless nature of contemporary society (as in a reduction in the
               quantity of materials required to serve economic functions, including factories,
               machines and labor), attributing primacy to the largely informational and symbolic
               nature of life’s processes. To some extent, this explains the significance of media
               as benchmarks for creating and circulating meaning. Indeed, contemporary social
               theory is suffused with claims about our increasingly liquid, ephemeral,
               self-reflexive, mobile and otherwise less than stable, permanent or tangible modern
               times (see in particular , ,
                  ). The dissolution of communication’s key sense making
               categories is articulated in this broader debate, and thus can be seen to fit within
               processes of theoretical abstraction about the boundary-erasing nature of
               contemporary life as well as practical observation of the concurrent exposure to
               media people enjoy today.
            The question is, what can be said about the kind of creativity a media life inspires
               — to what ends does such creativity interpellate individuals? To some extent, this
               seems a democratizing force, as the infrastructure of internet, widespread mobile
               connectivity, and an abundance of plug-and-play
               artefacts reduce digital divides and open up creativity to people from all walks of
               life. The collaboration and participation often found in networked media attracts and
               challenges people to interact rather than be just consumers of reality. Alison Hearn
               suggests another explanation, as she argues how this compulsive behavior of 
                  outer-directed self-presentation [...] trades on the very
                     stuff of lived experience in the service of promotion and profit
                  
               . For her, social media are forms of self-branding mandated by a flexible
               corporate capitalist project that 
                  has subsumed all areas of human life, including the very
                     concept of a private self
                  
               .
            Hearn's argument follows that of Zygmunt Bauman, who suggests that in our
               contemporary consuming life 
                  the test [people] need to pass in order to be admitted to the
                     social prizes they covet demands them to recast themselves as commodities: that
                     is, products capable of catching the attention and attracting
                        demand and customers
                  
                  (; emphasis in
                     original)
               . It is indeed a fascinating paradox that much of the media's creativity takes
               place within the parameters and constraints set and to some extent controlled by the
               same institutions that historically have set the parameters within which most people
               would have understood their reality: corporations and the state. It begs the question
               whether people inevitably end up reproducing the system they seek to subvert, or if
               they can in fact tactically gain a foothold exactly because they are part of the
               system (de Certeau, 1984 [1980]). The media life perspective would dictate that media
               are the ecosystem that people are a constituent part of, which includes the
               'goldplating' culture of the new capitalism . But even if
               all user (co-) creation can be reduced to self-branding in the service of capitalist
               imperialism , the profit people seek is not
               necessarily gained without agency or resistance (as Nicholas Garnham notes), nor does
               it solely exist in monetary terms. It would thus strike us as a fallacy to suggest
               this 
                  produsing
                  
                is just the manifest behavior of a globally shared false consciousness (in the
               Marxist understanding of the concept). On the other hand, people's more or less
               creative engagement with the world is all too often confounded by a real or perceived
               impotence of people in their identities as citizens, consumers and workers to shape their own social environment and [to] develop the capacity
                  for action necessary for such interventions to succeed, as Jürgen Habermas
               suggests . Media's creativity is therefore not
               necessarily liberating or empowering, it depends on one’s ability to take advantage
               of it – to quite literally be able to hack life. The mastery of such creative notion
               makes debates about digital divides, the participation gap, media competence and
               multimedia literacies all the more crucial.
         

            Media's Selectivity
            According to Niklas Luhmann , social systems or
               institutions (political, economic, scientific, and so on) within society have
               increasingly taken seriously the way media depict them. Hjarvard takes up this
               paramount media orientation as evidence of an ongoing mediatization of society — a
               process 
                  whereby society to an increasing degree is submitted to, or
                     becomes dependent on the media and their logic
                  
               . A duality arises in that media become so integrated in the operations of
               social institutions, that they also acquire the status of media institutions
               themselves. As a result, social interactions, whether between institutions or in
               society at large, take place via media. All institutions are dependent on societal
               representation, and media have in the last decades become increasingly indispensable
               as platforms for the publication of private affairs and the co-creative
               interpretation of reality. This means that an institution’s success in the media
               becomes necessary for the exertion of influence in other areas of society. Therefore,
               all functional areas within society have learned to look at themselves through media
               glasses. Society's institutions — which for the purposes of our argument include the
               family, the church (including the mosque, synagogue, and so on), the state and the
               workplace – have, due to the expansion of the media system, undergone a shift towards
               self-reflective commentary and positioning vis-à-vis the media . The media system has in this sense taken over the role of
               former authorities by leading our attention away from power balances and imbalances
               and towards the development of self-identity as a life project, a lifestyle
               management .
            From a media life point of view, this institutional orientation to media has now
               become each and every individual's primary frame of reference. People do not just
               orient to media as objects (i.e. as consumers), but also and increasingly as
               producers via the mass personalization of our media environments, the selective
               exposure and appropriation of media technologies and the large amount of time spent
               on online social networks. This incessant creation (and, as some would argue,
                  oversharing) of lived experience in media makes us part of a
               larger media system that produces reality in terms of the reality it records,
               redacts, selects and thereby constructs. It is, as Juan Miguel Aguado  asserts building on the work of Luhmann: in a media life,
               people, groups, networks and institutions observe themselves in the selection terms
               of media, that is, in terms of whether they are relevant and of interest to media. In
               the process, the media's systems of reference and criteria for selection gradually
               come to structure the way people live their lives in media. Stephen Duncombe  is among those who argues in favor of such an
               orientation, suggesting that appealing to the fantasy of
               mediated spectacle allows both (political) institutions as well as engaged citizens
               to get their points more effectively across rather than puristically sticking to
               factual, rationalist discourse. Referencing the media's qualities of interactivity,
               malleability and participation, Duncombe sees opportunities for a
                  Dreampolitik: a politics that finds expression in media and is not
               evident 
                  on the well-ordered fields of reason and rationality. Perhaps
                     it never was
                  
               .
            Reporting on values surveys in 43 countries, Ronald Inglehart  observed a global shift of people’s perspectives as
               citizens away from traditional social institutions and towards a distinctly
               skeptical, globally interconnected, yet deeply personal type of self-determined civic
               engagement. Other studies, such as the one by Robert Putnam, have detailed broad
               societal trends towards distinctly individualized and often outright
               anti-authoritarian attitudes. We are undoubtedly living in an
                  anti-hierarchical age, concludes Beck .
               Slavoj Žižek engages most explicitly the link between the individualization of
               contemporary society — towards a hedonistic solipsism not dissimilar to the presumed
               quality of contemporary mobile media — and the omnipresence of networked computers
               and cyberspace. This is not to say that Žižek embraces the promise of global
               connection without pause, as scholars such as Castells 
               and Scott Lash  are a bit more likely to do. Bauman objects
               to such benevolent readings of the networked potential of contemporary media life,
               suggesting that 
                  Castells and Lash fall victims of internet fetishism fallacy.
                     Network is not community and communication not integration – both safely
                     equipped as they are with disconnection on demand devices
                  
               . Žižek, however, warns against the fallacy of explaining these interconnected
               phenomena as evidence of the progressive disintegration of social bonds. 
                  [I]n order for an individual to immerse herself in the
                     virtual space, the big Other has to be there, more powerful than ever in the
                     guise of cyberspace itself, this directly universalized form of sociality which
                     enables us to be connected with the entire world while sitting alone in front
                     of a screen
                  
                     ; emphasis added
               . Here Žižek points towards the hidden nature of media as a principal component
               of the uniquely mediated experience of being together alone (connected yet isolated)
               in the world today.
            For Žižek the key to understanding the solipsism, skepticism and reflexive engagement
               of our times is not so much the often suggested absence of a big
                  Other, a universal symbolic institution such as God or Kant's categorical
               imperative that provides people common ground and a way out of themselves. What is
               missing, according to Žižek, is 
                  a small other which would embody, stand in for, the big Other
                     — a person [...] who directly embodies authority
                  
               . This lived experience of a life without universal or even local experts and
               authorities — whether these are priests, parents, professors or presidents — offering
               guidance does not necessarily mean society is falling apart. For Žižek, self-identity
               is impossible, since our multiple identities (especially in cyberspace) are always in
               motion and are intersubjectively constructed. The liquid modern 
                  art of life,
                  
                as confined to the lifelong project of identity, thus becomes a way of
               managing being part of an individualized society where 
                  how one lives becomes the biographical solution of systemic
                     contradictions
                  
                in conjunction with the omnipresence and deindividualizing effects of
               networked computers and cyberspace. This is not necessarily another way of restating
               the famous 1993 cartoon by Peter Steiner in The New Yorker, stating that [on] the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog.
               See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On_the_Internet,_nobody_knows_you're_a_dog.
               The exact opposite could also be true: due to the lack of anonymity, as for example
               captured by one's digital shadow, everyone can know you're a dog.
            As research on the generally restrained behavior of people in crowds online (for
               example on discussion forums, mailing lists, and social networks) suggests,
               deindividuation today is best conceptualized as a shift from a personal identity to a
               social identity, shared by members of the crowd . This
               social identity model of deindividuation effects (SIDE), found particularly in
               computer-mediated communication contexts, lends credence to Žižek's implicit
               suggestion that media today may function as a substitute for the small other.
               Paraphrasing Žižek, media provide the intersubjective cues needed to fill the void of
               the empty self. Individual and institutional orientation to media is intrinsic to the
               process of emptying out of meaning that
               container-concepts such as self and society undergo. Following this line of thought,
               it is perhaps not surprising that generally speaking, people are reportedly more
               likely to trust each other than they are to trust social institutions. The global PR
               firm Edelman conducts annual surveys (since 1999) on trust and credibility among
               college-educated, middle class and media-savvy adults in 18 countries. What the firm
               has found is a gradual erosion of trust in governments, traditional institutions and
               elites (especially in Brazil, Canada, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and
               the United States) in favor of a person like me, who is
               considered to be the most credible source of information. Instead of trusting the
               government or God automatically or even implicitly, people trust each other as
               embodied in the end-to-end principle of the internet (as in its protocols and
               physical infrastructure) and its emerging peer-to-peer social arrangements (as in the
               online sharing of processing power, disk storage, network bandwidth, and content).
               The main caveat to this embrace of what Pierre Lévy 
               enthusiastically calls collective intelligence, is that
               the other in media might as well be an institution (or a
               dog).
         

            Media's Sociability
            Sherry Beck Paprocki, one of the authors of The Complete Idiot’s
                  Guide to Branding Yourself
                states in the New York
                  Times (March 27, 2009): [i]f you don't brand
                  yourself, Google will brand you, referring to a perceived need to control
               the information people find about you when they type your name into a search engine.
                  Times reporter Alina Tugend motivates her story on
               the challenge of presenting oneself online as follows: [n]ot
                  being online today is akin to not existing. Apparently, it is not enough
               to have a profile on Facebook — you need a Twitter account, a YouTube channel, you
               should be uploading your own video mashups, designing custom levels in your favorite
               computer game, and on the whole using any kind of media to tell everyone about
               everything. Beyond such feverish assumptions about the need to self-disclose in media
               lies a much more practical consideration, as danah boyd suggests in a blog post for
               the Digital Media and Learning Research Hub at the University of California, Irvine:
                  In many situations, there is more to be gained by accepting
                  the public default [of online social media such as Facebook] than by going out of
                  one's way to keep things private. And here's where we see the shift. It used to
                  take effort to be public. Today, it often takes effort to be private.
            
            A reoccurring theme that gets emphasized in media related research is the issue of
               privacy — particularly regarding the ongoing mediatization of even the most intimate
               personal relationships. Numerous scholars lament the apparent lack of felt urgency
               among people in general and the young in particular about their lack of privacy. The
               loosely connected global network of privacy organizations, activists and scholars, as
               for example mapped by Colin Bennett in The Privacy
                  Advocates
               , shares and is powerful enough to produce a grave
               concern about the various ways in which communication technologies enable the
               gathering and mining of personal data. The worries by such authors and organizations
               seem validated by the way in which successful companies such as Facebook set up their
               policies regarding people's privacy when using social media. As explained by Facebook
               founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg in front of a live audience (on 8 January 2010), the
                  age of privacy seems to be over: When I got started in my dorm room at Harvard, the question a lot of people asked
                  was why would I want to put any information on the Internet
                     at all? Why would I want to have a website? And then in the last 5 or 6
                  years, blogging has taken off in a huge way and all these different services that
                  have people sharing all this information. People have really gotten comfortable
                  not only sharing more information and different kinds, but more openly and with
                  more people. That social norm is just something that has evolved over time. We
                  view it as our role in the system to constantly be innovating and be updating what
                  our system is to reflect what the current social norms are.
            
            As numerous observers and pundits commented at the time of Zuckerberg's statement,
               the relatively modest claim that his company is just following existing or emerging
               social norms seems somewhat disingenuous. However, most concerns about users’ privacy
               at social networking sites tend to reflect an equally naive expectation that people
               do not care or do not understand privacy issues in the context of media life. People
               today generally tend to feel that selectively sharing private information is part of
               participating in the public realm of social media, a sentiment eagerly exploited by
               businesses, specifically when seeking to interact directly with children and
               teenagers outside the purview of parental control . A key and appealing feature of media for all kinds of marginalized
               media users — such as teenagers, senior citizens, diasporic communities, pro-ana
               networks, and other significant minority groups — is exactly the fact that it is
               public, which allows them to publicize and distribute work as well as gain new forms
               of visibility and reputation. One wonders whether the various authors and
               organizations in their concern conflate privacy — the quality or
               condition of being private — with private — where the individual person
               controls what is shared and what remains secret, rather than being submitted to some
               form of authoritarian oversight.
            To most, privacy (in media) signals the ability to exercise control over their lives
               in a more or less deliberate attempt to circumvent notions of privacy that are based
               on an otherwise regulated space with rules and norms that are beyond the scope of
               intervention to those directly affected. This argument can be extended to the
               engagement of most, if not all people with regard to their media: control over
               people's private mass self-communication is ultimately solipsistic and not
               necessarily consensual. However, this does not mean that people are effectively
               autonomous in their self-regulatory behavior when it comes to privacy. The shift away
               from privacy as an inalienable right to a solely individual responsibility can be
               seen as a consequence of the rise of a globally interconnected media culture where,
               indeed, the constant and ongoing presentation of self is a benchmark for effective
               participation in life. It is perhaps not surprising in this context that several
               researchers signal a fascinating paradox: while people using media are simultaneously
               and instantaneously connected with large and multiple groups and networks, they are
               also increasingly ascribed with a deeply individualized and self-centered value
               system. As US psychologist David Downing writes: 
                  [...] such ostensible connectedness is, in actuality, with a
                     machine that is, in circular fashion, a projected externalization of our own
                     desires and phantasies with which we are in narcissistic relation
                  
               .
            This argument falls within a tradition of considering today's youth in particular,
               and Western culture in general, as supremely narcissistic because people supposedly
               have increasingly inflated and positive views of themselves, even though they are at
               the same time apparently obsessed with fitting in. By this account, in a redactional
               society of socially fragmented individuals, media become all-powerful as agents of
               dehumanization exactly by virtue of their uncanny capability to enable the
               representation of people in all their personal glory and uniqueness. On the other
               hand, the empirical evidence regarding both the experimental and experiential fusion
               of social and computer networks in local communities, as for example the study
               compiled by Patrick Purcell in his edited volume Networked
                  Neighbourhoods
               , suggests the ways in which different forms of
               computer-mediated communication usually have quite positive effects on community
               interaction, involvement and social capital, enabling people to keep in touch with
               old friends, colleagues and acquaintances, and deploying media largely in the service
               of connections. Such mediated connections, as Buckingham and De Block as well as
               other scholars note, produce cultural diversity and particularity as much as they
               foster allegiance and traditionalism. And even if it could be argued that these
               communities, connected across time and space, foster fitting in and group loyalty
               through thinly veiled appeals to self-representation and self-determination, one
               would still have to stop and wonder about the durability of these more or less
               integrated communities.
            A wonderful metaphoric example for the being alone and together characteristic of a
               life lived in media is the so-called Silent Disco
               phenomenon, where partygoers dance to music received through headphones. The music is
               broadcasted via FM transmitter and the signal is picked up by the wireless headphone
               receivers worn by the silent party attendees, who often listen to different,
               individualized streams of music while still dancing together. This suggestion of
               being together and generally having a great time yet still being alone in one's
               experience captures the notion of a media life, where people are more connected than
               ever before – whether through common boundary-less phenomena such as global warming,
               terrorism, and worldwide migration, or via internet and mobile communication – yet at
               the same time on their own, securely secluded in 
                  mediaspace
                  
               .
            Within the matrix of relationships between media and the human condition,
               contemporary technologies and the things people do with them, and how all of this
               fits into the social arrangements that govern people's lives, several elements serve
               to amplify and accelerate broader trends in society. These elements include a primacy
               of self-governance and self-reliance over the deference to authorities such as
               parents, professionals and politicians, as well as an extension of community premised
               on simultaneous co-presence and telepresence as directed by the individual and
               her/his concerns. Lastly, the emergence of mass self-communication next to mass
               communication in industrial societies signifies the shift from survival values to an
               increasing emphasis on self-expression values .
            The emphasis on performing oneself seems to go hand in hand with people's endemic
               and, perhaps more importantly, undirected uncertainty about how to express
               themselves. According to Bauman, this breeds a particular kind of fear, a fear that
               is based on 
                  our ignorance of the threat and of what is to be done
                  
               . All the more interesting is the connection Bauman sees between people's
               uncertainty about their prospects in a rapidly moving runaway
                  world (as Anthony Giddens calls it), and the structure and consequences of
               a deeply individualized society. Considering the pervasive and ubiquitous nature of
               media and the signaled capacity of contemporary media to connect and isolate at the
               same time — to make the world concurrently larger and smaller — we would like to move
               our concluding comments on the media life perspective to a another level of
               abstraction: that of people's experience with reality.
         

            Discussion: Media's Reality
            At the end of this essay, we are left with a couple of key observations. We argue
               that an ontological shift can take place because media cannot be conceived of as
               separate to us, to the extent that we live in media, rather than
                  with media. There are extensive societal and cultural repercussions
               occurring primarily due to the way media become invisible because media are so
               pervasive and ubiquitous that we do not even register the presence of media in our
               lives. The networked individualist and personalized information space in media that
               constitutes people's everyday reality influences work, play, learning and
               interacting. Considering the weightless or immaterial nature of contemporary society
               and the largely informational and symbolic nature of life's processes, research must
               find its starting point in a dynamic or mobile (as John Urry suggests) understanding
               of the relationships between what Sean Cubitt in EcoMedia
                articulates as polis, physis and techne: the human world,
               the green world (i.e. nature) and the technological world. Such an understanding is
               furthermore amplified by a recognition (not an explaining away) of the increasing
               invisibility of media, which in turn contributes to the overall mediatization of not
               just society, but indeed — through media's creativity and sociability — reality
               itself. In other words: today, in order to get to the real — to see it, recognize it,
               value it, and change it — we have to go through media. 
            The purpose of the media life perspective is not whether we can make reality more
               real, or whether more or less engagement with media helps or handicaps such noble
               efforts. Humberto Maturana has raised what we feel are the stakes in our discussion
               of the interconnected relationships between humans and technology: 
                  I think that the question that we human beings must face is
                     that of what do we want to happen to us, not a question of knowledge or
                     progress. The question that we must face is not about the relation of biology
                     with technology [...] nor about the relation between knowledge and reality
                     [...] I think that the question that we must face at this moment of our history
                     is about our desires and about whether we want or not to be responsible of our
                     desires.
                  
               
            
            Living a life in media does not necessarily mean submitting to the confounding
               reality of participating tactically in an all-encompassing reality show, nor does it
               require a strategy of avoidance and disconnection from such a reality. A glimpse of
               the potential of a media life point of view is offered by Kathryn Montgomery, who
               sees that 
                  [t]he transition to the Digital Age provides us with a unique
                     opportunity to rethink the position of [people] in media culture, and in
                     society as a whole [as] there is still enough fluidity in the emerging media
                     system for actions to help guide its future 
                  
               . If we live our lives in media and we choose to take responsibility for it,
               what are our options to constitute each other and ourselves? How can we be free yet
               mediated at the same time? As people see increasing potential in current waves of
               emancipation, grass-roots organizations, participation and community, and opposition
               to the powers of state and industry, a realization of their media life may provide an
               incentive to 
                  return to a more organic social form
                  
               , which integrates and articulates not self-interest but partnership (taking
               responsibility for others) and not self-redaction but directed freedom (shaping an
               artful media life). The organic form therefore incorporates the medial form.
            Our own reality or essence, as human beings, is not immutable, locked in to our
               physical presence, our cognition and behaviors. Considering the current opportunity a
               media life gives people to create multiple versions of themselves and others, and to
               endlessly redact themselves (as someone does with his/her profile on an online dating
               site in order to produce better matches), we now have a entered a time where, as
               Luigi Pirandello considered in his novel One, No One and One
                  Hundred Thousand, we can in fact see ourselves live, become cognizant
               about how our lifeworld is 
                  a world of artifice, of bending, adapting, of fiction,
                     vanity, a world that has meaning and value only for the man who is its
                     deviser
                  
               . But this is not an atomized, fragmented, and depressing world, or it does not
               have to be such a world. Our world — as in our sense of self — in a media life must
               be seen as a world where we would truly have individual and collective control over
               reality if only we could be at peace with the endless mutability of that reality. 
            Following Friedrich Nietzsche in The Antichrist, we
               therefore postulate that 
                  [m]an is by no means the crown of creation: every living
                     being stands beside him on the same level of perfection
                  
               . From this blank slate, Nietzsche argues in The Gay
                  Science (1974 [1882]), that we might 
                  become those we are — human beings who are new, unique,
                     incomparable, who give themselves laws, who create themselves
                  
               . This is not to say that a life lived in media is a life lived without 
                  the social forces constraining people's ability to make
                     choices and take action
                  
               . What we suggest is that the media life perspective exposes us to endless
               alternatives to and versions of ourselves, and that much of the confusion and anxiety
               about these options is grounded in people's inability to position themselves in media
               (as well as the social pressure on people to stick to a version that was generated
               for them, for example citizens for democracy, or consumers for capitalism). Society governed by media life is
               one where reality is, like many if not most websites, permanently under construction,
               not only by unseen-yet-all-powerful guardians in the panoptic fortresses of
               governments and corporations that seek to construct a relatively cohesive and thus
               controllable reality, but also by all of us. The governing principle of media life is
               mediated self-creation in the context of always-available global connectivity. We
               realize that a possible consequence of our argument in this paper is to advocate that
               we should not dwell too much on existential contemplations and just go with all the
               affordances media provide us with, and be satisfied with the privilege of our times
               to use such technologies to make art with life. As Michel Foucault asks: 
                  [w]hy should the lamp or the house be an art object, but not
                     our life?
                  
               . Indeed, suggests Bauman, 
                  we are all artists of our lives — knowingly or not, willingly
                     or not, like it or not
                  
               . In this work of art, people are on their own — much like Nietzsche advocated
               — but never alone. 
         
