Title:  Large-Scale Humanities Computing Projects: Snakes Eating Tails, or Every End is a New
      Beginning? 
Volume:  003
Issue:  2
Date:  18 June 2009
Abstract:  
            The word finish can mean two things that have quite different implications for large-scale humanities computing projects: to bring to completion; to make or perform completely; to complete and also to perfect finally or in detail; to put the final and completing touches to (a thing). The word finish is just not part of the deal for the Linguistic Atlas Project in either sense.  However, granting agencies must ask what do you want money for this time? and, from this viewpoint, the Atlas Project consists of a series of particular tasks or experiments, each one of which is capable of being finished in both senses of the word. This paper discusses the reality of funding, deadlines, and deliverables, as they relate to the sequence of tasks that make up the larger Atlas Project. There are no once-and-done, permanent solutions.  The largest humanities computing projects require continuing care and maintenance, and the best way forward is to create some sort of stable institutional setting for large projects that will provide continuity and baseline resources for the work.
         
Full Body Text: 
Large-Scale Humanities Computing Projects: Snakes Eating Tails, or Every End is a New
      Beginning
One of the motivating questions for this cluster of essays is What does it mean to
        finish something? As it happens, the word finish can mean two
      things that have quite different implications for large-scale humanities computing projects.
      On one hand, according to the OED,
      finish can mean To bring to completion; to make or perform completely; to
      complete. On the other hand, the word can also mean To perfect finally or in detail; to put
      the final and completing touches to (a thing). In my own work of this kind, the American
        Linguistic Atlas project (http://www.lap.uga.edu), we do neither of these
      things. We cannot come to an end of the work because we are witnesses and archivists of how
      Americans talk, and they keep talking differently across time and space. Neither do I think
      that our humanities-computing representation of our research is capable of being finally
      perfected, of achieving some perfect state, because technology keeps changing and the demands
      placed upon our research keep changing. If we view the entirety of the Linguistic Atlas
      Project as a large-scale humanities computing project, the word
        finish is just not part of the deal. And we are not alone. While the
      creation of, say, a variorum edition may seem like a project that can be finished in both
      senses, actually we need to make new editions all the time, since our idea of how to make the
      best edition changes as trends in scholarship change, especially now in the digital age when
      new technical possibilities keep emerging.
However, it is quite reasonable to ask, as our granting agencies must ask, What do you want
      money for this time? or Did you accomplish what we gave you money to do? From this
      viewpoint, the Atlas Project, as an example to stand in for any large scale project, consists
      of a series of particular tasks or experiments, each one of which is capable of being
        finished in both senses of the word. It is these separate tasks that are
      fundable, and for which we can claim to have done what we said we would do. In this paper, I
      would like to discuss the sequence of tasks that make up the larger Atlas Project in order to
      show the special character of work done deliberately as part of a sequence for a large-scale
      project, as opposed to work proposed as a singular task. The contextualization of the separate
      tasks leads to special cases of what it means to finish the work in either
      sense. The point of what follows is not the Atlas Project itself, but instead the way that
      individual tasks respond to the technical and academic situation at the time. Our own
      technical work on the Atlas has responded to the microcomputer revolution, to the emergence of
      the Web, and to the development of text-encoding and computer multimedia. Our work has helped
      to drive changes in the academic study of language variation, from traditional dialect maps to
      use of rapid visualization methods and statistical processing for both text and audio data.
      The scope of these changes show how our work and thinking over the years have had to change
      and must continue to change, just as they must for other large-scale projects like major
      editions and dictionaries, so that we can avoid the charge of being the snake that eats its
      own tail. 
The Linguistic Atlas Project, per se, has been notable over many years for its twin goals of
      interactivity for research (including the use of GIS) and making its data sets accessible and
      available to other researchers and to the public. I first programmed a GIS system for our
      Linguistic Atlas data in 1990, presented at the ACH/ALLC meeting in Tucson in 1991 Figure 1; ; ;
        . The program, called LAMSASplot, took advantage of work we did
      with funding from NEH to keyboard words and phrases from our survey interviews so that they
      would be available for computer-assisted analysis. The LAMSASplot system was widely used for
      teaching and research on American English in the early 1990s, and it immediately led to
      breakthroughs in how we were able to think about language variation data , ; . The
      two most important design elements of that first system were the central column, which shows
      the frequency of occurrence of a word of interest, both by speaker and by community (most
      communities have more than one speaker), and the rightmost column, the GIS implementation.
      That column is composed of two layers, a standard base map layer that shows the state
      outlines, and a second layer consisting of plotted points at community locations that is
      generated according to the evidence for the word selected.

            LAMSASplot on the Mac platform, c. 1990
            
            Screenshot of the LAMSASplot
         
The LAMSAS GIS programs were prepared on Macintosh computers using the Foxbase relational
      database package. Foxbase permitted us to associate graphical coordinates with our linguistic
      data within a relational structure. Generation of these plots took only 90 seconds on the
      desktop computers of the day, at least a 250-fold improvement over the hours required for the
      charting that had to be done by hand by the pioneers in the field, Hans Kurath and Raven
      McDavid. The other advantage of LAMSASplot is that it made frequency counts and plotted one
      variant at a time. This practice was in sharp contrast to the method used by Kurath and
      McDavid for charting language data, using isoglosses, lines which showed the limit of
      occurrence of particular variants. As our pail map suggests here, lines just cannot do justice
      to the geographical distributions of linguistic features. Our GIS solution thus launched a new
      line of analysis for dialectologists based on differential frequency in feature distributions.
      The LAMSASplot humanities computing application not only used available technology to automate
      mapmaking, it provided a theoretical advance in how the data was analyzed. The Atlas project
      was thus one of many involved in the burgeoning field of computer-assisted scientific
      visualization, not just in the humanities, but the particular point of talking about the Atlas
      is to show how such large trends have particular effects in particular areas of study.
We did not finish keyboarding all of our LAMSAS data with our NEH funding, which had been
      proposed as the first of a sequence of grants. We could show immediate benefits of getting the
      process started, in part through LAMSASplot, but unfortunately NEH did not fund our proposals
      to continue digitization of the data. There were various reasons offered by the panelists over
      the years, but I suspect that the refusals came down to the fact that the panelists preferred
      to fund new work over our historical interviews. The immediate analytical task for the Atlas
      was thus finished in both senses, both completed and refined, but only the
      immediate task; we were shut out from long-term funding to finish the whole
      project. 

            Atlas Web Site, Mark 1
            
            Map of states used in Linguistic Atlas Projects
         
As the next task in our humanities computing implementation, we then ported the system to the
      Web, which I first demonstrated in 1996 (; Figure 2 shows the site as of 1998). We had been working on an
      interactive ftp/gopher system as early as 1993, but when Web technology became available we
      saw that it enabled perfectly what we had been attempting from another direction. The Web
      allowed us to make our data available to a wide public, with many additional interactive GIS
      features for locating speakers and information for the LAMSAS survey, and with static pages
      for the other regional surveys. We added additional data for our African American LAMSAS
      speakers plus data from speakers of Sea Island Creole (Gullah) in 1998 with funding from NSF.
      The GIS maps from LAMSASplot were ported to the Web, as in Figure
        3 for the phrase quarter of in telling time (as opposed to quarter till, quarter to),
      where they now could be created by users almost instantaneously with a server-side script,
      another improvement in processing time of perhaps fiftyfold. We also offered maps to show
      where all of the speakers in a state resided (Figure 4). These
      maps were clickable to allow users to access all of the information about any given speaker
      and the speaker's survey responses (Figure 5). Besides maps, we
      enabled browsing and searches of the responses and of speaker information (Figure 6, Figure 7). We also changed
      the way that we stored our data: flat, comma-delimited files instead of a proprietary
      relational format. 

            LAMSAS Web: quarter of
            
            
            Map of interviewee distribution
         

            LAMSAS Web: state map of speakers in Maryland
            
            Distribution of interviewed speakers in Maryland
         

            LAMSAS Web: Baltimore speaker (from clicking MD13E
            
            Sample data set for interviewee
         

            LAMSAS Web: Browse Screen
            
            Screenshot of the LAMSAS site
         

            LAMSAS Web: Speakers (click of Figure 6, plain format informants
            
            Screenshot of LAMSAS informant database
         
The Atlas Web was a significant advance for both teaching and research (, ), in line with the goals for an
      electronic atlas first set forth nearly a decade earlier . 
      The plotted maps and much of the data were the same as what was available for the Mac
      LAMSASplot package — besides the African American data, we had keyboarded some additional
      files, a few at a time as resources permit, as we are still doing — but instead of an
      incremental improvement, the Atlas Web site was actually another sea change for the project.
      For the first time the whole Atlas project was represented together, not just as separate
      regional parts, and for the first time we could offer real public access to as much data as we
      could digitize. Again, the example of the Atlas just shows the particular significance in our
      area of our participation in the main international trend for Web representation of
      information. 
These were good things, revolutionary in their way, but the fact is that we had
      to do something: the world had changed from mainframes and desktops to UNIX servers. We had
      actually been using both mainframe processing (for intensive statistics jobs) as well as the
      desktop Macs and PCs. If we had not acted, the proprietary software that we were using would
      have gone out of use (FoxBase was sold, and the database for our PCs, RBase, also
      disappeared), and so we would have lost our investment in preparation of proprietary data
      files. We would have missed the Web revolution. So, not to change would have meant that the
      Atlas project would be stuck on paper, where it had been before we developed any computer
      applications at all. We did benefit from the NSF grant I mentioned, and from a small internal
      University of Georgia grant that allowed us to set up our own server, both limited tasks that
      we could propose as achievable within a short time and for which we could show results. We
      still could not get funding to do the whole project, and if we had waited for that we would
      still be waiting. Every large humanities computing project faced similar problems: adapt, or
      become a footnote in academic history.

            LAMSAS Web, Mark 2, c. 2005
            
            Linguistic Atlas Projects homepage
         
After a while, we wanted to do new things, so we began work on a major revision of the Web
      site that came on line in 2003 (Figure 8, shown as of 2005). Our
      earlier GIS visualizations were just not as flexible as they needed to be to satisfy the
      demands of sociolinguistics, which had come to expect association of linguistic features with
      particular social variables (e.g. sex, age, social status). We kept the interactive plotted
      maps and layered GIS access to information, but added even more interactive choices such as
      more flexible searches and tallies of the speakers and language data set. Browse screens are
      now composed on the fly from separate data files, as in Figure 9
      from the quarter of data and speaker characteristics, so that the linguistic information is
      immediately associated with the social characteristics of those who said it. For the first
      time we enabled searching by pronunciation features, not just words or strings, and we offered
      the ability to do sub-searches in sequence so that users could zero-in on features and groups
      of interest (Figure 10). In order to accomplish these goals, we
      again changed our manner of storing and manipulating data from a homemade phonetic font to
      Unicode, and from flat files and scripted regular expressions to a MySQL implementation.
      However, we kept The Old Site as a link on the new one, so that long-time
      users would find what was familiar to them, and also for users who did not want the greater
      complexity that came with greater flexibility of use (see the link on the bottom left corner
      of Figure 8). We could not just move it, however, because
        The Old Site had to be compatible with Unicode and with the extensive
      Python scripting that ran functions on the New Site. The task of importing the Mac-based GIS
      system to the Web was complete by 1996, but was finished, in that second sense, in 2003 with
      the platform change and the new touches of the more flexible site. Again, other large-scale
      humanities computing projects faced similar problems; we all had to adapt to new scripting
      languages and environments, new tools like MySQL and Unicode, and new scholarly trends and
      demands in our particular areas. 
The transition to the Web and the further refinement of our Web tools in the late 1990s and
      early years of the new century were not accomplished by means of external funding from federal
      sources. We did win awards to record the African American data and to conduct new kinds of
      research (e.g., NSF awards to explore neural-network analysis of Atlas data, and to conduct a
      pilot project for random-sample survey research in Atlanta), and some of these resources were
      applied to computer work, but no award specifically funded our Web innovations. Development of
      our Web site was primarily accomplished by two graduate assistants, Rafal Konopka and Eric
      Rochester, who worked on Atlas computer projects for twelve years between them, first Konopka
      through our initial Web implementation, then Rochester through the first major revision. They
      held graduate assistantships, sometimes fully funded for research but more often cobbled
      together from different sources including both research and teaching. The consistent, stable
      element in this funding came from the Hans Kurath Fund of the American Dialect Society. The
      Kurath Fund is an endowment for the Atlas created by Raven McDavid and maintained by the
      American Dialect Society . The Dialect Society hold title to
      the Atlas research materials, and its Executive Council ratifies editors and advisory board
      members for the project. While the Kurath Fund could not support a complete graduate
      assistantship, it could pay enough so that other funding could round out a position.
      Similarly, while the Kurath Fund could not pay all of the operational expenses of the project,
      it could provide a key piece of equipment from time to time, repairs, or specialized supplies.
      The University of Georgia had agreed to provide space for the project and some operational
      support, in conjunction with the author's faculty appointment (a more permanent agreement may
      in time be possible). Thus the funding that allowed continuous development of the Atlas Web
      site has come from multiple sources, and still does. We are always in the position of putting
      together the pieces of the funding structure year by year. The central role of the American
      Dialect Society, however, provides the essential stability that has made continuous operation
      of the editorial site possible.

            LAMSAS Web 2: Browse Screen
            
            Screenshot of search engine results
         

            LAMSAS Web: Sub-Search
            
            Screenshot of search engine fields
         

            LAMSAS Web: Work by Others
            
            Screenshot of similar work in the Netherlands
         
The additional changes for the LAMSAS Web Mark 2 may seem more incremental than
      revolutionary, but again we feel that they responded to a changing environment that could not
      be ignored, new scholarly imperatives. For the first time our linguistic survey data was now
      fully available for sociolinguistic research. Dialectology is a venerable pursuit in
      linguistics, but it had been overtaken by sociolinguistics in recent decades and declared
      essentially to be irrelevant by many sociolinguists. The changes that we made to our Web site
      integrated social and geographical analysis of language variation in a single visualization
      that, in itself, showed graphically that the two approaches were not only compatible but
      inseparable. In addition, we also began to link our site with other sites, so that the Atlas
      Project could be seen in its connections with other online resources. Finally, we began to
      post completed analyses on the site in addition to raw data and associated information; some
      of these are results from our own funded research, others, such as those from John Nerbonne in
      Groningen (Figure 11), are from the research of people who used
      our freely-available data. In this way we could make and defend the claim that our Atlas
      survey research was a member of a wider community of those studying language variation. We did
      respond to emerging computational opportunities in the New Site, like Unicode and Python and
      MySQL, but the most significant part of the new changes spoke to issues of linguistic theory
      and analysis. And again, nobody funded completion of digitization of all of the data from the
      Atlas.

            Future LAMSAS Web
            
            Information flowchart for linguistic interviews
         
 Still, the larger Atlas Project is nowhere near at an end. We are now rethinking what the
      site should do, from a text-based system to one that features audio and stored images along
      with text and GIS. This change has become possible only in the last two years, as much greater
      network-attached storage has become available (measured in Tb, before long Pb). Because of our
      archival audio files, we are now one of the largest clients at the University of Georgia
      institutional storage array (which we share with bio-informaticists, physicists, and others
      usually considered to be power users). We now conceive of our new interviews as conversational
      corpora, in which text transcriptions serve as time-linked indices to audio files ; . Figure
        12 charts the flow of information that we envision for the next-generation site. While
      many users will want to listen to our speakers, others will want to perform acoustical
      analyses, now a strong trend in language variation research, as we ourselves now perform them
      (e.g., ; ). Our next task is to
      integrate sound with text and to enable acoustical research functions, while maintaining our
      interactive GIS functions — a whole new set of tools and problems from the previous task . As the flowchart suggests, we now envision eight different
      outputs from a new Web presence: full text transcripts, linked sound, acoustical phonetic data
      in lists and plots, tallies of feature variants in lists and on maps, and technical
      statistical results in both lists and maps. While any single task from this list is possible,
      some will be difficult to automate, and the hardest thing of all will be to integrate all
      eight outputs. We have not yet made these changes; they have been designed for some time now,
      and await the right people and circumstances and resources to make them real (our major
      revision cycle seems to be 5 to 10 years). When we can do that, we will have integrated our
      existing modes of study for language variation, surveys and sociolinguistics, with corpus
      linguistics, the latest major contemporary approach to language variation. We will have
      provided not just words and phrases extracted from interviews, but a full complement of
      information in our interviews, from sound recording to transcripts to analyses of acoustical
      characteristics. 
So, will we ever be finished? Yes, with the GIS of LAMSASplot and of
        The Old Site, though still (as always) tweaking the current site. We have
      plans to make yet another thorough revision. But we will never be finished either with keeping
      older sites and available or with creating new visualizations for the information we keep, as
      new technical possibilities and research demands appear. We can complete particular tasks, and
      often we can even finish particular tasks in the sense of polishing them for
      improved use. Yet one research proposal does not make the whole research program. While we can
      often fund and succeed with individual tasks, we must always see tasks as part of the larger
      process that probably will not be funded completely but still must continue for future users.
      We would be the snake eating its own tail if all we did was keep polishing eternally a single
      task (or worse, the dog that pointlessly chases his own tail), but we do well to make every
      end a new beginning as new technological possibilities become available, and new theories and
      styles of analyses take hold. 
After twenty-five years of trying to apply humanities computing to the problems of the
      Linguistic Atlas, it has become clear that there are no once-and-done, permanent solutions.
      The largest humanities computing projects are likely to require continuing care and
      maintenance, if not more radical representation and reinterpretation in light of the advance
      of scholarship, and yet they seem unlikely ever to be funded comprehensively for these tasks.
      The best way forward is to create some sort of stable institutional setting for large projects
      that will provide continuity and baseline resources for the work. This we have done for the
      Linguistic Atlas, through the American Dialect Society and our association with the University
      of Georgia. Stable institutional settings allow for additional resources to be sought for
      individual tasks, as the need for each one becomes apparent. In my general area, the
      Dictionary of American Regional English project at Wisconsin and the Dictionary of Old English
      project at Toronto, both innovative users of humanities computing, have found long-term
      funding through NEH and have also had strong institutional support. We can hope that Wisconsin
      and Toronto will not end their association with these projects when their first editions are
      completed. A good model for what might happen has occurred at Michigan, where the completion
      of the (print) Middle English Dictionary was followed by the creation of the
        electronic 
               Middle English Compendium
             
             in
        conjunction with the University of Michigan Library. Conversion was assisted by a grant from NEH.
      We are now attempting something of the kind at Georgia, with our new grant from NEH which will
      allow us to make digital conversions of the existing audio-taped interviews from the
      Linguistic Atlas, and which will also help us to make a new public audio archive of these
      materials. 
Thus, at the end of the day, I recommend that, besides grants for new tasks and new work,
      granting agencies should consider assisting in the formation of enduring institutional
      structures to support large-scale projects in humanities computing. Some existing programs,
      like NEH Challenge Grants, may already be helpful for this purpose. The establishment of
      common interests between the library community and researchers in humanities computing,
      already well started in the ACH and ALLC and exemplified by projects like the Middle
        English Compendium, is an excellent trend to continue. We will probably never be able
      to fund big projects like mine at the level needed to finish them completely. But that is OK,
      because the idea of finishing big humanities computing projects once and for all is just an
      illusion. We will always need to address changes in technology and changes in our disciplines,
      even for subject materials that are historical and unchanging. We need, therefore, to accept
      the rule for Talmudic scholarship that my colleague Virginia McDavid once passed along to me:
      You do not have to finish the work, but neither may you desist from it. We just have to keep
      at it, and find the resources we need along the way.
