Title:  The impact of the pandemic on musicologists’ use
                    of technology
Volume:  019
Issue:  2
Date:  18 July 2025
Abstract:  
                This paper discusses findings of a global survey of nearly 600 musicologists in
                    35 countries in 2022, asking about their uses of technology during the pandemic.
                    The survey focused on participants’ frustrating and rewarding experiences,
                    risks, limitations and benefits of technology, and highlighting changes they
                    would keep after the pandemic. There was a preference for digital resources over
                    physical counter-parts, apart from where physical books were more popular than
                    e-books. Zoom and other video conferencing software were frequently mentioned in
                    both positive and negative terms, particularly around music performance and
                    fieldwork, conferences and collaborations. Access and availability of online
                    resources was positive, due to availability, and negative due to losing the
                        analogue experience. Methodologies had also been impacted on,
                    allowing researchers to ask new questions, while shaping and limiting these
                    questions. There was impact of technology on community-building and enhancing
                    the ability to meet across borders while limiting networking opportunities. The
                    shift to teaching online impacted on teaching music performance, and heavy
                    teaching loads were prioritised over research, highlighting the interconnected
                    roles of the musicologist researcher in teaching and learning. This research
                    contributes towards an understanding of the complex nature of the information
                    behaviour of musicologists. Insight into how musicologists‘ attitudes and
                    practices have changed and fulfil their multiple roles suggests they are moving
                    closer to the digital humanities field in their practices.
            
Full Body Text: 


                1. Introduction
                The Covid-19 pandemic forced many people online to engage with their work, their
                    clients, friends and family during long periods of isolation in lockdowns. The
                    music sector benefits particularly from in-person encounters in teaching,
                    listening, performing and enjoyment, while music researchers are generally
                    considered to prefer engaging with physical sources such as manuscripts and
                    books in situ rather than online.  Although
                    performance, music education and music listening all received notable attention
                    from researchers keen to explore the impact of the online pivot, eg ; ; ; , the impact of
                    the pandemic on musicology research is as yet relatively unexplored. 
                In terms of the scholarly study of music, musicology research studies various
                    aspects of music: history, role in society, structure, aesthetics, perception
                    and performance . This has led to a segmentation of the
                    field into a large number of specialisations, the main ones being: Historical
                    musicology and critical editing, Cultural musicology, Popular music studies,
                    Music theory, Analysis and composition, Music psychology, Sociology and
                    neuroscience, Music performance studies, Systematic musicology, Ethnomusicology,
                    Computational or digital musicology, Music libraries and Archives. This
                    segmentation acknowledges the wide role music has in society and leads to the
                    adoption of a variety of research practices and information behaviours . Digital tools and resources are increasingly
                    being adopted by musicologists. Research exploring images, encoded scores, audio
                    and metadata have been supported by rapid developments in the capability of
                    technology, allowing new questions to be asked by musicologists across the
                    spectrum of specialisations. Although this increase in the use of text and data
                    mining and the availability of digital tools and resources brings musicology
                    closer to the digital humanities field, it has been suggested at times that
                    musicology is not strongly embedded in large-scale data creation efforts and
                    general methodological discussions in digital humanities . Other evidence suggests however that the digital
                    elements of musicology are increasingly being recognised as being part of the
                    field of digital humanities .
                The paper explores the practices of musicologists during the pandemic, while
                    exploring the differences and commonalities with those of other humanities
                    researchers. A global online survey was designed to explore the impact of the
                    pandemic on the information behaviours of self-identifying musicologists,
                    associated scholars and facilitators such as librarians and archivists, and key
                    factors are discussed: the place of technology within musicological and adjacent
                    disciplines; and shifting to online work. The findings demonstrate that the
                    pandemic forced the community to attain a technical skill set that enabled
                    online communication in many forms and provided access to a wealth of resources,
                    which has widened horizons in terms of collaboration and networking, resources,
                    tools and research topics and methodologies.
            

                2. Literature Review
                As in other humanities disciplines, sources for musicologists are primarily text
                    (reviews, concert programmes, scholarly articles, popular press), image
                    (including manuscripts and music notation), audio (commercial and field
                    recordings) and video (concert recordings, promotional clips). The range of
                    sources includes digital books and journals, physical books and journals,
                    digitised archives and manuscript collections, physical archives and manuscript
                    collections, music audio on computer, phone, mobile device, music audio on tape,
                    record, CD, physical collections of music editions, digital collections of music
                    editions and online music audio collections .
                    The use of digital and physical/analogue sources varies according to the
                    speciality. Until the digital impact on accessibility of music resources,
                    researchers had to track down and visit collections of physical materials and
                    audio sources, or request copies or scans. Access to digital resources was
                    hindered by strict copyright regulations surrounding contemporary recordings in
                    particular  and special issues surrounding optical
                    music recognition which have caused it to trail behind text-based and audio work
                        . Previous research has explored how
                    musicologists used technology in their research practices, finding that while
                    the participants described themselves as mostly comfortable with digital
                    resources in their research, they would benefit from ongoing support with their
                    digital information skills and from reliable and usable technology . These findings seemed to align with other
                    digital humanities research of the time 
                    , which demonstrated how humanities scholars are not luddites; they simply behave differently from
                        scientists, and many social scientists when interacting with physical and
                        digital information
                    . In the years since, it is said that the
                    field of musicology has broadened from a focused computational analytical
                    approach towards a bigger tent similar to that
                    identified by Urberg . The expansion of
                    digital humanities research to include digital publishing,
                        philosophies of digital research, and ‘born digital’ projects that cannot
                        exist outside of a digital medium
                     is said to have led to a field where
                    researchers can ask new questions and inter-disciplinary work can be
                    facilitated. In musicology, the ongoing development of digital analytical tools
                    has been catching up the rapid and mature development of tools for text
                    analysis, leading to wider access to digital musicological resources, databases
                    and formats. This is exemplified by the AHRC Digital Transformations project
                        Transforming Musicology in the UK, which ran
                    between 2013–2017, with the aim of bringing in together musicologists and
                    associated researchers and facilitators to explore how
                        emerging technologies for working with music as sound and score can
                        transform musicology, both as an academic discipline and as a practice
                        outside of universities
                    .
                The gradual shift to encompass the digital in research practices highlights the
                    creative tensions between musicology and the digital. Findings suggest that
                    while scholars prefer physical monographs over e-books, they are happy to read
                    electronic journal articles or book chapters , they may work with scanned artefacts
                    but also have the urge to visit the original, and they will experience a live
                    music event and will listen to mp3s or CDs in the car on the journey home. These
                    fragile balances may have been disturbed by the recent pandemic. 
                From the outset of the pandemic, apart from what could be done at home, the
                    analogue was almost removed from the landscape. News items identified the
                    popularity of singing on one’s balcony or organising online concerts . Concerts were cancelled and some music
                    workers suddenly ceased to have any income . Early in
                    2020, courses and classes were moved online, travel was limited, physical
                    resources locked down. It is suggested that the impact on the in-person nature
                    of music-making, -listening and -learning was lengthy and profound, cementing
                    the digital turn
                     which had already been taking place for a
                    number of years in teaching and other aspects of music-making and
                    consumption.
                Musicology research was also impacted, not least because many higher education
                    institutions required their academic staff to shift their teaching online , which required many of those doing
                    non-Covid-related research to pause their research activities to enable them to
                    focus on teaching . Studies indicate that this
                    pause was further limited by travel and access limitations and has been found to
                    have notable impact in a variety of research disciplines, broadening the gender
                    gap in publishing 
                    , negatively affecting mental health  and reducing collaborations , community-building  and social capital . Due to the wide-ranging formats and pursuits,
                    the impact of the pandemic on music-related activities could be wider and more
                    complex than other disciplines. The challenges of moving conferences  and fieldwork online have already been
                    discussed , particularly where the music being studied
                    is not from a recording , chiming with the
                    findings of Pokhrel and Chhetri (2021) in their review of the impact of the
                    pandemic on teaching and learning in developing countries .
                As we approach a global humanities discipline , the concept of global musicology recognising the variety of
                    its nature and the distributed make-up of its community, its fluidity, and the
                    importance of its community  is possibly becoming
                    ever-more in reach. Bohlman describes a two-dimensional global musicological moment, where a change of
                        revolutionary proportions takes place
                     and where this paradigm shift also
                    changes the understanding of historical processes, both in the past and in their
                    future unfolding. This article considers the impact of the pandemic on the
                    digital practices and resources of musicology in an attempt to determine the
                    extent of this so-called musicological moment, and the way ahead.
            

                3. Methodology
                This study is part of our research line What Do Musicologists Do All Day
                    (abbreviated WDMDAD)The title of the project is inspired by one of the
                        authors’ favourite children’s book
                        Scarry, R. (1968) What do people do all day? New York: Random
                        House.. Its aim is to investigate the daily use of digital
                    technologies by musicologists and their attitudes towards these. We conducted a
                    world-wide survey in 2014–2015, the outcomes of which were published in Inskip
                    and Wiering (2015)
                    . In 2022, we did a follow-up survey with the
                    following two research questions: 
                        To what extent has the use and acceptance of digital technology by
                            musicologists changed since 2015?
                        What was the impact of the pandemic on musicologists’ use of
                            technology?
                    This article focusses on the second question, looking at the changing
                    role of technology during the pandemic and the expected impact on future use of
                    technology in musicological research. On the launch page of the survey (see Appendix 1), we listed a range of technologies
                    commonly used in musicology, with an emphasis on digital technology. We decided
                    not to provide a strict definition of (digital) technology in order to give
                    respondents the freedom to answer in accordance with their own understanding of
                    the term.
                
                    3.a Data collection
                    An online survey was designed, using Opinio, using questions from the
                        previous survey which were revised to make them relevant to the pandemic.
                        The survey home page stated (see Appendix 1):
                            We are looking at the research practices of
                            musicologists and other music researchers to gather information which
                            can be used in the development of technologies relevant to these
                            practices. This survey will provide some insights into how you have
                            responded to the Covid-19 pandemic. The research was approved by
                        the University College London Department of Information Studies Ethics
                        committee (16 February 2022) and GDPR (Z6364106/2022/02/129) approved on 23
                        February 2022. As with the previous survey, which was run in 2014–2015 and
                        had 621 usable responses, the survey link was made available to
                        musicologists via musicology societies mailing lists, and social media. The
                        survey ran from Tuesday 1 March 2022 – Friday 10 June 2022 and delivered 584
                        usable responses. The responses were gathered into Opinio and subsequently
                        downloaded as an Excel spreadsheet, which was imported into NVivo. 
                
                
                    3.b Sample
                    Efforts were made to encourage participation from around the world by
                        approaching local musicology societies and asking them to circulate the link
                        to their members. The survey was anonymous although it is recognised that
                        some participants could be identifiable through their research topics, and
                        these have been redacted where necessary. The invitation was widely
                        circulated via musicology societies and networks. Participants were invited
                        to complete the survey if they had an involvement with musicological
                        research. This led to the inclusion of musicology-focused librarians,
                        archivists and scholars in adjacent disciplines, recognising the wide scope
                        of the segmented discipline, as noted earlier. Some previous participants
                        had provided their contact details separately from their data and were
                        notified of the survey and asked to take part.
                
                    
                        3.c Data Analysis
                        When the survey was closed the data was downloaded from Opinio and
                            imported into NVivo for analysis. One researcher was using NVivo for
                            Mac, the other NVivo for PC. Coding was done by both the researchers
                            over a period of months, with access to a password-protected shared
                            drive and regular online discussions taking place. Both researchers were
                            coding the whole dataset, and it was planned to merge both coding sets;
                            however, technical incompatibilities meant that this was not possible,
                            so the two separate coding books were compared and reviewed to ensure
                            consistency. The numerical data was analysed separately from the textual
                            data, using basic Excel spreadsheets and charts to visualise relevant
                            results.
                        The approach to coding the qualitative data was partially derived from
                            grounded theory and followed two stages: open and axial . In the open coding stage, the
                            responses were initially organised by their associated questions (e.g.
                            Q13: Tell a story about a frustrating experience with technology during
                            the Covid-19 pandemic), open coding allowing the researchers to immerse
                            themselves in the responses to each of the questions and identify themes
                            within each set of responses: frustration, reward, risks, limitations,
                            benefits, changes. During axial coding, the links between each of the
                            themes were then identified and compared between researchers to find
                            commonalities and outliers. The texts were visualised using word cloud,
                            text search and cluster map features in NVivo, helping the researchers
                            identify patterns in the word usage.
                    
                

                    4. Findings
                    
                        4.a Questionnaire
                        The full questionnaire can be seen in Table 1 below:
                        
                            Questionnaire
                            
                                No
                                Question
                                Response Type
                            
                            
                                1
                                Did you participate in the previous WDMDAD survey?
                                Y/N
                            
                            
                                2
                                Please identify your location from this list.
                                List
                            
                            
                                3
                                What is your level of education?
                                List
                            
                            
                                4
                                 How confident would you say you are using digital systems and
                                    materials to find, organise and analyse research materials, and
                                    create and disseminate your findings? Please indicate your
                                    confidence on a scale of 1 – 5, where 1 is low (not at all
                                    confident) and 5 is high (very confident).
                                Scale
                            
                            
                                5
                                Are you affiliated with an institution?
                                Y/N
                            
                            
                                6
                                Where do you usually do your musicology research? (You can
                                    choose more than one of these options if you like.)
                                List + open
                            
                            
                                7
                                What is your speciality? (You can choose more than one of
                                    these options if you like.)
                                List + open
                            
                            
                                8
                                What are you currently researching?
                                Open
                            
                            
                                9
                                Which are the top five information or music resources you use
                                    most in your musicology research and writing?
                                List
                            
                            
                                10
                                Following on from the previous question, which specific
                                    information or music resources do you use the most? Please
                                    mention the most important ones, you do not have to be
                                    exhaustive.
                                Open
                            
                            
                                11
                                To what extent has your preference for using digital or
                                    physical resources in your work change during the
                                    pandemic?
                                Scale
                            
                            
                                12
                                Why do you think this is?
                                Open
                            
                            
                                13
                                Tell a story about a frustrating experience with technology
                                    during the Covid-19 pandemic.
                                Open
                            
                            
                                14
                                Tell a story about a rewarding experience with technology
                                    during the Covid-19 pandemic.
                                Open
                            
                            
                                15
                                What do you think are the risks of the use of technology in
                                    musicology research during the pandemic?
                                Open
                            
                            
                                16
                                What do you think are the limitations of the use of technology
                                    in musicology research during the pandemic?
                                Open
                            
                            
                                17
                                What do you think are the benefits of the use of technology in
                                    musicology research during the pandemic?
                                Open
                            
                            
                                18
                                Which of the changes you have been forced to make are you
                                    going to keep after the pandemic is over?
                                Open
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        4.b Demographics
                        In comparison to the earlier survey ,
                            there was some similarity between the demographics of the participants.
                            There were 584 usable responses, (previous 621). Only 51 are sure that
                            they participated in 2015, while 71 doubt if they did: nearly 80% thus
                            participated for the first time (Q1). Spread over continents is rather
                            similar (Q2), though showing a dip in North American and increase in
                            European participants (Table 2).
                        
                            Location of participants (2015, 2022)
                            
                                Location
                                Count (2015)
                                Percentage (2015)
                                Count (2022)
                                Percentage (2022)
                            
                            
                                Europe
                                306
                                49
                                352
                                60
                            
                            
                                North America
                                248
                                40
                                148
                                25
                            
                            
                                Australasia
                                38
                                6
                                26
                                5
                            
                            
                                South America
                                13
                                2
                                16
                                3
                            
                            
                                Far East
                                6
                                1
                                16
                                3
                            
                            
                                Africa
                                4
                                1
                                14
                                2
                            
                            
                                Middle East
                                4
                                1
                                8
                                1
                            
                            
                                Central Asia
                                2
                                0
                                3
                                1
                            
                            
                                Total Responses
                                921
                                100
                                583
                                100
                            
                        
                        Similarly to the previous survey, over 70% claimed to be confident in
                            their use of digital systems (Q4), and materials. In both participant
                            groups, a large majority hold a PhD and are employed at an academic
                            institution (Q3, Q5). The spread of musicological specialities (Q7) is
                            also very similar (Figure 1):
                        
                            Specialities (2015, 2022). Participants could indicate
                                multiple specialities: on average participants reported 2.4
                                specialities.
                            
                                A bar chart of particpant specialties for both the 2015 and 2022 studies where the majority participants represented in both surveys identify their specialty as Historical musicology and critical editing
                            
                        
                        And their self-evaluated digital skills (Q4) related to their speciality
                            were again similar (Figure 2, cf. ):
                        
                            Self-evaluated digital skills per speciality (2022)
                                n=544. Skill levels range from 1 (not at all confident) to 5 (very
                                confident).
                            
                                A horizontal stacked bar chart of participants' self-evaluated digital skills related to their speciality showing higher confidence in digital skills in more empirical specialties.
                            
                        
                        The preferred type of resource (Q9) demonstrated a general preference for
                            digital over physical, although physical books were preferred to e-books
                            (Figure 3).
                        
                            Resource preference (2022) n= 499, on average
                                participants reported 4.7 preferred resources
                            
                                A bar chart of participants' preferred resources, showing general preference for digital over physical, although physical books were preferred to e-books.
                            
                        
                        Perhaps not surprisingly, preferences differ between specialities (Figure
                            4), suggesting that preference for digital materials is higher in more
                            empirical specialisms and lower in the ones that focus on musical
                            heritage and cultural context.
                        
                            Preference per speciality (percentage)
                            
                                A bar chart of participants' preferred resources by specialty showing a higher preference for digital materials in more empirical specialties and a lower preference in specialties that focus on musical heritage and cultural context.
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        4.c Qualitative analysis
                        The data was gathered together under each question, and open coding was
                            used to identify trends and patterns in the full text responses. As an
                            example, the tables in the Appendix 2
                            shows the open and axial coding for Q13 and Q14 by one of the authors.
                        In response to Q11 and Q12 (To what extent has your preference for using
                            digital or physical resources in your work changed during the pandemic?
                            Why do you think this is?) it was found that although a proportion of
                            participants had changed a lot (n=75), a larger proportion had changed
                            not much (n=193) or some (n=150). The ten most frequent reasons for
                            changing format preference are listed in Table 3 below.
                        
                            Ranked reasons for changing format preference (a lot)
                            
                                Reasons for changing
                                Count
                            
                            
                                More availability of digitised materials
                                47
                            
                            
                                Cannot access library or archive
                                46
                            
                            
                                Cannot travel to library or archive
                                31
                            
                            
                                Work from home
                                23
                            
                            
                                Preference hasn’t changed
                                11
                            
                            
                                Accessibility
                                10
                            
                            
                                Convenience
                                7
                            
                            
                                Easier
                                7
                            
                            
                                Had no choice
                                5
                            
                            
                                Changed research question to adapt to online
                                4
                            
                        
                        The top ten reasons for those whose preference had not changed much are
                            seen in Table 4.
                        
                            Ranked reasons for not changing format preference
                            
                                Reasons for not changing
                                Count
                            
                            
                                Already working with digital
                                102
                            
                            
                                Prefer physical
                                28
                            
                            
                                Prefer digital
                                16
                            
                            
                                Used more digital
                                15
                            
                            
                                No impact
                                10
                            
                            
                                Use physical and digital equally
                                8
                            
                            
                                Not available digitally
                                7
                            
                            
                                Use inter-library loan
                                6
                            
                            
                                Lack of digital resources available
                                6
                            
                            
                                Had access to library
                                5
                            
                        
                        These ranked reasons help to highlight the dynamic nature of the findings
                            of the survey. The conflicting responses across the dataset underpin
                            observations from the quantitative data that the underlying segmented
                            and specialised complexity of the musicologist term covers a wide
                            set of research practices and beliefs.
                        The responses to the text questions were closely analysed and discussed
                            repeatedly to identify patterns and address inconsistencies. Codes were
                            drawn together into a set of over-arching themes: individual changes,
                            social aspects, changes in the discipline, learning new skills,
                            interaction, teaching and learning. These are presented and discussed
                            below. Survey quotations have had minor edits, highlighted in square
                            brackets, but are otherwise presented as provided by the
                            participants.
                        
                            4.c.i Individual changes
                            Whereas Q11 and Q12 concern changes made during the pandemic, Q18
                                (Which of the changes you have been forced to make are you going to
                                keep after the pandemic is over?) is about expectations for the
                                future. Table 5 presents a high-level overview of the 317 responses.
                                Many respondents chose to answer this question categorically, most
                                often with none (26 times) or nothing (5 times), less
                                often with all (11 times) or many (3 times).
                            
                                Overview of responses to Question 18
                                
                                    Amount of Change
                                    Count
                                
                                
                                    (almost) none
                                    73
                                
                                
                                    specific change(s)
                                    210
                                
                                
                                    most or all
                                    19
                                
                                
                                    don’t know
                                    9
                                
                                
                                    unclear or unusable
                                    6
                                
                                
                                    Total
                                    317
                                
                            
                            Fifteen respondents were critical about the use of the word
                                    forced, stating, for example, that I
                                    don’t feel I have been forced to make any changes during
                                    the pandemic — I just adapted to my new reality [157].
                                Voluntary changes in technology use may therefore be
                                underrepresented. In addition, six respondents mention doubts about
                                the pandemic being over soon or explain that they …cannot for[e]see the future, even not my
                                    own [415].
                            Table 6 zooms in on the areas of change. Specific remarks that were
                                mentioned in responses coded as (almost) none and most or
                                    all are included in this analysis as well. Many respondents
                                commented on multiple areas of change. Note that their remarks may
                                express positive as well as negative attitudes or experiences.
                            
                                Areas of change in responses to Q18. There were 301 unique participants; codes are not mutually exclusive so add up to more than the number of unique participants. Sub-areas are subsets of the area above it.
                                
                                    Area of Change
                                    Sub-Area
                                    Count
                                
                                
                                    human interaction
                                    
                                    136
                                
                                
                                    
                                    teaching
                                    29
                                
                                
                                    digital and physical materials
                                    
                                    76
                                
                                
                                    remote work, travel
                                    
                                    50
                                
                                
                                    hardware, software, services
                                    
                                    24
                                
                                
                                    other changes
                                    
                                    21
                                
                                
                                    
                                    skills and attitudes
                                    13
                                
                                
                                    
                                    health
                                    5
                                
                            
                            The most prominent area is thus human interaction, which is mainly
                                about the use of video conferencing services in various contexts,
                                one of which is education. Digital and physical materials, focussing
                                on the issue of access, comes second. Location of work and
                                travelling also attract a lot of comments, whereas technology itself
                                is less discussed. Table 7 compares the responses from Q18 with the
                                changes in preference reported in Q11:
                            
                                Area of change (Q18) split by preference changes (Q11).
                                    Percentages are calculated over columns: they relate the number
                                    of comments in an area of change (Q18) to the number of
                                    participants with a particular preference change (Q11).
                                    Percentages don’t add up to 100% due to (a) responses that don’t
                                    mention an area of change and (b) responses that mention
                                    multiple areas of change
                                
                                    
                                    Preference change
                                
                                
                                    Area of change
                                    not much
                                    some
                                    a lot
                                 
                                
                                
                                    human interaction
                                    71 (48.3%)
                                    45 (39.5%)
                                    20 (35.7%)
                                    
                                
                                
                                    digital and physical materials
                                    19 (12.9%)
                                    34 (29.8%)
                                    23 (41.1%)
                                    

                                
                                
                                    remote work, travel
                                    19 (12.9%)
                                    25 (21.9%)
                                    6 (10.7%)
                                    
                                
                                
                                    hardware, software, services
                                    11 (7.5%)
                                    9 (7.9%)
                                    4 (7.1%)
                                    
                                
                                
                                    other changes
                                    6 (4.1%)
                                    11 (9.6%)
                                    4 (7.1%)
                                    
                                
                                
                                    unique participants
                                    147
                                    114
                                    56
                                   
                                
                            
                            Two interesting patterns seem to emerge. One is about human
                                interaction: The less the respondents’ preference has changed, the
                                more human interaction seems to be an issue. In other words, their
                                most important experience of technology may have been the use of
                                different modes of communication. This is supported by the frequent
                                mention of Zoom in the responses, for example that For better or for worse, Zoom is here to
                                    stay [156].
                            Another pattern concerns resources, which are mentioned much more
                                often by those reporting a strong preference change and may indicate
                                an increased use (or wish to use) digital resources. Some remarks
                                suggest a changed working practice: My thesis
                                    has made the turn towards digital archives and will continue in
                                    this direction [59], while other suggest a mixed
                                approach: Use of digital sources in the first
                                    instance to establish if the content merits an ‘in-person‘
                                    follow up visit [45].
                            Other patterns are apparent but are weaker, such as that respondents reporting some preference change relatively made most remarks about remote work and travel.
                        
                        
                            4.c.ii Social aspects
                            Social distancing measures and travel restrictions deeply impacted
                                collaboration, conferences, concerts, fieldwork and communication.
                                In the words of respondent 289: Without
                                    technology such as Zoom or other platforms, we could not have
                                    any interaction. Delving deeper into responses from Q18
                                about human interaction can tell us something about how
                                musicologists expect these changes to affect their professional
                                lives in the future. Table 8 gives a breakdown of these
                                responses.
                            
                                Aspects of the social structure of the discipline. There were 136 unique participants; codes are not mutually exclusive so add up to more than the number of unique participants. Sub-aspects are subsets of the aspect above it.
                                
                                    Aspect
                                    Sub-Aspect
                                    Count
                                
                                
                                    professional interaction
                                    
                                    114
                                
                                
                                    
                                    general
                                    8
                                
                                
                                    
                                    teaching
                                    29
                                
                                
                                    
                                    research, work
                                    68
                                
                                
                                    
                                    individual, informal
                                    21
                                
                                
                                    
                                    fieldwork, participants
                                    7
                                
                                
                                    conferences
                                    
                                    42
                                
                                
                                    discipline in general
                                    
                                    6
                                
                                
                                    musical events
                                    
                                    4
                                
                            
                            We’ll focus here on the two largest categories, professional
                                interaction and conferences. Discipline in general is the topic of
                                the next section, while the comments on musical events are too few
                                to draw a conclusion from. From the respondents speaking about
                                online conferences, the large majority either appreciates them or at
                                least intends to keep participating. Appreciation speaks from
                                remarks such as Zoom conferences/research
                                    meetings are pretty cool [381] or just Remote
                                conferences! [211]. They extend networks: We
                                    just organized a hybrid conference. I would do that again at any
                                    time, since it brought scholars from all over the world to the
                                    event [115] and remove barriers for participation:
                                    Zooming with collaborators and some online
                                    conference/seminar attendance have been really useful, and where
                                    possible would be good to keep. It can make conferences much
                                    more accessible. [236]. Conversely, online may just be a
                                last resort: I guess attending conferences and
                                    other meetings online will remain an option, to be used only in
                                    situations when it’s ABSOLUTELY IMPOSSIBLE to attend in
                                    person [484]. Several respondents take a middle
                                position: Limiting my attendance at overseas
                                    conferences [289] or expecting that I would return to in-person conferences, but continue to ‘go‘
                                    to online events that are short and to which I would never
                                    travel [391]. Future conference organisers may want to
                                take these sentiments into account.
                            Many respondents stress the advantages of working online, mentioning
                                the benefits of staying at home: Virtual
                                    meetings are extremely comfortable. I don’t want to do 3 hours
                                    of public transportation for only 1 hour of meeting
                                    anymore [431]. The type of meeting matters: maybe some private meetings on online platforms;
                                    certain forms of online-meetings, like board meetings, are
                                    easier and maybe worth considering [147], as does
                                finding the right balance: We are looking at
                                    ways of blending in-person and online research interaction and
                                    presentation which will attempt to keep the best of both worlds
                                    wherever possible [129]. Some respondents mention
                                specific collaborative activities such as co-writing with collaborative software [292] and
                                participation in a Zoom writing group [231]. Especially for
                                long-distance collaboration, working and meeting remotely has become
                                a viable alternative: I’ll continue my
                                    international collaborations using Zoom [477].
                            At a more individual and informal level of interaction, we found
                                several remarks, mostly with a positive slant, about The possibilities to share and communicate without
                                    going somewhere physically [229] with colleagues and academic friends from all over the
                                    world [286]. Interestingly, some suggest an increased
                                openness in communication, for example a brave
                                    attitude in approaching people I don’t know about a Zoom call
                                    (in the past one would need to wait and hope that one would
                                    'accidentally' meet at a conference to make that
                                    'entry') [373]. Others however plan to make it a regular practice to connect informally with
                                    colleagues in person [100] or to resume travelling to
                                maintain their personal network (and do research): The limitation of travel to engage in research
                                    activities is not something I will continue with — it was
                                    extremely limiting to my work, and to my networking
                                [312]. Finally, there is a small but interesting group of responses
                                addressing fieldwork and participant research, noticing on the one
                                hand a turn to online and hybrid
                                    ethnography [51] while on the other still feeling an
                                urge for real fieldwork with real
                                    interviews [468].
                        
                        
                            4.c.iii Changes in the discipline
                            Some responses in Q18 go beyond the individual and seem to reflect on
                                more widespread changes in the musicological community. A good
                                starting point is the following: Many: perhaps
                                    none of them huge or transformative on their own, but in sum the
                                    changes in habit and standard operating procedure have been
                                    huge. [176] Prompted by this observation we searched for
                                remarks concerning the discipline in general through all responses
                                to Q13–18 and identified over 180 relevant remarks (as always, there
                                were borderline cases where it was unclear whether they described
                                the respondent’s personal situation or a more general observation).
                                These responses are summarised in Table 9:
                            
                                Remarks concerning discipline in general in Q13–18. The
                                    sentiment score is based on number of remarks in Q13–Q17.
                                    Remarks in Q14 and Q17 are considered positive; those in Q13,
                                    Q15 and Q16 negative. Remarks from Q18 are not included since
                                    they can have either sentiment.
                                
                                    Category
                                    Q13–Frustrating
                                    Q14–Rewarding
                                    Q15–Risks
                                    Q16–Limitations
                                    Q17–Benefits
                                    Q18–Changes after pandemic
                                    Total
                                    Sentiment
                                
                                
                                    access
                                    2
                                    3
                                    29
                                    12
                                    24
                                    6
                                    76
                                    0.49
                                
                                
                                    interaction
                                    0
                                    14
                                    11
                                    3
                                    16
                                    7
                                    51
                                    0.76
                                
                                
                                    equity and inclusion
                                    0
                                    3
                                    7
                                    9
                                    15
                                    3
                                    37
                                    0.63
                                
                                
                                    learning skills
                                    0
                                    3
                                    3
                                    3
                                    13
                                    1
                                    23
                                    0.8
                                
                                
                                    method
                                    1
                                    1
                                    7
                                    2
                                    7
                                    2
                                    20
                                    0.55
                                
                                
                                    technology
                                    1
                                    1
                                    7
                                    7
                                    2
                                    0
                                    18
                                    0.23
                                
                                
                                    money
                                    0
                                    1
                                    4
                                    2
                                    6
                                    1
                                    14
                                    0.64
                                
                                
                                    values
                                    0
                                    0
                                    9
                                    1
                                    0
                                    1
                                    11
                                    0
                                
                                
                                    travel, working remotely
                                    0
                                    2
                                    1
                                    0
                                    4
                                    0
                                    7
                                    0.9
                                
                                
                                    environment
                                    0
                                    1
                                    1
                                    0
                                    3
                                    1
                                    6
                                    0.86
                                
                                
                                    organisations
                                    0
                                    0
                                    2
                                    2
                                    1
                                    0
                                    5
                                    0.27
                                
                                
                                    health and well being
                                    0
                                    0
                                    1
                                    0
                                    1
                                    1
                                    3
                                    0.6
                                
                                
                                    total remarks
                                    4
                                    29
                                    82
                                    41
                                    92
                                    23
                                    271
                                    
                                
                            
                            For each category we calculated a naïve sentiment score from the
                                responses from the positive (Q14, Q17) and negative (Q13,
                                Q15, Q16) questions. We calculate the weighted proportion of
                                positive responses in the total number of responses to each
                                category. Weighting is necessary since there are three
                                    negative questions and two positive ones: hence a
                                negative response must receive two thirds of the weight of a
                                positive response:
                            $$sentiment = \frac{Q14 +
                                    Q17}{Q14 + Q17 + 2(Q13 + Q15 + Q16)/3}$$
                            Scores above 0.5 indicate a positive sentiment on the topic, scores
                                below 0.5 a negative one; a score of 0.5 indicates a neutral
                                sentiment. Since just the number of responses, not their content is
                                taken into account, these scores can only serve as a rough
                                indication. The positive sentiment of some of the smaller categories
                                (travel, working remotely; environment) is hardly surprising.
                                Learning skills is also quite positively valued (see Section
                                4.c.iv), as is, somewhat surprisingly, interaction (see Section
                                4.c.vi). Mixed feelings seem to exist surrounding equity and
                                inclusion (see Section 4.c.v).
                            Three interconnected categories that won’t be treated in detail
                                nevertheless deserve some consideration because of both their
                                importance and relatively low score: access, method and values. Many
                                respondents comment on the increase in digitisation: Many institutions moved forward in digitization,
                                    and many researchers found digital resources they perhaps were
                                    not aware of [481]. Positive outcome is the radically accelerated pace of obtaining and
                                    disseminating scientific information [39]; another that
                                    it led us to ask different questions... It
                                    prompted research areas that might not have been visited without
                                    the urgencies of limitation [47]. Many respondents
                                signal the danger of losing the contact with
                                    the ‘material’ part of the discipline [23]: The biggest risk in my opinion is that
                                    over-reliance on technology will lead increasingly to a
                                    situation where, if it’s not online, it doesn’t exist. This will
                                    favour certain approaches and ideological bents, and harm
                                    others. [243]. And what is digitised is not even under
                                control of the researcher: researchers reliant
                                    on digitized materials are at the mercy of those on the other
                                    side of the scanner. We don’t have a say in prioritizing what
                                    gets digitized and what doesn’t [480]. This viewpoint,
                                however, could be qualified by comments such as: I have to give a shout-out to dozens, possibly
                                    hundreds, of extremely helpful reference librarians who have
                                    been quick and accurate in responding to research needs during
                                    the pandemic. This included, more often than not, providing
                                    scans of pages without charge — and, in some case[s], responding
                                    to a request for additional work without complaining
                                [393]. Digitisation has methodological consequences, and these are
                                not always seen in a positive light. Compare for example: Our tools shape the way we think – the increased
                                    speed of digitisation allows for more analysis of big data and
                                    more research questions based on questions related to
                                    quantifications in general [437] with I am concerned about how reliance on digital
                                    resources can shape research questions and trends — a topic
                                    which to my knowledge no one has looked into [198].
                                There is also a middle ground: One might look
                                    at the music they’re researching from a different perspective —
                                    they might get inspired to perform their research by using
                                    different musical softwares [354].
                            A digital turn in musicology will touch on disciplinary values as
                                well, and when these are mentioned it usually with concern. One is
                                music as a sensory phenomenon: Much research
                                    still depends upon living and moving through the world and
                                    experiencing things with our full sensory faculties. 'Online'
                                    research, if not supplemented with its corollary, is capable of
                                    representing only a small subset of the cultural and social
                                    meanings of music, and is prone to gross misrepresentations that
                                    have only begun to be discussed in our fields.[292] The
                                openness of the discipline may also be at risk by potentially Establishing a new status quo that essentializes
                                    technology in musicology, creating a skill- and financial
                                    barrier to undergraduate students and global scholars
                                [30]. Trust and respect may be at stake: I
                                    think that we’re tending to splinter into groups that don’t
                                    trust one another, and that is inherently a bad thing
                                [143] so that in the end We are all getting a
                                    little less human [111]. On a more positive note, some
                                comments connect accessibility and
                                    ecological[ly] [474] benefits of digitisation and
                                envisage the possibility of a greener
                                    scholarship [42]. These are important concerns, and
                                however positive one may be about the digital turn in musicology,
                                such issues need to be debated as part of the shaping of the future
                                of the discipline.
                        
                        
                            4.c.iv Learning New Skills
                            The most fundamental consequence of the pandemic was of course that
                                nearly everyone had to learn new skills to be able to function in
                                the online environment. Twenty-three respondents comment on this,
                                often describing increased digital skills as a positive outcome. For
                                example, the pandemic added to the acceptance
                                    of technology. It helped people, which were reluctant, to also
                                    see technology’s possibilities and chances [234] and
                                    to become more open to digital tools, modes
                                    of operation, and modes of thinking for what constitutes
                                    'legitimate musicology' [108]. Critical comments come
                                from six of the respondents, pointing out among other things the
                                cost and availability of the necessary training. Not all training is
                                entirely adequate: Many of the trainings assume
                                    that you want to make said technology the centre of your
                                    research/teaching [277]. The amount of learning should
                                maybe not be overrated: It’s like ‘we’re so
                                    technologically focused now‘, but it’s really just Zoom
                                    xD [215]. But on the other hand, Because everyone had to learn how to use Zoom all at once, it
                                    actually works pretty well [427]. Mastering video
                                conferencing tools thus appears to have become a core technical
                                skill because of the pandemic.
                            Respondents mention a considerable number of other technical skills
                                they acquired, including video editing, programming with
                                    music21music21 is a Python library for computer-aided
                                    musicology , music notation
                                programs, and online collaborative work, but one of these stands
                                out, namely the ability to access and use digital resources. In the
                                following sections we focus on the social aspects, reserving
                                methodological aspects for another publication.
                        
                        
                            4.c.v Equity and inclusion
                            An important cluster of responses discusses whether technology might
                                create a more open and inclusive disciplinary culture, because, in
                                the words of one respondent, it decenters the
                                    world, and allows for amazing interchange of ideas and
                                    people [132]. Due to the pandemic, a new, more global conversation about music [362] has
                                emerged. Technology could show how it is
                                    possible to create a more equitable, global musicology
                                [217] as envisioned by former International Musicological Society
                                president Daniel Chua . In addition,
                                according to several respondents, technology has allowed much more remote work (including presentations)
                                    that both increases collaboration and helps underrepresented
                                    scholars [138] and expand[s]
                                    access, particularly for underrepresented and marginalized
                                    groups [270]. The changes are therefore not to be
                                discarded after the pandemic: I think we can go
                                    some ways in address[ing] equity in academia if we were to keep
                                    symposia, workshops, and conferences online [160], or,
                                when they are in-person, we must retain the
                                    online versions. It should in any case be mandatory for
                                    institutions to do this as part of their open access/disability
                                    etc., policies [114].
                            The same technologies however carry a risk of exclusion as well.
                                First, one must be skillful enough: If you were
                                    not very much confident in using everything, you might need to
                                    spend to[o] much time to make things work [229] and
                                secondly be able to get access those technologies at all: Access, both in terms of expense and facility of
                                    use, is a large contributing factor to who can and cannot take
                                    advantage of technology in their research [156].
                                Unaffiliated researchers may hit upon new gate
                                    keepers [27] blocking access to resources; early career
                                researchers may have difficulties getting noticed in the online
                                environment [19]. Technology may even appear as an exclusionary practice that leaves
                                    non-technological people behind, including those in developing
                                    countries [58]. Strong feelings of exclusion speak from
                                the following response from South-Africa: I have
                                    to also flag that there have been times where it has felt like
                                    the global North opened their doors through technology in the
                                    early stages of the pandemic (when it suited their interests)
                                    and now while they are moving to fewer restrictions they are
                                    simply closing those doors again. This feels like yet another
                                    instance where the global North has abused the global South when
                                    it suits them and then denied access when it would be
                                    advantageous for us (in the global South) to continue accessing
                                    these resources. [160]It may seem a simple task to
                                engage inclusively in global conversations through accessible online
                                conferences or webinars, and data and publications are being made
                                increasingly available through the rapidly growing FAIR principles
                                     and the Open Science movement  However, the role of publishers and
                                other content providers in establishing and policing financial
                                barriers still impacts widely on access.
                        
                        
                            4.c.vi Interaction
                            Earlier (Section 4.c.ii) we discussed how individual researchers
                                expected their own interactions to be affected by the pandemic. Here
                                we look into the changes they observe at the disciplinary level. We
                                already saw many responses in Q18 that concern conferences. The
                                discipline-level responses from the other questions suggest again
                                that this has been perhaps the most impactful change during the
                                pandemic. Some respondents see this change as the future of the
                                discipline, and not just for reasons of convenience, for example:
                                    We’ve learned that you can hold conferences
                                    and give colloquia online. I don’t think we’ll ever go back to
                                    in-person colloquium — the economics are squarely against it.
                                    And as global travel becomes less common (because it has to),
                                    online conferences are sure to become increasingly important.
                                    [176]Precisely the opposite sentiment speaks from this
                                comment: I strongly believe we should go back to
                                    the old normal […] Particularly, I am concerned that, if we
                                    all send the message that digital conferences are as good as (or
                                    better than) face-to-face ones, and doing archival research
                                    remotely is as good as (or better than) face to face, then we
                                    will be shooting ourselves in the foot in the long run, with
                                    institutions and funding bodies cutting even further funding for
                                    conferences and research trips. [198] The following
                                remark nicely captures the widely felt experience that, while online
                                conferencing has its limitations, there are important gains that
                                should not be lost integrated into the social infrastructure of the
                                discipline: Technology is not a substitute for
                                    meeting in real life; Zoom fatigue is not good. But institutions
                                    and organisations have to think through the hybrid option, and
                                    (in Philip Bohlman’s phrase) recognise the current
                                    musicological moment for what it is. [217] Several
                                respondents give examples of the kind of increased international interconnectivity [83] that has
                                emerged. One organised an online conference on
                                    Zoom in the early days of the pandemic, leading to a
                                    long-lasting informal network of specialists across the
                                    world [478]. An attendant of such a meeting describes
                                the rewarding experience of being in the 'room'
                                    with a number of very well respected thinkers in the field.
                                    Those whom I would probably not meet in real life [293].
                                Students may also benefit: I’ve also been able
                                    to start a ‘remote’ lecture series for my department. […] this
                                    has broadened our ability to help our students learn from
                                    scholars who are not at our own institution [362].
                            Technology also facilitates collaboration on a more global scale, for
                                example by enabling to hold meetings of members
                                    of research groups based in different countries more easily, or
                                    to create new international research groups with greater ease
                                    than was possible before [109] and generous sharing of digitized resources among colleagues [275]. There are however several concerns about impact of
                                mediated communication as compared to direct interaction. Informal
                                talk may end up not being so ephemeral when it’s archived and present a risk to researchers [sic] reputations,
                                    as they may not have chosen their words quite as carefully as
                                    they would in a written published work [179]. Trust may
                                become an issue: I think that that not meeting
                                    in person has led people to be much more suspicious of one
                                    another, convinced that some people have bad motives, and then
                                    to voice opposition in ways that are needlessly insulting. I
                                    think that we’re tending to splinter into groups that don’t
                                    trust one another, and that is inherently a bad thing.
                                    [143] And, maybe because of this, people may express
                                themselves more cautiously: Digital
                                    communication also results, in my experience, with a higher
                                    level of curation and filtering of information and
                                    openness [82].Striking the right balance between the
                                human and technology is thus very much an issue of concern, and when
                                interacting remotely it is maybe good to remember that colleagues, students, and librarians are live,
                                    physical, etc. [420]
                        
                        
                            4.c.vii Teaching and learning
                            Contrary to our expectations, many of the musicology researchers who
                                participated in the survey discussed their experiences of teaching
                                and learning practice in some depth. Even though we did not
                                specifically ask about teaching, as our focus was on the impact of
                                the pandemic on research, the topic arose time and time again across
                                the answer set, demonstrating the importance of the topic to the
                                participants. Indeed, numerous universities had required their
                                academic staff to cease research activities at the start of the
                                pandemic to free up time to move teaching online in response to the
                                global lockdowns: There has been no time to do
                                    research, between redeveloping teaching materials repeatedly,
                                    dealing with increased caring responsibilities, and handling
                                    extra work for colleagues who are out with health issues.
                                    [264]
                                Under the pandemic, I had no time for research
                                    at all, having to cope with the digital teaching situation under
                                    poor technical conditions and without no real help from my
                                    institution. [683] Some students however did not engage,
                                whether they did not switch on their cameras (Teaching black tiles in Zoom isn’t fun. You simply don’t see,
                                    whether the students struggle for insights or for the lid of
                                    their nutella glasses [120]) or occasions where a small
                                number of students regularly contributed: I
                                    hated teaching on Zoom. Students seemed to be tuned out and the
                                    same handful carried almost all of the conversation. I felt like
                                    I never got to know them and they never got to know each
                                    other [622], and classes on Zoom
                                    allow people to, well, Zoom out and do other things on the side
                                    while the camera is switched off [522]. The limitations
                                of the gaps between the physical and the digital were readily
                                apparent: Don’t get me started with their
                                    experience with primary resources… you can’t look at a digital
                                    copy of a 17th-century score on a computer screen and really get
                                    any feel for how it was put together or what it is
                                [622].
                            There were numerous examples of technical limitations specific to
                                teaching. Some of these of course related to problems everybody was
                                facing at the time, such as lack of expertise in teaching digitally:
                                    The time I wasted – and still do waste
                                    these days for teaching recordings – on editing my own videos is
                                    ridiculous [234]; …redesigning
                                    courses for online and then hybrid teaching [264] and
                                    because of connectivity issues
                                [406] or poor access to software and hardware: Because we not even had notebooks to do it and had to use our
                                    private equipment. It took half a year for the university to
                                    provide a reliable software and hardware equipment but we had to
                                    find solutions immediately on our own to not let the students
                                    down. That was very exhausting and frustrating
                                [579].
                            More specifically for music audio, there were additional technical
                                limitations which may in the classroom have had a simple
                                tried-and-tested solution, but in the online space were complex:
                                    I wish, while teaching online, that I could
                                    have been able to share both a recording and a score at the same
                                    time [543] and teaching music performance, not a complex
                                task in-person, suffered from connectivity issues (…trying to teach Western rhythm and its notation
                                    to Thai classical music students via Zoom as part of ongoing
                                    research collaboration with Thai institutions. Delay due to
                                    unstable internet made the task near impossible [68]),
                                as well as various Zoom-related challenges: I
                                    also teach Oboe, and the sound quality of platforms such as Zoom
                                    are terrible in reproducing instrumental performance. A disaster
                                [114]; Had to give up teaching
                                    performance since it’s no fun trying to teach sitar on
                                    Zoom! [435]. The limitations of software not designed
                                for music were very plain: …the technology for
                                    singing/making music in the classroom along with online
                                    resources that were not equipped for music meant that I spent
                                    almost all of my Covid time fighting technology (panopticon /
                                    Camtasia / Canvas / macOS) trying to make videos of my classes
                                    to keep them going [62].
                            As well as the technology, the mode of teaching was also problematic,
                                after moving entirely onto Zoom, many classes were later shifted
                                back to in-person or hybrid, with students in-person and on-line
                                simultaneously. The tensions surrounding the two modes of
                                participation were frustrating and distracting: It was like teaching online with an audience in
                                    attendance [85], and the need for simultaneously use
                                multiple types of software also confounded some: Teaching music has been extremely difficult due to
                                    issues like using the blackboard while trying to Zoom or making
                                    sure my online and in class students are both engaged
                                [88]. One participant summed this up – with
                                    participants both 'in the room' and 'in the Zoom'. It’s
                                    horrible! [455]. 
                            However, this was not always the case and numerous participants noted
                                the benefits of the teaching pivot. Students could often be more
                                engaged than previously: They were considerably
                                    involved in the course. They did oral presentations, engaged
                                    discussions, and opted for transforming their oral presentations
                                    into written papers at the end of the course. In my experience
                                    this is much more difficult with face-to-face lessons
                                [85], with higher level of participation (My
                                    audience doubled because it was more convenient for the students
                                    to attend courses staying at home (attending is not compulsory)
                                [86]) and significantly better punctuality (They want to continue working on-line, rather than
                                    having to travel to the faculty. Students tend to be much more
                                    punctual, and they prepare their presentations more
                                    carefully [114]).
                            On reflection, it seems that some positive changes in practice took
                                place, particularly of note is the reusable nature of teaching
                                videos: Given the success of the recorded
                                    presentations, they will become an option for students in future
                                    versions of the course, whether the course is online or on
                                    campus [131], which reduces future workload (I have made all those recordings available to
                                    students, so now if they miss class they can just watch the
                                    video, and there is much less work for me to do to help students
                                    catch up [226]) and allowed the adoption of new
                                pedagogies (Flipped teaching. it turns out that
                                    this actually works, and now I’ve made all the videos
                                    already [601]) and involve guests more readily (Being able to present guest lectures more readily
                                    via Zoom opened up a lot of great opportunities for me, as both
                                    a presenter and host [562]).
                            Generally, it was accepted that online work was here to stay (Online teaching/meetings are now going to be
                                    embedded into academic culture [70]), with some positive
                                experiences even celebrating how teaching online was better than
                                in-person: Piano teaching by Zoom – that was
                                    great! When my new student, a very weak girl, whom I had never
                                    seen alive, entered the conservatory, I realized that I can do
                                    something and I’m worth something [261]; with the
                                complexity of numerous software being overcome (Being able to teach an advanced class using Discord and Twitch,
                                    Skype, XSplit, YouTube, game consoles, etc, in a fashion better
                                    than I could do in person [276]) and online tutorials
                                with one student being more feasible than large classes (Being able to do one-on-one tutoring/advising with
                                    a student from my home regarding his/her thesis [441]). 
                            In terms of teaching and learning, therefore, we should end on a
                                positive note: Among the blessings of the
                                    pandemic were learning that we could do a lot of testing
                                    remotely, by have the students submit videos, saving us valuable
                                    class-time. Having to teach caused me to make a lot of changes
                                    in course design, all of them for the good. It gave me the
                                    license to try things I had thought about doing for years, and
                                    most of them worked. The year I taught online was a year of
                                    ceaseless innovation. I used it as an opportunity to do things
                                    differently and better. Yes, there will challenges, but I
                                    focused on the medium’s potential and not it’s limitations. In
                                    order to do ear training online, we required the students to
                                    acquire digital pianos, and we made those pianos smoke, with a
                                    corresponding (and unprecedented) spike in student learning and
                                    achievement. [543]
                                Zoom and other teams surfaces allowed me to
                                    teach throughout covid and it allowed me to participate in
                                    conferences. It is impossible not be deeply thankful for those
                                    who invented these programs. Zoom is not the same as teaching or
                                    lecturing in person, especially, in the case of music. But
                                    teaching from one’s home had something emotional and beautiful
                                    about it. Technology saved us from being completely isolated.
                                    Similarly, listening to music on the computer and mobile phone
                                    was a life saver. This is another experience and an interesting
                                    experience. We lose a lot but do gain something. But: like
                                    technology saved us during covid we now have to save ourselves
                                    from being forever dependent on technology. [615]
                        
                    
                

                    5. Discussion
                    In this section we discuss our main findings and place them in the context of
                        other research into the impact of the pandemic on academia. Our central
                        research question, what was the impact of the pandemic on musicologists’
                            use of technology, is answered by a quantitative and qualitative
                        analysis of the 584 usable responses to our 2022 online survey. The
                        demographics and disciplinary interests of the respondents are rather
                        similar to those of our previous survey (2014–2015), and we did not widen
                        our request for demographic information because we wanted to follow the
                        design of the previous survey to enable comparisons between the two
                        datasets, focusing on location, level of education, affiliation and specific
                        musicological interests. Most respondents come from the global north, the
                        anglophone world in particular, and since the survey was online, it is
                        biased towards participants with access to technology and digital literacy.
                        The outcomes therefore cannot be generalised without question.
                    As shown earlier (see Section 4.c.i), we observed a limited preference change
                        towards digital resources, primarily due to the general increase in
                        availability of digitised materials, but also because of lack of access
                        caused by the pandemic and the general increase in working from home. This
                        perfect storm enacted an acceleration of the adoption of digitised
                        resources within musicology, perhaps aligning the discipline more closely
                        within digital humanities than previously noted by Döhl . Many respondents reported that they expected to
                        keep some of the change that they made during the pandemic. The spread in
                        the responses is quite large; moreover, lack of change may indicate both a
                        preference for traditional work practices and a long-term adoption of
                        digital approaches.
                    Nearly everyone has been affected in some way by the pandemic, and in
                        academia the effects have been felt by academic staff and students alike. It
                        is therefore important to delve deeper into the experiences and insights in
                        the textual responses. In those, we observed a number of important areas of
                        change. Here we focus on three: individual changes, teaching and learning,
                        and changes in the discipline. These impacts include the topics identified
                        in this survey and have been identified across disciplines and borders.
                    With respect to individual changes, the tension between positive and negative experiences of using and adapting to new formats  can be seen vividly in the findings – again showing the need for reliable technology and adequate training and support. Many of us have experienced how the hybrid model has continued after the pandemic subsided . The impact of the shift to online in collaborative music-making meant a change in approaches was needed to accommodate the difference affordances of the technology (playing in real time vs learning from recordings  or synchronous and asynchronous learning . The frustrations of poor connections and time lags in music performance and Skype had already been identified before the pandemic , although Skype was barely mentioned in the survey responses, Zoom and Teams being the most prevalent online conferencing software, demonstrating the fluid and fast-moving nature of the technological context. Access to collections was frequently raised, supporting Onyeji and Onyeji’s (2022) discussion of folk music materials in the Library of Folk Music of Nigeria project . Individual changes in musicology thus seem to follow the general pattern, with the added complication of music as a collaboratively-created, highly time-sensitive medium.
                    Another theme centred on teaching and learning, which was rather unexpected
                        as our survey was geared towards research. As in academic global health
                        programmes  the pandemic had impact on
                        education, research and administration. The digital
                            turn in music education has been documented elsewhere and the
                        distinction between emergency remote teaching
                        and online learning  is highlighted by the
                        stress the pivot caused many of the participants. The shift to online
                        classes comes out very clearly in the survey results, along with limitations
                        on travel and communication impacting on research outputs and practices.
                        Analysis of this impact across academia  has
                        shown how widespread these shared impacts have been. The lived experience of
                        the participants in our survey highlights the personal impact of these
                        enforced changes on musicology researchers. An important finding here, in
                        terms of equity, was that while global north participants could rely to a
                        degree on the technologies which were being provided to facilitate the
                        shift, those in global south struggled 
                         and anticipated a reduction in access once
                        the pandemic had subsided.
                    Interestingly, quite a few responses reveal, implicitly or explicitly, a
                        sense that the discipline itself is changing. We focused on three dimensions
                        of change: learning new skills, equity and inclusion, and interaction. 
                    Since early 2020, a huge amount of research has been done on a wide range of
                        aspects of Covid-19. By comparison, the number of publications that study
                        the effect of the pandemic on disciplines and researchers themselves is
                        rather low. Here we discuss a selection. The one we found that comes closest
                        to our work is Sezen‑Barrie et al. (2023), surveying 408 faculty, staff and
                        students from university in the northeast of the U.S, representing a wide
                        range of disciplines. Their study focusses on productivity and health and
                        well-being rather than on technology, but technology plays an important role
                        in the responses. Adaptations to the pandemic include use of virtual
                        communication tools such as Zoom, online teaching and conferences, increased
                        [technical] knowledge/skills, using digital collections and the pursuit of
                        new research opportunities. As one of the lessons from the pandemic, the
                        authors conclude that digital technologies can help
                            create effective and equitable virtual teaching and research
                            opportunities
                        . While our research supports that
                        view, our findings relating to access suggest that a longer-term approach is
                        necessary if we are to make any progress towards putting global north and
                        south on an equal footing.
                    Equity is a recurring concern in the literature. Presenting the outcomes of a series of workshops with Indonesian researchers in social and humanities research,  conclude that, while much empirical research can be done in principle using online meeting platforms and communication apps, there are various issues in the adoption of digital research methods. Some relate to lack of direct interactions with informants; others relate to the digital divide restricting access to infrastructure and resources in developing countries. , in an ethnographic study of academic-community partnerships in food systems research, shows how the pandemic impacted on power relations between academics and community partners, often at the expense of the latter. Further to this,  observes that digitisation and open-access publishing have had a positive impact on equity in Digital Humanities, both for Eastern Europe and developing countries. He also connects digitisation to carbon neutrality — a minor theme in WDMDAD — and recommends (art history) journals to go fully online. He remains however a supporter of in-person conferences.  observes — from a publisher’s perspective — that infrastructure was a limiting factor in the use of eBooks worldwide. Yet online humanities conferences have caused a flattening of the previous inequalities of participation. He also sees a change in work practices exemplified by the use of collaborative writing environments, which may lead to more team-based humanities research.
                    We thus find rather similar themes and observations in the literature about other disciplines. Individual responses and stories indicate that there is a large variety in the ways that researchers adapted to the pandemic and how they assessed the role of technology. The pandemic made the researchers’ physical world smaller but dramatically enlarged their digital world. This may explain why questions of in- and exclusions are so much in evidence in these publications. Hence, equity should be an important theme in shaping the development towards global musicology and the role of technology therein.
                

                    6. Conclusion and recommendations
                    The storyline that emerges from our analysis of the responses is that the
                        pandemic forced the community to attain a technical skill set that enabled
                        online communication in many forms and provided access to a wealth of
                        resources. Most notably this is true of students, who were exposed to
                        several years of mainly online teaching. These experiences may have widened
                        horizons in a variety of ways, with respect to collaboration and networking,
                        resources, tools and research topics, and finally methodological
                        reflections. Nearly all fundamental aspects of the discipline have been
                        affected in some way, and it seems safe to say that, under the influence of
                        the pandemic, the digital has become an integral part of the musicological
                        discipline.
                    While we derive our storyline from a bottom-up analysis of the WDMDAD survey,
                        theoretical work elsewhere in the humanities propose complementary insights.
                        That the humanities are undergoing a paradigm shift – accelerated by the
                        pandemic – is claimed by Lorella Viola (2023). She criticises the evolutionary approach to the digital of gradual adjustments by which the existing model of knowledge creation is left essentially
                            intact
                        . Instead, she argues that the digital
                        affects the very practices of knowledge production , so that the digital
                            is no longer contextual to knowledge creation but that knowledge is
                            created in the digital
                        . We haven’t encountered this level of
                        methodological reflection in our data, but some of the practices our
                        respondents describe suggest that this shift also affects musicological
                        knowledge production.
                    Further analysis of the responses may refine or question our storyline.
                        Speciality is an important viewpoint for further studying the comments
                        relating to access and method. In addition, regional and national difference
                        merit investigation. The storyline is also a prediction of future
                        developments, potentially to be tested by means of another survey in a
                        number of years. One particular point of concern is to what extent
                        technology divides the community; a next survey should therefore have a much
                        better coverage of audiences that have been underrepresented so far. A
                        comparison of the 2022 and 2014–2015 responses would provide further insight
                        in the pace of disciplinary change in the recent past.
                    We also believe that our work has practical implications, first for
                        musicology, but by extension for other humanities as well. Many music (and
                        humanities) researchers, especially the younger generation, now possess a
                        basic common toolset and share similar experiences with these. In Viola’s
                            words: As a bare minimum, for example, regardless
                            of the discipline, a post-COVID researcher is someone able to embrace a
                            broad set of digital tools effectively
                        . Post-COVID researchers in musicology
                        and elsewhere will likely shape their work practices and aims around these
                        tools and experiences, with potential consequences at all levels of the
                        discipline. At the same time there is a considerable group with limited
                        access to technology or is, for whatever reason, unwilling to use it. And
                        there is a very large disciplinary legacy that remains inaccessible
                        digitally. There is thus a looming threat of multiple digital divides. We
                        have seen above (see Section 4.c.v) that technology has the potential to
                        include as well as to exclude. This may be seen as an illustration of
                        Kranzberg’s first law of technology: technology is neither good nor bad; nor
                        is it neutral , the implication of which is
                        that shaping technology and its application is a profoundly human task. We
                        argue here that this shaping ought to take place not only at the individual
                        and local level, running the risk of fragmentation, but especially at the
                        level of research communities and international organisations. Many of these
                        support values such as equity, inclusion and openness. By using technology
                        to support these values (and developing policies about their proper use)
                        they can demonstrate that technologies that have regularly been described as
                            disruptive can be employed constructively, enhancing human
                        networks, connecting material and digital resources, and combining new and
                        traditional approaches to the full range of research topics. 

                        Acknowledgments
                        The authors would like to express their gratitude to the participants who freely gave their valuable contributions, the musicological societies who helped by promoting the survey, and the anonymous reviewers whose comments allowed us to substantially improve our text.
                   
                    

                    Appendix 1. Survey launch page and informed consent
                    Musicologists and other music researchers generally have been quick to adopt
                        technologies that might help them with their work. Early examples include
                        microfilm, phonograph and tape recorder. Nowadays researchers frequently
                        make use of the possibilities that mobile phones, social media, digital
                        libraries, search engines and computer software offer. But these
                        technologies do not always have a good fit with the daily work
                        practices.
                    We are looking at the research practices of musicologists and other music
                        researchers to gather information which can be used in the development of
                        technologies relevant to these practices. This survey will provide some
                        insights into how you have responded to the Covid-19 pandemic.
                     Whether you do not use much technology, or if you use it a lot, we are
                        interested in finding out your views.
                    This survey has 14 questions. Some questions are multiple choice. In other
                        questions we would like you to write a little about what you do, what you
                        think, and about your experiences with technology. Depending on how much
                        detail you wish to provide, we expect it will take you between 10 and 25
                        minutes to complete these questions. If you feel uncomfortable writing in
                        English, please use another language.
                    Your participation is voluntary, and you can withdraw from the survey at any
                        time before you finish. If you take the survey we will not ask you for any
                        identifying information. Your comments are anonymous, but please do not
                        provide any information that could make you identifiable, or that you do not
                        want to be quoted in publications. At the end of the survey we ask you if
                        you wish to take part in future research – your response is stored
                        separately from your survey comments and they cannot be linked in any way.
                        Please do not take this survey if you are not doing music research.
                     We are: Dr Frans Wiering, Utrecht University (https://www.uu.nl/medewerkers/FWiering) and Dr Charles Inskip,
                        University College London (https://www.ucl.ac.uk/information-studies/charlie-inskip-0). If
                        you have any queries or comments about the survey or our research in general
                        please contact us using the details on our home pages.
                    Participation in this survey indicates that you:
                    
                        are aged 18 or above 
                        have read the notes written above and understand what the study
                            involves.
                        understand that if you decide at any time that you no longer wish to
                            take part in this project, you can withdraw immediately. After you click
                            ‘Finish’ your anonymised answers are stored in a database and cannot be
                            identified or withdrawn.
                        agree that the research project named above has been explained to you
                            to your satisfaction and you agree to take part in this study.
                    
                    This research has been approved by the UCL Department of Information Studies
                        Research Ethics Committee.
                    Data Protection Privacy Notice: Reference No Z6364106/2022/02/129 social
                        research
                    The controller for this project will be University College London (UCL). The
                        UCL Data Protection Officer provides oversight of UCL activities involving
                        the processing of personal data, and can be contacted at
                        data-protection@ucl.ac.uk. This local privacy notice sets out the
                        information that applies to this particular study. Further information on
                        how UCL uses participant information can be found in our ‘general’ privacy
                        notice: For participants in research studies, click here
                        (https://www.ucl.ac.uk/legal-services/privacy/ucl-general-research-participant-privacy-notice).
                        The information that is required to be provided to participants under data
                        protection legislation (GDPR and DPA 2018) is provided across both the
                            local and general privacy notices. The lawful basis that
                        will be used to process your personal data is: Public task for
                        personal data. Your personal data will be processed so long as it is
                        required for the research project. If we are able to anonymise or
                        pseudonymise the personal data you provide we will undertake this, and will
                        endeavour to minimise the processing of personal data wherever possible. If
                        you are concerned about how your personal data is being processed, or if you
                        would like to contact us about your rights, please contact UCL in the first
                        instance at data-protection@ucl.ac.uk.
                

                    Appendix 2. Coding for Q13-14
                    
                        
                            Selective
                            Axial
                            Open
                            Occurrence of Code
                        
                        
                            Activities
                            
                            
                            603
                        
                        
                            
                            Accessing
                            
                            167
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            More digital available
                            29
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Scan and send
                            20
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Physical vs digital
                            17
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            ILL
                            3
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Websites
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            Attending
                            
                            161
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Conference
                            55
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Meetings
                            14
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Semindar
                            6
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Performance
                            3
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Hybrid
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Office hours
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Protests
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                            Teaching
                            
                            130
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Teaching online
                            71
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Heavy teaching load
                            7
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Asynchronous
                            6
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Hybrid
                            5
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Blended
                            4
                        
                        
                            
                            Learning
                            
                            58
                        
                        
                            
                            Communicating
                            
                            24
                        
                        
                            
                            Producing
                            
                            24
                        
                        
                            
                            Working from home
                            
                            14
                        
                        
                            
                            Moving research online
                            
                            10
                        
                        
                            
                            Collaborating
                            
                            9
                        
                        
                            
                            Doing interviews
                            
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            Multi-tasking
                            
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            Music listening
                            
                            2
                        
                        
                            Barriers
                            
                            
                            23
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Lost data
                            8
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Finance
                            6
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Broken link
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Unhelpful library staff
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Virus
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Delays
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            GDPR
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Security
                            1
                        
                        
                            Drivers
                            
                            
                            22
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Reliability
                            9
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Helpful librarians
                            6
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Ease of use
                            4
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Quality
                            3
                        
                        
                            Impacts
                            
                            
                            75
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Community
                            21
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Engagement
                            8
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Difficulty
                            7
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Effort
                            5
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Wellbeing
                            5
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Convenience
                            4
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Stopped research
                            4
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Travel
                            4
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Fatigue
                            4
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Choice
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Copyright
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Forced
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Philosophical
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Speed
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Time
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Dependence
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Financial
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Fun
                            0
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Health risk
                            0
                        
                        
                            Technologies
                            
                            
                            260
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Hardware
                            39
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Internet connection
                            34
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Limitations of software for teaching music
                            10
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Email
                            3
                        
                        
                            
                            Software
                            
                            172
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Zoom
                            67
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Incompatibility
                            16
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Sibelius
                            12
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Teams
                            7
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Updates
                            7
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Software expire
                            6
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            OCR
                            4
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Finale
                            3
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Lilypond
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Skype
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Technological determinism
                            2
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Endnote
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Excel
                            1
                        
                        
                            
                            
                            Spotify
                            1
                        
                        
                            None
                            
                            
                            66
                        
                    
                
