Title:  Missed Connections: The Collective Novel and the Metropolis
Volume:  005
Issue:  2
Date:  17 May 2011
Abstract:  
            This essay argues that the urban collective novel serves as an important modernist
          precursor to network narratives. The collective novel is a literary form, particularly
          popular during the 1930s, that explores a wide context through a decentered narrative.
          Previous discussions of these novels have focused on them as exemplars of modernist form
          in proletarian literature. However, this essay shows another origin for the form in
          concerns about the metropolis and mass culture that complicates our understanding. Drawing
          on examples from novels by John Dos Passos, Daniel Fuchs, Albert Halper, Josephine Herbst,
          William S. Rollins, Jr., and Edwin Seaver it shows how these texts offered not only
          radically ambivalent assessments of networked existence but often a pessimistic view of
          the possibilities of political community, extending at times to specific critiques of
          communist politics. In its conclusion, the essay draws links between these novels and the
          cinematic network narratives that became popular in the first decade of the 21st century.
        
         
Full Body Text: 
The introduction to New York Panorama, the first volume of
           the Federal Writers’ Project (FWP) guide to New York City, invokes the rumor of a great city, which:

            goes out beyond its borders, to all the latitudes of the known earth.
          The city becomes an emblem in remote minds; apart from the tangible export of goods and
          men, it exerts its cultural instrumentality in a thousand phases: as an image of
          glittering light, as the forcing ground which creates a new prose style or a new
          agro-biological theory, or as the germinal point for a fresh technique in metal sculpture,
          biometrics or the fixation of nitrogen.
            
         
As the metropolis grew in influence through the concentration, production, and then
        dissemination of products and ideas, FWP editors argued, it assumed the character of a
        distinct thing and a cause, and, in particular, a shaper of culture. As both object and
        agent, the metropolis catalyzed the development of several modes of writing including
        realism, yellow journalism, and naturalism. The FWP writers, like many
        other critics of the 1930s, likely also had in mind a more recent narrative innovation: the
        collective novel, a prose form in which the interconnection among character plots is
        disrupted to the point that social aggregates and their environment become primary. In
        particular, they would have been aware of the broad influence of John Dos Passos, the form’s
        most lauded American practitioner, whose writing helped shape the styles of Daniel Fuchs,
        Albert Halper, Josephine Herbst, William S. Rollins, Jr., and Edwin Seaver, among
          others.Rollins in fact wrote the introduction to the Manhattan section of The WPA Guide to New York City in a style resembling that
          of Dos Passos. See  for an account of other
          writers using the collective novel form. Growing out of the influence of both
        modernism and cinema, this early version of network narrative became so influential in
        leftist cultural movements during the 1930s that critics today often neglect its
        metropolitan origins. Unfortunately, the focus on the proletarian collective novel elides
        crucial concerns about mass culture, the breakdown of community, and even skepticism of
        communism and proletarian culture that emerge clearly in the metropolitan collective
        novel.
The political and aesthetic efficacy of collective novels lay in their ability to generate
        cognitive maps, making both connection and, just as important, disconnection
        visible. Illuminating this capacity, my argument joins two ongoing discussions. The first
        discussion concerns the status of the collective novel vis-à-vis proletarian
        literature and modernism. The second discussion focuses on the question of what issues
        network narratives make visible. Critics studying proletarian literature today, like their
        1930s predecessors, have placed the collective novel at the heart of their case for the
        inventiveness of proletarian literary culture, linking it by turns to a rejection of
        modernist aestheticization and an embrace of aesthetic innovation. The attempt to link the
        collective novel with proletarian culture is compromised on one hand by the emergence of the
        collective novel from attempts to grapple with metropolitan incoherence, and on the other,
        by the critiques of communism voiced in key metropolitan collective novels. This analysis
        focuses on several novels — Dos Passos’s Manhattan Transfer,
        Fuchs’s Summer in Williamsburg, Halper’s Union Square, Herbst’s Rope of Gold, Rollins’s
          The Shadow Before, Seaver’s The
          Company — to illustrate how the urban collective novel generates an account of
        disconnection that charts the deleterious effects of metropolitan mass culture on social and
        cultural politics.
The accounts of frustrated political community in these novels problematize discussions of
        connectivity theory and network narrative by moving away from functionalism and description
        to emphasize manufactured disconnection. Connectivity theory traces the increasing global
        connections of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, seeking emergent
        identities, cultural forms, and possibilities of agency. Anticipated in the 1970s by
        Immanuel Wallerstein’s economic World Systems Theory, but seeking to broaden this work
        beyond the economic and political spheres, theorists in several disciplines — including
        Bruno Latour, Manuel Castells, and Michael Hardt & Antonio Negri — have conceptualized
        networks of information, technology, people, culture, and governance. These theories offer
        accounts of personal, political, and institutional relationships across multiple scales:
        local, regional, national, and transnational. Actor-Network Theory, associated with Bruno
        Latour, describes the construction and maintenance of networks of people and technology,
        allowing theorists to examine both the practices and the rationales holding them together.
        Connectivity theory also explores how agents of both dominance and resistance make use of
        new technologies and institutions that transcend national boundaries. For instance while
        Hardt and Negri trace the emergence of a new global mode of dominion they call Empire, they
        also examine resistance in the form of transnational activist and cultural movements.
        Crucial to most of these theories is their functionalist bent, their tendency to focus on
        how connections are created or maintained. In contrast, the dysfunctional and distorting capabilities of networks were crucial concerns of modernist writers.
Corresponding with the rise of connectivity theory, critics have gained an increasing
        interest in cultural forms that replicate its complex focus on networks. In the visual arts,
        several artists have pioneered new forms for imagining transnational relationships. Mark
        Lombardi’s Narrative Structures, for example, diagram relationships
        among power brokers in a globalized network, allowing the audience to visualize connections
        and influence normally hidden from view. Focusing on construction and interpretation more
        than description, Thomas Hirschhorn’s installations create congeries of images, texts, and
        material, provoking questions about both the items’ relationships and how we develop
        knowledge in an information-saturated, global context. Recent cinematic forms termed
          network narratives by David Bordwell explore globalized relationships
        across the sociogeographical incoherencies of class, race, and nation, often by tracking the
        production, distribution, and consumption of specific commodities. One need only think of
        recent films like Steven Soderbergh’s Traffic
             and Alejandro
        González Iñárritu’s Babel
             to realize how such an expansive form
        can challenge aesthetic conventions.See 
               Poetics of Cinema and The Way
            Hollywood Tells It for discussions of cinematic network narrative. Along with
          Soderbergh and Iñárritu, Bordwell cites Robert Altman, Rodrigo Garcia, Claude Lelouch, and
          John Sayles as directors who have explored this style.
         
As a precursor to these network narratives, the collective novel offered writers an opportunity to trace out forms of causality that confounded the plotting which characterized most nineteenth century prose. Indeed, the collective
        novel seemingly provided writers with the narrative tools to tackle the tension between the
          tangible export of goods and men and the more ephemeral
          cultural instrumentality in the opening FWP statement, namely the
        difficulty of assessing causality and efficacy in an overdetermined, image-saturated
        environment. The collective novel, then, represents an important step towards forms of
        narrative that seem increasingly relevant today, and in consequence the problems its
        practitioners faced, and often metanarratively explored, remain important.
Despite their diagnostic focus neither interwar collective novels nor modern network
        narratives fulfill Marxist literary critic Fredric Jameson’s call for, a 
               positive hermeneutic, or a decipherment of the Utopian impulses of these
            same still ideological cultural texts
               
            . Rather than indicating hopeful directions, most of the artworks we might group
        under network narrative approach globalized relationships as problematic and they portray
        them at a critical remove. This distance is anticipated in the urban collective novel of the
        interwar period. In these novels, the charting of social and narrative disruption, often via
        mass culture, and a self-aware approach to narrative construction undermined more hopeful
        renderings of networks. Indeed, writers using the collective form frequently went so far as
        to question the possibility of political community, and even narrative coherence, in an
        environment shaped and maintained by mass culture.

            The Collective Novel: Recovery and Repression
            The collective novel has long been an important genre for proponents of the United
          States’ radical literary heritage because of its potential for creating expansive
          politicized narrative. Both early and more recent discussions of the genre’s boundaries,
          often coalescing around Dos Passos, illuminate the stakes of the link between the
          collective novel and proletarian literature. In Revolution and the
            Novel
               New Masses editor Granville Hicks offered Soviet authors
          Valentin Kataev and Aleksandr Fadeyev as exemplars of this new literary tendency.For
            another 1930s discussion of the collective novel as an international development see
            . See also essays by Otto Biha and George Lukács in . While the collective
            novel was generally viewed as a leftist genre  examines
            its reception in Italy, where editors of the journal Oggi worried that it would reflect
            fascist collectivism. More recent discussions of the collective novel occur in , .
          The crucial issue dividing the emerging collective novel from the older complex
            novel, was whether the group 
                  emerge[d] as a
              character
                  
                or whether individual
          characters continued to dominate the plot. In other
          words, the represented group had to achieve some sort of unified identity, in essence a
          form of narrative class consciousness. While Dos Passos served as a promising model for an
          American collective novel — in 1935, Hicks enthroned him as the heir apparent of a
            great tradition of American letters that chronicled social forces —
          the critic felt that his novels fell short of realizing a unified group, a shortcoming he
          believed was based on muddled ideology. Hicks sought to distinguish the politically —
          charged collective novel from the apparent disengagement of high modernism, maintaining a
          critical emphasis on the link between content and form. To read his writing on Dos Passos
          is to sense growing frustration, recognition of undeniable literary talent that flirts
          with, but refuses to yield to, a communist worldview. For Hicks, Dos Passos’s hesitation,
          his camp follower mentality, was a tragedy; the writer’s lukewarm and
          negative portrayals of communists derailed his narrative accomplishments .
            In its marriage of modernist narrative structure and realist social focus, the collective
          novel offered a potential resolution to a conflict between two of the most influential interwar
          Marxist aestheticians: Georg Lukács and Bertholt Brecht. In History
            and Class Consciousness, written in 1923, Lukács detailed an epistemological
          role for the novel as a means of countering reification:
            
               By relating consciousness to the whole of society it becomes possible
            to infer the thoughts and feelings which men would have in a particular situation if
            they were able to assess both it and the interests arising from it in their
            impact on immediate action and on the whole structure of society. That is to say it
            would be possible to infer the thoughts and feelings appropriate to their objective
            situation.
               
            
            A novel that could trace the connections among structural relationships, perception of
          those relationships, and resulting behaviors would offer a powerful corrective to
          reification. Appropriating the term realism for such a literature, Lukács argued that to
          achieve the necessary effect, the literary work needed to replicate totality in its own
          unified aesthetic system, to immerse the reader in a credible world that was recognizably
          their own. This led Lukács to attack both naturalist and modernist texts, which he viewed
          as flawed in execution by fragmentary narratives that in emphasizing and replicating
          flawed perception only skimmed the surface of totality. In a response written in 1938 and
          published posthumously, Brecht decried the formal constraints of Lukács’s edicts while
          offering an alternate aesthetic theory designed to counter the effects of mass media
            rhetoric.See  for the
              debate between Lukács and Brecht. Though this much-invoked
            argument did not surface during the collective novel’s heyday this anachronism poses
            little problem. Lukács’s views shaped Soviet aesthetics and by extension the views of
            many American communist critics, while Brecht drew from many of the same influences as
            Dos Passos and other American literary experimentalists, particularly from the montage
            cinema of Sergei Eisenstein. Brecht critiqued the dominance of mimesis in
          literary construction and critical evaluation as a sop that encouraged readers to lose
          themselves in the narrative drama while subverting their critical capacity. The
          pedagogical function, and thus political utility, of literature, could be heightened
          through non-Aristotelian effects, bucking mimesis, which would both heighten the reader’s
          awareness of the construction of narrative.
            If the collective novel could unite these epistemological and pedagogical functions,
          providing by turns a complex account of social totality and a defamiliarizing jolt to the
          reader, it would marry modernism’s metaperceptual and textual foci with realism’s
          penetrating social lens. Hicks’s vision of proletarian literature, captured in this
          wishful passage, evoked this possibility:
            
               Proletarian literature, however, does not end with John Dos
            Passos...if we can imagine an author with Michael Gold’s power of evoking scenes, with
            William Rollins’[sic] structural skill, with Jack Conroy’s wide acquaintance with the
            proletariat, with Louis Colman’s firsthand knowledge of the labor movement, with all the
            passion of these and a dozen other revolutionary novelists, with something of Dreiser’s
            massive patience, we can see what shape a proletarian masterpiece might take. It would
            do justice to all the many-sided richness of its characters, exploring with Proustian
            persistence the deepest recesses of individuality as essentially a social phenomenon.
            And it would carry its readers toward life, not, as The Remembrance
              of Things Past does, toward death.
               
            
            The literature Hicks hopes for would render gripping images within a complex narrative,
          producing a social and psychological understanding of the working class’s role
          revolutionary politics. For Hicks, toward life, meant cognizance of
          the economic underpinnings of social totality, which would impel recognition of
          capitalism’s structural injustices and the reader’s connections with other proletarianized
          subjects. The invocation of Rollins for the formal ideal was crucial because of the
          similarities between Rollins’s and Dos Passos’s style: compounded adjectives, multiple
          plotlines, imagism, and incorporation of documentary material. While Dos Passos served as
          the example of repeated failure he remained the clear benchmark for formally innovative
          and expansive narrative.
            Now that modernism connotes lasting literary value rather than decadent experimentation,
          the collective novel ironically serves to buffer proletarian literature against critics
          who have pilloried the latter’s banality and didacticism. When Barbara Foley revived the
          collective novel category in her seminal study of the proletarian novel, Radical Representations, she placed it at the juncture of
          proletarian literature and modernist aesthetic innovation. Foley begins her discussion of
          the collective novel with a taxonomy indebted to Hicks.
                  . Foley redraws the lines between the complex and collective novel to
            include a range of works that Hicks placed in the complex novel category, most notably
            Dos Passos’s USA trilogy. Author and critic James T.
            Farrell contested this division in his A Note on Criticism,
            claiming that it mainly served primarily to validate Hicks’s political ideology . See
            also  for a summary of contrastive positioning
            of Dos Passos vis-à-vis the collective novel among Hicks, Malcolm Cowley, Alfred Kazin,
            and Lionel Trilling. This essay sidesteps much of the debate over the division between
            the collective and complex novel, granting Foley’s more expansive taxonomy while
            examining its problematic boundaries. She asserts that the form’s defining
          features are the focus on the group rather than individuals, the use of 
                  direct documentary links with the world of the reader,
                  
                and the heightened deployment of 
                  experimental devices that break up the narrative and rupture the
              illusion of seamless transparency
                  
               . This definition allows her to expand the category beyond Hicks’s
          politically-charged division, a move that establishes the form not as a longing, but as
          the manifestation and fulfillment of proletarian literature’s promise. The move to expand
          and formalize the collective novel genre, quickly leads to its repoliticization. Citing
          the collective novel’s experimental form, the praise it garnered from critics of various
          political inclinations, and its popularity among writers, Foley contests the monolithic
          conception of the proletarian literary movement typical among postwar anti-communists (of
          both the left and the right). While many radical novels had predictable, sentimental
          plots, as postwar critics charged, Foley hails a more flexible and experimental
          understanding of proletarian literature. In her view, other typical proletarian novel
          forms — the proletarian autobiography, proletarian bildungsroman and proletarian social novel — had bourgeois origins, but the
          collective novel: is primarily the product of 1930s radicalism. The
            term proletarian collective novel would therefore be tautological
            
               . Insofar as the collective novel form was a
          distinctive proletarian literary contribution promoted by communist critics, often
          practiced by proletarian writers, and developed during a period of heightened awareness of
          class struggle, it bolsters a reconsideration of proletarian literature’s legacy.
            However, this recovery has also created its own peculiar form of repression. While Hicks
          overemphasized authorial politics in his imagination of the collective novel, Dos Passos
          remains as troubling for Foley as he had been for Hicks. Foley rightly recognizes that the
          overwhelming influence of Dos Passos, a rather ornery fellow traveler in both life and
          letters, generates tension between the collective form and communist political doctrine.
          But her move to bring Dos Passos into the fold generically, if not doctrinally, sidesteps
          Hicks’s reservations. One symptom is her heavy focus on the national trilogy U.S.A., the most formally ambitious of Dos Passos’s interwar
          works. In contrast, in Hicks’s analysis Manhattan Transfer
          forms a crucial prior link in the evolution of the collective form, which was tied to the
          growth of the metropolis. Like the FWP, Hicks stressed the city’s effect on narrative,
          positing William Dean Howells’s A Hazard of New Fortunes and
          Frank Norris’s The Octopus — the former utilizing the
          metropolis as an organizing rubric, and the latter as a governing node in a global market
          — as antecedents of Dos Passos’s novels. Hicks was not alone in recognizing the earlier
          novel’s innovations. A glowing 1925 review by Sinclair Lewis, comparing Dos Passos
          favorably to modernist icons Proust and Joyce, presciently suggested that 
                  
                     Manhattan Transfer might be the founding of
              a new school of writing
                  
               . Dos Passos
          himself believed the form was distinctive enough to be the first of his novels to merit
          the name chronicle, the designation he applied to the U.S.A. trilogy, marking these novels’ shared focus on historical
          and spatial context.The designation chronicle has a
            long legacy in the novel and usually signals fealty to historical and spatial fact,
            whether real or invented. While Dos Passos signaled a new direction for himself using
            the name, he also affiliated his works with this tradition. By asserting the
          proletarian nature of the collective novel, Foley misses a secondary link between content
          and form in many collective novels: the struggle to narrate the incoherent modern
          metropolis and, in turn, use it as a microcosmic exploration of modernity. Written by a
          member of the cultural elite, focusing primarily on bourgeois characters, and yielding no
          coherent class-based social agenda, Manhattan Transfer was by
          no means a proletarian novel, but it was a collective novel. Its inclusion in this
          category troubles the equation between proletarian literature and the collective novel
          while opening communist cultural politics to a mass-cultural critique.
         

            
               Manhattan Transfer, Mass Culture, and
          Disconnection
            By portraying both the dissolution of social connectivity in the city and the conflation
          of mass-market images with political desire, Dos Passos identified crucial problems for
          writers and activists associated with the radical left. Manhattan
            Transfer mapped the interpenetration of media in urban lives, highlighting the
          way the media shaped conceptions of the self and community. In the novel, the confusing
          urban milieu and technologies of desire perpetuate an unjust social order to the detriment
          of the individuals within it. Critics discussing the novel’s critique of mass culture
          often concentrate on Jimmy Herf and Elaine Thatcher, the novel’s most developed
          characters, but Dos Passos’s links among the urban environment, mass culture, and politics
          emerge most clearly in the clutter of subplots and resonant images that gave the novel its
          collective force and which constitute the object of this analysis. Through them Dos Passos
          identified the epistemological problem engendered by the metropolis that gave rise to both
          the possibility and need for collective narrative.
            Jameson argues this epistemological problem emerges during the late nineteenth century
          when awareness of global markets triggers an important split between the experience of a
          phenomenon and its truth: 
                  At this point the phenomenological
              experience of the individual subject — traditionally, the supreme raw materials of the
              work of art — becomes limited to a tiny corner of the social world, a fixed-camera
              view of a certain section of London or whatever. But the truth of that experience no
              longer coincides with the place in which it takes place. The truth of that limited
              daily experience of London lies, rather, in India or Jamaica or Hong Kong; it is bound
              up with the whole colonial system of the British Empire that determines the very
              quality of the individual’s subjective life. Yet those structural coordinates are no
              longer accessible to immediate lived experience and are often not even
              conceptualizable for most people.
                  
               
            
            While Jameson aligns this experience with the inward flows of empire, the flow of goods
          out of the metropoles was equally important in generating the split.Max Weber, Emile
            Durkheim, and Georg Simmel also warned about the inadequacy of the individual’s comprehension
            of their environment in the age of monopoly capital. Weber discusses bureaucracy,
            , the division of labor, and , the effects of the metropolitan social and
            economic organization as modern changes that contribute to the inadequacy of individual
            consciousness. As the metropolis grew, its culture industries transformed the
          modes of social interaction well beyond the hinterlands. This situation was compounded
          within the city, where expansiveness, social diversity, and media saturation all
          compromised the authority of experience.
                  notes
            that the construction of Times Square — an image-laden entertainment district at the
            center of the city, rather than the previously traditional marginal location — marked
            the rise of a spectacular environment in which it became much more difficult to untangle
            the web of images, which seemed only to refer back to more images. This
          development cast doubt on the capacity of a unified plot to depict either the experiential
          reality or the complex mediated totality of the city.
            The quest of Bud Korpenning — the book’s first character — to 
                  git more into the center of things
                  
                is a metanarrative reference to the difficulty of making sense of a complex
          environment beyond the reach of the individual consciousness. An anachronism in the
          metropolis, Bud walks about asking questions, activities emblematic of an earlier age of
          personal transportation and empirical knowledge, which highlight his inability to deal
          with modern urban characteristics such as job scarcity, workplace organization, and social
          services. Rather than flânerie, the contemplative approach to the city lauded by Walter
          Benjamin and Michel de Certeau, Bud’s experience is bewilderment.See , Reflections 156-58 ; for the most influential
            discussions of the urban walker, or flaneur, a figure that embodies a contemplative
            understanding of the city in defiance of the accelerated pace of modern life. See also
            Cowan, who discusses Manhattan Transfer at length, for a discussion of walkers as heroes
            in modern urban novels. His futile search ends in his fatal plunge into the East
          River from the Brooklyn Bridge, an important symbol of modernity which had joined the
          cities of New York and Brooklyn in 1883 .
            
               Manhattan Transfer addresses this problem directly,
          mimicking the social complexity and fragmentation of the city to expose the confusion and
          failure of individual consciousness. Like Bud, readers wander through Dos Passos’s
          metropolis, struggling to keep track of events, particularly in the first section of the
          novel where the narrative follows eight named characters from different social registers,
          as well as several minor characters. Reinforcing this effect, the narrative jumps from
          third person exterior description to stream-of-consciousness impressions. Moreover, the
          character narratives are interrupted by both imagistic passages at the beginnings of
          chapters and cultural artifacts like headlines and bits of popular song. When, in a review
          for the New York Times, a frustrated Henry Longan Stewart complained that the novel was
          simply a recording device with vestige of plot, he missed the point in assuming that the city was simply
          available to traditional plotting methods, a strategy that reduced its social and
          textual complexity .
            The formal innovations of Dos Passos’s text enabled the rendering of the city’s
          complexity and energy, fracturing conventional expectations to generate a heightened
          awareness of the problems involved in making sense of the city. Yet they also held forth
          the promise of a critical epistemology, a means of understanding relationships among urban
          phenomena. Though the novel’s form replicated metropolitan confusion, William Brevda
          contends that Dos Passos insisted on art’s 
                  critical
              transcendence,
                  
                which Brevda defines
          as the artwork’s 
                  capacity to be the center at once both inside
              and outside of structure
                  
               . In other words, as Mikhail Bakhtin
          suggested, the novel has the structural capacity to stage multiple discourses and
          subjective perceptions against one another as one of its defining structural elements,
          allowing it to both mimic and expose .Mikhail
            Bakhtin’s theory of heteroglossia hails the capacity of the
            novel to stage multiple discourses and subjective perceptions against one another as one
            of its defining structural elements . See also
            Benjamin, On Some Motifs in Baudelaire for a discussion
            which foregrounds incorporation of ritual correspondences in the literary structure of
            Fleurs du Mal as a way to fathom the full meaning of the
              breakdown of experience which Baudelaire experienced in the urban environment
              . While the metropolitan center of
            things seemingly lay outside the grasp of either subjective or unified
          narrative, the possibility remained that a narrative structure deploying many
          consciousnesses and discourses simultaneously could establish hierarchies among them. This
          quality would in turn allow the reader to distinguish among subjective discourses, to move
          from parataxis to hypotaxis, from observation to understanding. Ideally, the collective
          novel could bridge the gap between experience and truth, fulfilling Jameson’s call for
              
                  cognitive mapping
                  
               
          by rendering complex interactions visible across unbridgeable social divides and
          epistemological uncertainties. Manhattan Transfer’s structure
          indeed helps to make the metropolis intelligible to readers by narratively connecting a
          wide range of urban elements and interactions, but it repeatedly stresses social
          disconnection and alienation.
            Bud’s death provides the blueprint of a key motif, the spectacular catastrophe, which
          highlights further disjunctions between experience and actuality, linking them to
          metropolitan mass culture. Before his plunge, Bud finds himself first entranced by the
          East River into a reverie and then blinded and disoriented by the sunrise off the
          skyscrapers. As Bud falls, he is incorporated into the urban spectacle; the viewpoint
          shift to a tugboat captain who watches the fall literally makes Bud’s catastrophe one the
          sights of the city. The spectacular catastrophe links two dominant modes of understanding
          the modern metropolis while highlighting disjunctions among actual responsibility,
          perceived responsibility, and outcome. Guy Debord’s influential formulation of the
          spectacle echoes the epistemological problem identified by Lukács and Jameson. A
          manifestation of the material and textual plenitude of advanced capitalism, the spectacle
          arises when the commodity fetish becomes generalized throughout social life, when
              
                  all that was once directly lived has become mere
              representation
                  
               . Identifying the
          spectacle as a product of mass culture, Debord argues:
            
               Understood on its own terms, the spectacle proclaims the predominance
            of appearances and asserts that all human life, which is to say all social life, is mere
            appearance. But any critique capable of apprehending the spectacle’s essential character
            must expose it as a visible negation of life — and as a negation of life that has
            invented a visual form for itself.
               
            
            The shifting visual dynamic of the spectacle engenders desires and offers a framework of
          interaction for urbanites. Yet it also disrupts the ability to form stable understandings
          of causality and responsibility, including political responsibility.
            A glance through late nineteenth and early twentieth century newspapers, which chronicled
          the frequently disastrous meeting of the metropolis’s dense concentration of bodies and
          the modern machinery of industry and transportation, shows catastrophe to be an equally
          prominent topos.See  for the obsession of
            turn-of-the-century journals with urban catastrophes. While, on one hand, the
          catastrophe ended subjective involvement in the spectacle for its victims, on the other,
          it incorporated their bodies into the spectacle, providing material for the media and
          reinforcing the sense of change and unpredictability that Debord argues is essential to
          life under the spectacle. One of the dominant motifs of the novel is fire with its often
          indeterminate origins, its swift destructive power, and its spectacular coverage by the
          media. Symbolically, a pyromaniac sets the novel’s first fire on the day after the 1898
          unification of New York’s five boroughs in the section appropriately entitled Metropolis. Each of the four fires in Manhattan Transfer occurs suddenly and with indeterminate or irrational
          origins, reinforcing the indictment of the metropolis as an unjust environment.
            In Manhattan Transfer, spectacles, often connected to mass
          culture, undermine the ability of subjects to perceive their environment accurately,
          leaving them susceptible to catastrophic reversals. The clutter of subplots reinforce the
          threat of sudden reversal, as illustrated in Phil Sandbourne’s brief narrative, which
          draws a clear connection between desire, spectacular incorporation, and catastrophe.
          Walking with a colleague, Phil falls into a discussion of the latest fashions and the
          attractive women who wear them. Here, mass culture is juxtaposed with the body of a woman
          — a common modernist linkage, and one that the novel utilizes often.See , for discussion of frequent modernist
            associations between women and mass culture. As they cross the street at Fifth
          Avenue, Phil notices a woman in a taxi and wanders into a fantasy in which he joins the
          woman in the taxi on her unspoken invitation, only to find the material world reasserted
          in the form of a truck that strikes him. Likely unaware of Phil’s gaze or even the
          accident, the woman leaves. Phil’s thoughts, however, indicate that he is still caught in
          the spell: 
                  As they lift hi minto[sic] the ambulance Fifth Avenue
              shrieks to throttling agony and bursts. He cranes his neck to see her, weakly, like a
              terrapin on its back; didn’t my eyes snap steel traps on her? He finds himself
              whimpering. She might have stayed to see if I was killed.
                  
                Unable to distinguish fantasy from reality,
          Phil mistakenly believes that the woman has an obligation to remain. Their relationship
          is, like many other relationships in the book, a projection of one person’s misguided
          desire rather than a shared experience. The pattern of sudden reversals continues in
          several plotlines.
            In Manhattan Transfer, spectacular culture is equally
          detrimental to the possibility of stable political communities. Anna Cohen’s story
          highlights one mode of social participation — self-definition through mass culture — that
          conflicts with other ethnic and radical forms of community. As several commentators have
          argued, Elaine Thatcher’s plot provides an example of limited agency and security gained at
          the cost of participating fully in mass cultural self-objectification. Anna’s work in the
          garment trades could easily highlight mass cultural production, offering an instructive
          contrast in class and ethnic opportunity with Elaine. However, Dos Passos chose to focus
          on the effects of mass culture rather than its production, a move that emphasized
          manufactured disconnection.
            Indeed, mass culture appears particularly destructive to class-based organizing. This is
          a curious and telling portrayal since Dos Passos would soon be entering his most intense
          engagement with communism.Here, the novel explores a twentieth-century American
            pattern — identified by commentators like Lizabeth Cohen, Michael Walzer, and Michael
            Sandel — in which individuals chose a private life built on consumption rather than
            republican models of work or civic participation (, , ). Heinze suggests that instead of
            embracing the participatory models of citizenship as Progressives advocated, Jewish
            immigrants more often engaged in acts of self-definition through consumption.
          Anna transposes the radical vision of justice that her labor organizer boyfriend Elmer
          offers onto romantic understandings of the future defined in mass cultural images. Anna
          daydreams of a future with the young radical, but waffles in her fantasies between a
          future after the revolution in which Elmer is chosen as New York’s mayor and one in which
          Elmer opens a store on the Lower East Side. Her vision of the post-revolutionary world is
          particularly revealing as it mixes revolution with glamorous images from the movies.
              
                  Elmer in a telephone central in a dinnercoat, with eartabs,
              tall as Valentino, strong as Doug [Anna’s favorite dancing partner]. The Revolution is
              declared. The Red Guard is marching up Fifth Avenue. Anna in golden curls with a
              little kitten under her arms leans with him out of the tallest window.
                  
                Anna conflates one vision of community with
          another, drawing together elements of Jewish urban life with an Anglo-oriented cinematic
          fantasy in which Anna is blond and Elmer tall and dashing
            Conflagration returns in this narrative, yielding yet another catastrophic and
          misinterpreted spectacular incorporation. While Anna daydreams of seizing the means
          of production, those material means, the scraps of cloth around her, catch fire and
          severely disfigure her. While the Triangle Shirtwaist fire, which Anna’s predicament would
          likely call to mind for most 1920s readers, tragically united the fate of a group of
          working women and eventually helped forge sympathies that helped to build a stronger
          social justice community, Anna’s tragedy is individualized and contained. Elaine, who has
          witnessed the aftermath, limits the damage to the upscale boutique’s image by telling
          other customers, 
                  it was nothing, absolutely nothing
                  
               .
            Ultimately, Manhattan Transfer depicts an environment where
          the capacity for self-realization and community has been sapped, an indictment that Dos
          Passos eventually transferred to the nation. The Manhattanites, stupefied by the spectacle
          all around them, cannot seem to formulate clear thoughts or lasting relationships. The
          only characters who profit from the urban environment are those who, like Elaine Thatcher,
          exchange their independence for security, or those, like the bootlegger Congo Jake and Gus
          McNiel, who gain power through corruption. Success and failure are both predicated on
          incorporation into the spectacle. This leaves the possibility of social justice with
          little chance in the metropolis. Walking out of the city jobless and homeless at the end
          of the novel, the disillusioned journalist Jimmy Herf becomes the prototype for Vag, the
          character whose incessant wandering would frame the narrative of the U.S.A. trilogy and transfer the indictment of mass culture and political
          failure to the nation .See  and  for critical accounts that consider this expansion of focus. Hicks’s The Great Tradition —
            written between the publication of 1919, the novel which came closest to an endorsement
            of communism, and The Big Money — suggested that U.S.A. was
            a more mature work than Manhattan Transfer because it
            refused a 
                     retreat that is a confession of futility
                     
                  . However, the two
              nations imagery ending the trilogy with the 
                     transcontinental passenger
                     
                   flying over
            Vag suggests that Dos Passos retained his ambivalence. It is not surprising then that
            Hicks was so deeply disappointed with The Big Money.
          It is tempting to read Jimmy’s self-exile as productive abandonment of a career and
          environment in which his choices are constrained for one in which he will have more
          autonomy. Yet Jimmy’s uncertain response to a query about his destination, 
                  I dunno…pretty far,
                  
                recalls the
          threat figured in Bud’s narrative; Jimmy’s quest may lead to a ruinous pursuit of an
          impossible aim . The spectacular catastrophe returns
          again and again in U.S.A. as the metropolitan allegory
          becomes
          a national one, its questions of justice famously unresolved in the trilogy’s final image
          of the separation between Vag’s perambulations and the airborne intercontinental traveler.
          While Dos Passos was adapting the collective novel for more expansive territory, other
          collective writers continued to explore the metropolis, finding similar elements of
          disconnection.
         



            Marx and Metropolis: The Urban Collective Novel in the Red Decade
            The history of the collective novel following Manhattan
            Transfer shows both divergence from its urban focus and remarkable continuities
          in the concerns with metropolitan culture and disconnection. Despite the urban origins,
          few collective novels were written about the metropolis, writers preferring instead to
          locate problems within classically Marxist narratives of struggle in primarily industrial
          or agricultural milieus. To a certain extent, this may also reflect a general cultural
          turn away from the metropolis in the 1930s toward the national problems presented by the
          Depression, as well as the international rise of fascism. However, social historians have
          argued that the city remained a vital entity, both politically and culturally during the
            1930s.See  for a historical discussion of the growth of
            urban political power in the 1930s. Besides Dos Passos’s U.S.A. trilogy, a few novels — notably Herbst’s Rope of
            Gold (1939) and Rollins’s The Shadow Before (1934)
          both written by committed radicals — contained significant sections set in the metropolis.
          Moreover Seaver’s The Company (1930) and Halper’s Union Square (1931) engaged with the metropolis at length. In all
          of these novels, the metropolis exerts a negative force on characters’ lives and their
          understanding of political community. 
            In The Shadow Before, New York is where the bosses live,
          extending control over mill towns in the hinterlands where the novel is set. The primary
          urban figure in the text is Harry Baumann, the son of one of the bosses, who grows up
          among the city’s social elite, but feels alienated among them. This disjunction turns him
          into a sociopathic figure, obsessed with criminality and sadism as a means of enacting his
          rebellion. Only when he sides with the strikers at his father’s textile mill does he seem
          to be able to turn his energy to useful purpose. However, even there, his background seems
          to corrupt his understanding. Baumann steals the keys to his father’s mill, potentially
          enabling a sit-down strike, but instead he nihilistically sets out to burn the mill and
          kills himself when he is about to be caught. 
            The city has similarly deleterious effects on both community and creativity in Rope of Gold. Herbst’s communist journalist Victoria Chance is
          separated from her husband by her need to find work in New York. This separation proves
          disastrous to their relationship, but the city seems to emanate a more insidious influence
          over politics. In the following scene Victoria describes the bohemian atmosphere of the
          city:
            
               Time went very fast. Before you could turn around, the week was over,
            then the fortnight. She would never thrive in a city; she was a woman for the country as
            her people before her. Esther had a great deal of company and the arguments and
            discussions were endless. People who had never before thought of communism argued
            incessantly. Many of Esther’s friends talked of the revolution as if it were, like
            prosperity in the Hoover era, just around the corner. Victoria sniffed at them often
            enough and at what she called Marx, fifth-hand, and she
            said a revolution was never fought by paper revolutionaries
            with a feeling of pride that, though she herself might be working at a job in the city,
            Jonathan was actually putting his hand to the plow, for better or for worse.
               
            
            This passage repeats Malcolm Cowley’s 1934 indictment in Exile’s
            Return of Greenwich Village bohemianism as the unconscious promotion of a
          market-oriented individualism, but shifts the target to fashionable urban radicalism. The book reinforces Victoria’s dismissal of bohemians when
          it shows how Lester Tolman, the leftist journalist with whom she works, is distracted from
          his writing by alcoholism and an affair with an actress. Ultimately, Victoria, like Jimmy
          Herf, must leave the city in order to find a radicalism untainted by bohemianism. 
            As its title suggests, Seaver’s The Company offers an
          alternative organizing principle, while still yoking mass culture and the metropolis.
          Resembling a 1930s literary prequel to the TV series Mad Men,
          the novel focuses on the copywriters of the Universal Illuminating Company. The city is
          everywhere present in the novel, in commutes and lunchtime walks, as well as in the
          attitudes of the main characters. Like Manhattan Transfer,
            The Company linked mass culture to the decline of
          authority. At one point, an unnamed first-person narrator celebrates the departure of a
          Jewish copywriter named Aarons from the firm, whose cynical self-deprecation — 
                  When you’re a harlot, you have to know how, eh boys?
                  
                — leads to demoralization among the other writers, who want to
          believe in their commercial work, 
                  to write inspirationally the
              way the boss wanted us to
                  
               . The final realization of one of the
          copywriters is that his life has been essentially unproductive: Advertising didn’t make electricity any more than the smoke drooling all day from the
            mouths of the chimneys. Fifteen years of scribbling meaningless words, an epitaph of
            smoke.
               . 
            The novel goes beyond personal alienation to show the disorganizing effect mass media can
          have on politics. In one scene, another copywriter, Mr. Nash, passes a demonstration of
            Reds
               . Written in a way that exposes the limits of Mr. Nash's understanding, the novel shows how newspapers backing a company sponsored union have prejudiced him against the communists' message. The text seems to sympathize with the communists, as it does
          with Aarons, who is marked out as one of them later. However, the crowd shares Mr. Nash’s
          limits, and the demonstration quickly devolves into a melee. Far less subtly than Dos
          Passos, Seaver suggested that metropolitan mass culture capably set consciousness in
          patterns that frustrated attempts to organize.
         

            
               Manhattanized Communism: Albert Halper’s Union Square
            
             Despite the persistently negative image of the city and mass culture in 1930s collective
          novels, few writers grappled with manufactured desire and co-optation to the extent that
          Dos Passos had done in Manhattan Transfer. However, the
          concerns with social divisions, image proliferation, and market imperatives all return
          clearly in Halper’s Union Square, written in 1931 when the
          proletarian literary movement was gaining momentum. This novel bears careful attention
          both because of its literary merit and its direct, metropolitan critique of proletarian
          literature. Despite the complexity of his form and his steady literary output throughout
          the 1930s, Halper has received too little attention from critics interested in the textual
          archaeology of that decade.The novel has been out of print since 1962. Only two
            scholars, Lawrence Hanley and John Hart have devoted essays to Halper’s novels although
            Halper still receives regular mention in lists of 1930s authors. See ;  for criticism that groups
            Halper’s novels with proletarian literature. See 
            for a review of critical literature on Union Square. See ,  for discussion of the Menorah Journal circle, of which
            Halper was a part. Halper’s relationship to proletarian literature is complex. In its
            promotional materials, the Literary Guild distanced Union Square from proletarian
            writing, yet tellingly admitted the likelihood that Halper’s book would be received as
            such. Halper’s agent Maxim Lieber successfully sought out and promoted new writers voice
            such as Erskine Caldwell and Louis Adamic who represented proletarian voices in their
            literature. Halper’s 1930s novels — Union Square, The Chute, The Foundry, and Sons of the Fathers — explored radicalism, labor struggle, and
            working-class family life, all common subjects in proletarian writing. In
          criticism, Halper emerges as either an urban proletarian novelist or an individualistic
          objector, but a survey of his politics and literary output suggests a complicated
          engagement with proletarian culture. Halper’s associations and stories in the 1930s do
          indicate a left-leaning radicalism. However, like Dos Passos, he prized detached
          criticism, and his political views were tempered by commitment to his writing. In the
          collective novel, he found a way to voice his concerns. Union
            Square offers a critique aimed at the intersection of radical cultural politics,
          commitment, and advanced capitalism. Union Square draws the
          early concerns of the collective form — mass culture, social division, and alienation —
          into dialogue with proletarian literature, showing how radical cultural and political aims
          are undercut by a metropolitan consumer culture. 
            Halper’s account of Union Square’s origins suggests the
          productive confluence of his lifelong urban experience and a fresh engagement with New
          York’s radical scene and spectacular street life. Publishers had rebuffed Halper’s first
          two novel attempts, manuscripts that focused on the lives of immigrants in his native
          Chicago. While he was able to support himself by selling essays and stories to the
          left-leaning Menorah Journal, he could not generate the idea
          for a new novel. Halper moved to a room near Union Square in 1930 after spending several
          months in a loft in the Bronx. His new neighborhood was in fact a meeting place of a
          number of neighborhoods. Located at the northern edges of bohemian Greenwich Village and
          the Lower East Side, Union Square also abutted affluent
          neighborhoods around Gramercy Park, Stuyvesant Square, and Astor Place. By the 1930s, the
          square had earned its reputation as the center of left-wing radicalism in the city because
          of its proximity to the headquarters of the Communist Party and several labor unions.
          Rallies for socialists and communists were held in the park frequently, speakers shouting
          their messages from atop crates. As a symbol of social conflict, it was ideal. On one of
          Halper’s frequent strolls, he noticed a man walking backwards using mirrored glasses as
          his guide. The perilous navigation of the walker via fragmented reflections, a sort of
          ambulatory version of Plato’s cave allegory, crystallized Halper’s observations about
          urban life. Immediately, he began plotting and drafting the manuscript to Union Square
               . The manuscript was accepted and published quickly,
          delayed only by its acceptance as the Literary Guild Book of the Month, which guaranteed
          it a wider audience and critical response than many other radical novels
            received.See  for a critical discussion of
            arguments that proletarian literature was not read by its intended audience.
            
            While Halper nowhere nods to the influence of Manhattan
            Transfer in his memoir, Union Square’s formal
          similarities to the earlier novel include diverse and disconnected character plotlines and
          resonating images. Though political radicals figure centrally, recognizable characters and
          plots from popular urban novels and movies abound in the text. These serve as allusions to
          other narratives of urban alienation, highlighting the broad failure of the urban
          environment to provide meaningful lives and communities. Serving as a “sugar daddy” for a
          younger woman, the wealthy Mr. Boardman is unhappy with both the volatility of his affair
          and the tensions created by hiding it from his daughter. The immigrant Andre Franconi sees
          his relationships with people back home dissolve. Gangsters compel a Hungarian restaurant
          owner to sell alcohol, which leaves him subject to extortion by the police. The negative
          trajectory of these plotlines is reinforced by repeated allusions to the fall of the Roman
          empire and an emphasis on seasonal instability. 
            
               Union Square’s thematic concern with mass culture and
          social alienation also echoes Manhattan Transfer. The novel’s
          engagement with a spectacular mass culture emerges most clearly in the plotline of Celia,
          a young woman infatuated with the communist artist Leon Fisher. The novel links Celia’s
          failure to win over Leon to the urban consumer culture and its standards of beauty,
          suggesting a source of frustrated aims. A cracked tooth prevents Celia from smiling, and
          she believes this blemish keeps Leon from noticing her. Ironically, Leon’s attraction to
          Celia is based in the artistic qualities that her imperfections generate. During a quarrel
          Leon’s bitterness with Celia is mollified by the interesting quality of her “sweet, frozen
          smile” that hides the gap where her tooth was removed . Earlier, when Leon paints Celia, she attempts to smile, but he specifically asks her
          to refrain. 
                  Then, hurt, she gave up and stared hopelessly before
              her, the joy of posing gone, the loneliness of her young life flowing from her eyes.
              In a flash Leon began squeezing paint from tubes and started painting
              furiously
                  
               . Because she avoided
          smiling to hide her tooth, her face evokes a sense of loneliness — simultaneously personal
          and, in the Depression, historical — which Leon tries to capture. 
            In her attempt to correct the tooth, Celia is faced with the particularly urban dilemma
          of a proliferation of choices, abetted by mass media technology, with a dearth of reliable
          guidance. 
                  Every evening she read the dental advertisements,
              leaning over the sheets, wondering what dental parlor did the best work at the lowest
              price
                  
               . Overwhelmed by these choices, she finally
          decides to go to a dentist whose quality and value are promised on a flashy sign,
              
                  a big, gilt sign with two strong electric bulbs glaring
              toward the print: ‘Painless Dentist, First-Class Work, Lowest Rates, Plates and
              Crowns, also Gas Administered
                  
               .
          Celia’s choice and its result show how the advertising spectacle obscures the actuality of
          the promised good. The doctor will not give Celia a first-class
            job for less than twenty-five dollars, but comes up with an inferior solution
          that is just barely within her ability to pay . This
          bait and switch undercuts the promise of the sign. At the end of the novel, Celia is
          pleased by the results of the dental work, the flashing smile
          that echoes the dentist’s beckoning sign . However,
          the novel has already deterred this reading of mass cultural fulfillment by denying the
          object of her transformation. 
            As Halper’s novel revisits these concerns in the Depression metropolis, it offers more
          direct commentary on communism than Manhattan Transfer, or
          even USA. It even parodies other proletarian novels,
          undercutting their claims and enabling a critique of the proletarian cultural scene. In
            Union Square the question of commitment — the degree to
          which individuals subordinate their individual and class interests to those of the
          proletariat (as defined by the Communist Party) — emerges in several plotlines. See
               for a critical discussion of
            commitment. In each, the novel suggests that commitment is either thinly held or
          motivated by desires that render social justice a secondary concern. Positioned to attract
          the sympathies of readers, Leon could offer healthy model of political participation, his
          commitment and passion reinforcing the justness of communist aims. His willingness to help
          other characters like Celia, Jason Wheeler, and Comrade Helen displays generosity and
          devotion. In the middle of the Depression he abandons a secure job to work as a
          propagandist making posters for the Communist Party. His commitment makes him an ideal
          fellow traveler whose art directly serves revolutionary aims. In a conventional
          proletarian novel, Leon might well be rewarded for his political virtue or martyred
          heroically. The novel undermines these expectations showing how Leon’s gentle nature and
          selflessness become liabilities in the city. 
            Leon’s desire for Helen channels his virtues into a mechanism of denial and servility,
          invisible to Leon, but openly displayed to the reader in its associations with mass
          culture. Helen is a dual figure identified with mass culture, much like Brigitte Helm in
          Fritz Lang’s Metropolis, who appeared as both the saintly
          reformer Maria and her lascivious robotic doppelganger. Leon imagines Helen as the pure
          heroine of a political melodrama. By contrast, Jason, who often points out Leon’s naiveté,
          sees her as a very different cinematic character: highly sexualized, a big, hot baby who takes advantage of Leon’s idealizing vision to gratify
          herself . Leon’s innocence throughout the affair
          suggests his incompatibility with urban moral codes, a dangerous susceptibility that was a
          popular theme of 1930s cinema.Several 1930s films — including King Vidor’s The Crowd
                  , Frank Capra’s Mr. Deeds Goes to
              Town
                  , and Lowell Sherman’s Morning Glory
                   — pitted
            sympathetic yet naïve characters against these urban codes, often embodied in cynical
            characters. These narratives explored how and to what degree the protagonists are able
            to adapt to the urban social environment while maintaining their admirable traits. Leon
            fails in a way that exposes both personal and political flaws. When he helps out
          with the cleaning at Helen’s apartment, a seemingly selfless activity that echoes his
          devotion to the communists, the text emphasizes the servility of his actions. Leon’s
          blindness is shown as an inability to face an unwanted reality that has negative effects
          on his behavior and casts doubt on his political commitment. 
            In Union Square, market demands subvert proletarian culture
          and complicate the question of commitment by influencing artistic production and
          valuation. Jason’s plot explores this problem by linking propaganda and pornography. A
          highly cynical writer whose work at one time was seen as promising in proletarian literary
          circles, Jason, like Manhattan Transfer’s Jimmy Herf, faces a
          choice between making a living and making art. Jason, however, chooses the former, and he
          ends up freelancing pornographic stories, which ironically often fail to sell. Jason
          taunts Leon through sardonic monologues about the formal qualities and craftsmanship of
          these stories. His jibes are meant to force Leon to confront the question of the
          relationship between his art and propaganda, insinuating that Leon has undercut his
          artistic potential by subordinating his art to political aims. 
            This pairing of propaganda and pornography suggests a common ground in market forces, a
          link made explicit in a scene in which Jason’s cynicism suddenly erupts into pointed
          literary critique. In a crucial scene at a party at the Kremlin, a
          tenement which houses many proletarian artists and writers, Jason voices criticism of
          another poet’s work, triggering condemnation and calls for clarification by the other
          writers. Turning the proletarian writing’s prophetic didacticism against itself, Jason
          monologues on the failures of proletarian literature. Voicing Leon Trotsky’s criticism of
          proletarian culture, Jason suggests that no such culture will emerge without a proletarian
          revolution, and contends that no first-rate writers have yet emerged from the workers’
            ranks.See  for this argument. He
          contends that most writers have little experience with working-class life, and therefore
          cannot illuminate those conditions in any useful way. Moreover, Jason charges, they have
          aggrandized their role within class struggle by suggesting that their work creates
          class-consciousness even when they do nothing further to aid workers. To this point
          Jason’s concerns about proletarian literature echo critiques from within communist
          critical circles. 
            Jason’s most developed critique, however, reveals the intertwined logic of the cultural
          marketplace and urban arts communities. Foreshadowed in the novel by the misreadings of
          films from the Soviet Union that idealize its culture and political system — the
          characters who gain their understanding of the Soviet way of life from the movies are not
          workers, but the police and the Drollingers, a bohemian couple who nostalgically yearn for
          Russia’s imperial past — Jason asserts that the proletarian cultural movement is a vogue,
          subject to the demands of the urban literary marketplace more than the needs of the
          communists or the proletariat. Many of the writers he attacks are amateurs who have
          attached themselves to a popular movement because of its publicity instead of developing
          their own work. Jason equates them with the bohemians of the previous generation:
              
                  You’re all bohemians! Fifteen or twenty years ago you would,
              if you had been born earlier, been[sic] living in Greenwich Village, fighting for the
              ‘new freedom,’ free love, and all that sort of stuff. But what’s happened, comrades?
              Why the bourgeoisie has stolen your ancient thunder; every shopgirl, every
              fifteen-dollars-a-week clerk believes in free love and freedom now.
                  
               
            
            While Cowley suggested that radicalized writers rejected bohemian affectations, Jason
          reveals a common bond between these groups: the marketability of rebellion. In his view,
          these writers work to establish marketable identities rather than concentrating on
          artistic development. In consequence, the proletarian cultural scene supports and even
          encourages second-rate work. Only by developing their specialized skills as artists rather
          than acclaiming themselves proletarians, Jason argues, can
          they be of any use to workers. Arguing that true proletarian writers will need to emerge
          from a 
                  background other than Manhattanized
              communism,
                  
                Jason suggests that
          urban social demands have co-opted the already narrow possibility of building a more
          equitable society . 
            The novel advances the account of market dynamics in a scene which references the 1931
          writers’ committee to investigate and publicize conditions among striking Harlan County,
          West Virginia coal miners, which was led by Theodor Dreiser and featured Dos Passos. In
          the novel, the writers on the committee believe they will provide the essential compelling
          testimony, which is, after all, why they were sent. But it is the entertainment provided
          by the Appalachian folk band and the speech of a young organizer from Kentucky that excite
          the audience. Here, authentic experience appears to drive the audience’s response, yet the
          narrative questions whether the audience is motivated by recognition of the value of
          working class experience and culture, or the effect of authenticity, the
          cultural capital that the 
                  genuine stuff, workers beaten down
              into the ground, silent, plucking their instruments — men starved and gaunt with
              toil
                  
                lends the event and by
          extension its audience . 
            In summary, Union Square effectively questions the
          sophistication of communist cultural politics. It exposes the complexity of market
          dynamics that undercut the potential usefulness of proletarian literature, both as
          propaganda and as art. The novel casts doubt on the commitment of writers to radical
          politics by identifying the marketability of radical identity. The novel’s depiction of
          the climactic march draws on negative understandings of urban crowds to create a
          disturbing figurative dissolution of identity in the political mass. Halper portrays the
          march as 
                  a dark, advancing shadow against the flat grey of the
              street below
                  
               . Halper notes the presence of women and
          African-Americans among the marchers, and through the growing collective voices suggests
          the solidification of a community. Silent initially, as the marchers near Union Square they become more assertive, 
                  the roar of their united voices struck the waiting crowds like the sound of pounding
              seas.
                  
               . This image, which could be read as
          either hopeful or tragic, is temporary, replaced by a far more ambivalent mob scene in
          which identities dissolve. The march decays into a melee as the police deploy agents
            provocateurs, who succeed in duping the communists into a disorganized and
          dangerous mass. In this mass the distinction between intentional and apparent
          participation dissolves. Struggling to escape the panic-stricken mob, while screaming
              
                  I ain’t a Red, I’m an Amerikin!,
                  
                Hank Austin, a worker with nativist views,
          suffers a spine-crushing beating when the police mistake him for a violent protester . This erasure of his identity as an able-bodied worker
          is followed by another: his life is rewritten 
                  as a victim of the
              bosses…of the whole capitalistic system
                  
                by communists anxious to benefit their own cause . The narrative irony in this rewriting in no way eases the erasure. Halper
          drew on understandings of the crowd as the dissolution of individual identity in order to
          cast doubt on radicals’ promises of community.See The Crowd  for a cinematic representation of identity dissolution in the urban masses. See  for a contrasting discussion of 1930s
            choreographic and cinematographic representations of social coherence in Busby
            Berkeley’s films.
            
            In the final paragraphs of the novel, a skeptical rhetoric disorders the notion of
          progress essential to communist teleology. The final scenes, in which the communists’
          march is juxtaposed with a suicide and the fire that destroys Twenty Door City and kills
          Mr. Boardman, are punctuated by the repeated phrase, 
                  In this
              world things move on apace.
                  
               
               Variations
            of this phrase occur on . Coupled with the march, this would initially seem to suggest the
          inevitability of progress and reaffirm the communists’ vision of change. However, the
          novel’s final verses undercut both the hopefulness of such a vision and its teleology:
              
                  In this world things move on apace. Life must go on. There
              are children to be born, and some will cry out when their tender skin is cut. But
              progress overleaps all barriers. Time does not stop, it moves. The tide comes in and
              great waves roll toward the shore, and if there’re pebbles waiting, why the pebbles
              are no more. For the future must be faced, no getting away from that, and if you
              cannot keep apace, you’ll be sitting on your hat. Tramp, tramp, tramp, past Union
              Square they’re clopping. A wooden beat on an iron street, and no telling when they’re
              stopping.
                  
               
            
             The marching ends in an ominous tone, one that resonated in later decades as demagogic
          politics derailed the effects of democratic movements. The facile rhyme and violent
          imagery in this passage affirm the inevitability of progress, but strip it of positive
          connotation, stressing destructive and unforeseeable consequences. Union Square casts doubt on the ability of the communists, or anyone else, to
          direct progress, leaving little hope in the possibility of justice. At the end of the
          novel, the square is returned to the scene of economic competition between pushcart
          vendors that began the novel.
         

            The Narrative Perils of Collection in Daniel
          Fuchs’s Summer in Williamsburg
            
            If the collective novel’s expansive focus could challenge the viability of political
          community, why end the critique of coherence at that point? One final urban collective
          novel of the 1930s deserves separate consideration, if only briefly, because its
          self-aware critique of narrative form raises crucial problems for both the collective
          novel and modern network narrative. Daniel Fuchs’s 1934 novel Summer
            in Williamsburg, which re-appropriated Halper’s hybridization of the Jewish
          neighborhood novel and the collective form to focus on a Brooklyn ghetto, illustrates the
          conflict between an increased capacity for collection and narrative coherence. Marcelline
          Krafchick has accurately described its radical approach to complex narrative, showing how
          the novel attempts and then deflates a collective approach to its object. See  for this discussion. Most of my analysis in this
            section draws on Krafchick’s reading, but it seeks to recontextualize Summer in
            Williamsburg against the framework of the metropolis, mass culture, and manufactured
            disconnection that guides this essay. In one crucial scene a suicide of
          indeterminate cause prompts Philip Heyman to meditate on narrating urban complexity.
          Countering the tendency to read his working-class neighborhood as a uniform slum, he recognizes its immense diversity, and, hoping to capture
          it, recites the advice given by Old Miller, one of the elders of the ghetto: 
                  If you would really discover the reason, you must pick Williamsburg to
              pieces until you have them all spread out on your table before you, a dictionary of
              Williamsburg.
                  
               . In this vision, the
          collective narrative becomes the collecting narrative, drawing as many elements as
          possible into its frame. 
            Highlighting the stakes of this activity, Fuchs’s story showcases the effects of mass
          culture, most often in the form of cinematic images that rewire desire, shaping the
          attitudes and behavior of the characters. If Philip, and by extension Fuchs, cannot find a
          way to represent Williamsburg, mass culture will provide the definitive narrative. Fuchs’s
          depiction of the cinema as a force that has deeply and perniciously influenced the
          thoughts, language, and behavior of the second generation makes this threat clear.
          Although he makes fun of his friend’s infatuation with actresses, the young boy constantly renders his
          own understanding of his relationship with a girl in images from romantic films. Throughout
          the course of Philip’s relationship with Tessie, he sardonically notes her tendency to
          construct an understanding of love out of the movies. The narrator reinforces Philip’s
          observations, suggesting Tessie’s attempt to discover the 
                  truth
                  
                of her feelings is 
                  clouded by the shadowy influence of the movies
                  
                . Philip himself, however, is influenced by the movies, which inform
          his gestures and thoughts. He notes this tendency, saying, 
                  I’m a
              dope, I fall in love with movie stars and there isn’t even a great emotion for Tessie
              to turn down
                  
               . When Tessie leaves him
          for Schlausser, he has a brief reverie that recasts his pain in the imagery of cinema:
            
               In his brown warm mental mist a machine gun began pumping bullets into
            his heart, his face full of surprise at the unexpected attack. Ta ta ta, rra, traa, ta
            ta ta. The belt of lead sluiced through the gun. Boomp, boomp, boomp. The bullets sank
            into his flesh, each impact individually shaking his body. The movies.
               
            
            While the behavior of the second generation approximates movie romances, the reality of
          the relationships seldom measures up to their expectations. Nonetheless, the movies
          provide solace for this dissatisfaction as well; after he walks from Williamsburg to
          Clinton Hill and back while mulling his narrow existence, Philip feels 
                  compelled to lose [his sadness] and his loneliness in the darkness of a
              movie theater
                  
               . 
            While the idea of collection might provide an alternative to the scripted visions of the
          cinema, the narrative begins to dissolve when Philip tests the ramifications of Old
          Miller’s directive:
            
               That means Mrs. Linck and her guinea pigs…my uncle Papravel, and my
            father, Mahler, and even Old Miller himself. It means my lovely friend Cohen and his
            pimples. A million things. That means the raw metallic tunes of a player-piano that come
            out of a window and paint the buildings with drabness; it means the horse rippling the
            skin of his rump; that couple, fat and perspiring, in holiday clothes with bathing-suit
            bags at their sides, drinking vanilla soda water at the candy stand.
               
            
            As the list approaches absurdity in its grotesque detail the reader begins to see the
          pitfalls of the strategy: the more information is available, the more difficult it becomes
          to parse it for meaningful connections. Though Summer in
            Williamsburg’s form upholds Philip’s vision, the collective novel essentially
          becoming the collecting novel, the skeptical metanarrative returns at several points to
          reaffirm this paradox. As the narrative expands, it increasingly comes to look like a
          congeries, a disconnected collection held together only by the conceptual framework of the
          neighborhood. Ultimately, the novel fails to resolve this tension. Philip eventually
          recognizes selection as crucial to narrative, but still hopes to incorporate the full
          range of impressions he has gathered. Critics often recognize the apparent futility of
          Philip’s endeavor, but the novel leaves the reader with the dilemma of condemning all such
          expansive narrative efforts or recognizing discordant excess as an essential part of complex
          narrative. 
            Fuchs answered this dilemma personally by abandoning metanarrative fiction for
          screenwriting. In a short reminiscence in Commentary,
          provocatively entitled Strictly Movie, he resolved the mass
          culture/critical culture antipathies of Summer in Williamsburg, He recalled the influence
          of the vaudeville and cinema shows of his youth at the Republic Theater on Grand Street
          while suggesting that the art of storytelling for film required an understanding of
          fragmented, episodic narrative like his novels. Fuchs largely abandoned long form fiction
          after the 1930s, turning to work in the industry which had served as the narrative
          competition for his first novel. While this resolution seemed to eliminate the
          self-critical possibilities embodied in his fiction, Fuchs’s most famous screenplay, for
          the 1949 film noir thriller Criss Cross,
          foregrounded problems of individual and epistemological disconnection.
         

            Conclusion: Narratives of Disconnection
            The urban collective novel provides an important modernist precedent for both the
          existence and the interpretation of present day network narratives. Rather than viewing
          these novels as an attempt to forge or identify points of connection, they may be better
          viewed as attempts to map disconnection. Emerging alongside the proletarian collective
          novel, and often overlapping with it, the urban collective novel was an excellent
          instrument for representing both urban alienation and the failure of political community.
          Their authors’ attempts to use the metropolis as a platform for exploring social
          disconnection illustrated the spatial power of the narrative, its ability to explore
          multilayered social environments and the proliferation of images in those environments.
          The writers skillfully pointed out the contradictions of an environment that promised
          opportunity yet simultaneously militated against it, suggesting that these conflicting
          drives undermined both individuals and the bonds of community between individuals. This,
          ultimately, is the legacy of the urban collective novel: its power to trace the production
          and circulation of disconnection, the focus on the preemptive and co-optive adaptations
          that maintain the investment of individuals in damaging economic and social practices.
          Ironically, even while they condemned its effects, they often identified in mass culture a
          social order that citizens often found more appealing than the visions of a communist
          future advanced in proletarian literature. As Halper’s and Fuchs’s novels showed, the
          market itself seemed to provide a narrative logic, one that worked through multiplicity
          while generating desire. 
            In arguing that these fellow travelers wallowed about in despair of answers, Hicks and
          other communist critics who praised the formal character of Dos Passos’s and Halper’s
          collective novels while hoping the writers would find their way to a more sanguine view of
          communism accurately described the novels’ pessimistic stances but neglected both the full
          thrust of their critiques and the tensions shaping the novels’ form. The novels’ final
          images — Manhattan Transfer’s self-exile, USA’s final split, Union Square’s
          brutal march, The Company’s vision of smoke — offered little
          hope of any sort of politics of connection. Even the politically committed Rollins left
          his reader with a young mother-to-be, radicalized but unemployed, deserted by her lovers
          and hunting a husband as an instrumental father to her baby.This is not to suggest
            that network narrative is incapable of positive construction. An expansive conceit like
            the octopus, the metropolis, or traffic offers a useful way to conceptualize and work
            through phenomenological disconnection even when the narrative tends toward an
            inescapable tautology or an absurd congeries. As the title of Iñárritu’s Babel suggests, cinematic network narratives today emerge out of a
          similar crisis of experience as the one that first defined naturalism and then the
          collective novel, and these films have been just as notable for their negative stance,
          their eschewal of hopeful resolutions, as their modernist predecessors. Though critics
          today, with the absence of a robust communist politics and the rise of modernist
          aesthetics, are unlikely to judge this a failure of ideology, they will have to reckon
          with the intensely critical and negative elements of these narratives, their refusal of
          the network as emancipatory community. It may well be significant that these critical
          forms have developed in media with anachronistic, even declining, relationships to
          emerging mass media networks. The novel is, of course, not a radio play or a newsreel, nor
          is the network film a Twitter feed.It is interesting to consider what David
            Fincher’s film The Social Network
                   might have been like as a
            more decentered narrative that have would allowed it to explore the global utilization
            of Facebook or Napster. While digital narrative projects today largely seem to
          embrace the connective possibilities of the network, it is likely that ambitious narrative
          forms will develop that resurrect the epistemological critique levied by the
          collective novel.
         
