Title:  Narrelations — Visualizing Narrative Levels and their Correlations with Temporal Phenomena
Volume:  013
Issue:  3
Date:  14 October 2019
Abstract:  
                
                We present findings from interdisciplinary research at the intersection between
                    literary studies, information visualization, and interface design. Despite a
                    growing interest in text visualization among literary scholars, so far,
                    narrative visualizations are not designed to support the particular tasks
                    involved in narratological analysis and often fail to reveal nuanced
                    narratological features. One major outcome of our iterative research and design
                    process is Narrelations, a novel visualization technique specifically suited for
                    analyzing and interpreting narrative levels of a story and temporal aspects of
                    its narrative representation. The visualization provides an overview of the
                    nesting and distribution of narrative levels, integrates the representation of
                    temporal phenomena, and facilitates the examination of correlations between
                    these aspects. With this research we explore how collaboratively designed visual
                    encodings and interaction techniques may allow for an insightful analysis at a
                    high level coupled with a close inspection of text passages. We discuss prior
                    work relevant to our research objectives and explain the specific
                    characteristics of narrative levels and temporal aspects of narrative
                    representation. After describing the research process and design principles, we
                    apply the visualization on a test corpus of eight annotated German short stories
                    and demonstrate its heuristic value for literary analyses and interpretations.
                    In particular, we explore the intricate connections between the literary content
                    of the novellas and their narrative form.
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                    The Narrelations interface is conceived for the visual analysis of
                        specific narrative phenomena: the nesting and distribution of narrative
                        levels and their correlations with certain temporal phenomena. Besides
                        appraising overall patterns in a story, the interface enables to focus on
                        individual passages and annotations by coupling visual and textual analysis.
                            https://uclab.fh-potsdam.de/narrelations/
                    
                
                1. Introduction
                Although the predominant mode of the academic discourse in the humanities has
                    relied on text , visual formats, such as diagrams
                    and visualizations, have always held an essential role for knowledge production
                        . With a growing recognition of digital
                    humanities approaches towards literary text analysis and interpretation,
                    visualizations of textual data are becoming more and more prominent. But despite
                    the recent rise of digital methods, most visualization techniques for literary
                    studies still exhibit an epistemological imbalance to communicating results, but
                    seldom generating new knowledge. One facet of this reduction to presentation is
                    the use of visualization as unquestioned data representations denying its
                    interactive potential. However, the results of recent research on text
                    visualization demonstrate the potential of interactive visualization for a broad
                    range of linguistic and literary analyses . While
                    many existing techniques rely on basic linguistic categories, often
                    automatically extracted through natural language processing (e.g., , ), results from
                    recent collaborations among visualization researchers and literary scholars
                    highlight the virtues of interdisciplinary research (e.g., , ). Connected with this
                    line of research, our work explores the potential of text visualizations that
                    are explicitly suited to support narratological analysis. In this paper, we
                    introduce an explorative visualization (see Figure
                        1) as a heuristic method to augment a multi-layered interpretative
                    examination of annotated literary text, in particular with regard to its
                    narrative levels and temporal phenomena.
                The paper is structured as follows: In section 2, we discuss prior work in text
                    visualization, especially for the purpose of literary analysis. Section 3 is
                    dedicated to the narratological principles relevant to our project. The
                    visualization design process and principles are presented in section 4; and
                    section 5 finally demonstrates the heuristic value of the visualization as
                    applied to a test corpus of eight German novellas. In closing, we reflect on the
                    results and discuss directions for future research.
            

                2. Related Work
                With our research we seek to devise a specific visualization technique that
                    emphasizes the particular patterns and characteristics that literary scholars
                    conducting narratological analysis are especially interested in. To consider
                    related research on text visualization, we can differentiate between three main
                    approaches: 
                        Gaining an overview over structural features of an entire
                            story,
                        Studying features and qualities of individual text passages,
                            and
                        Shifting back and forth between individual passages and the whole
                            text.
                     While the specific structures and qualities may differ, these approaches
                    apply more generally to many areas of text analysis and literary studies. The
                    potential of text visualization for the purpose of literary and linguistic
                    analysis has already been shown multiple times (e.g., ). We briefly discuss prior work as it relates to
                    our objective to support narratological analysis.
                Many text visualizations focus on the syntactic or lexical structure of a
                    document to provide a visual overview comprised of patterns and relationships.
                    The most commonly and casually used text visualization is the tag cloud, in
                    which the varying font sizes indicate word frequency . The common criticism that tag clouds decontextualize the displayed words
                    can be (somewhat) addressed through interactive arrangements  and the integration of a keyword-in-context views
                        (kwic, ) or a word
                        tree, a hierarchical text visualization resembling a dynamic
                    concordance . The phrase
                        net technique relies on networks to show syntactic and
                    user-defined relations between words in a text .
                    Manually annotated text corpora can also be visualized at relatively high level,
                    with the resulting views appearing far removed from the underlying documents and
                    passages .
                While a given text visualization technique may focus on a particular linguistic
                    or literary category, a range of visualization environments demonstrate the
                    potential of multiple views for multi-faceted text analysis ; . Close
                    collaborations among visualization and literature scholars can yield highly
                    specific representations for data sets and tasks . For example, the Speculative W@nderverse
                    features a multi-view interface that incorporates hierarchical, temporal, and
                    material qualities of a unique literature collection. Building on this line of
                    work, we seek to devise a visualization technique particularly pertaining to
                    narratological features that can range from single words to multiple pages.
                Especially with regard to the analysis of narrative levels it is important to
                    preserve the original order of the text and being able to scrutinize different
                    levels in their surrounding context. When considering these two requirements,
                    there are two kinds of text structure visualizations to consider: visualizations
                    of narrative or plot. In either case, most of these visualizations are based on
                    character interactions in different scenes in drama or movie scripts, which can
                    automatically be extracted as they are well-structured. In 2009, several
                    hand-crafted visualizations appeared on the webcomic xkcd to show character
                    interactions in popular Hollywood movies . This
                    visualization known as storylines has shown to be very popular, not only among
                    the webcomic’s audience, but also in the information visualization community.
                    There are a number of works building on this visualization style and trying to
                    turn it into generative visualization algorithms (,
                        , ). While these
                    techniques are highly relevant for our work, we are particularly interested to
                    examine the hierarchical and temporal characteristics in the progression of the
                    narrative. The storylines technique has been extended to include the
                    representation of non-linear story developments by arranging sessions (events)
                    as layers on a hierarchical circular layout . While
                    resembling our visualization in appearance, the hierarchical layer position does
                    not reflect narrative level, nor story, but is calculated based on the length of
                    sessions and a space-compression algorithm. In contrast to the aforementioned
                    visualizations, the story curves interface allows scholars to compare different
                    narrative features and relate narrative order and chronological order of events
                        . In addition to the representation of order, we
                    seek to find an adequate representation for temporal duration and frequency.

                The term close reading describes the traditional scholarly
                    way of interpreting a text by reading it repeatedly, underlining or highlighting
                    text passages, and registering observations in the margin of a book page.
                    Depending on the type of text and its context, attempts to translate this
                    activity to the digital realm have more or less resulted in views reproducing
                    the analog context , .
                    There are certain use cases, like the analysis of poems, in which scholars study
                    structural or sonic features on the word or sentence level , . For the purpose
                    of narratological analysis of short stories and novels, a combination of a
                    simple close reading view and an overview visualization may be more
                    appropriate.
                A recent survey of text visualization techniques for close and distant reading
                    shows that the number of works that combine both perspectives is increasing
                        . On the one hand, the ability to swiftly
                    move from an overview visualization to a close reading view seems to align with
                    the workflows of humanities scholars. On the other hand, this duality is an
                    application of the longstanding visualization truism 
                        Overview first, zoom and filter,
                            details-on-demand
                        
                    . However, only few text visualizations fully support deliberate shifts
                    between distant and close reading views. One exception is
                    VarifocalReader, an interface that offers multiple levels of abstraction
                    of scanned and transcribed text .
                In sum, while there is a great variety of text visualizations designed to support
                    a sense of overview and allow for comparison of textual structures, research on
                    visualization interfaces that support the continuous switching between close and
                    distant levels is still scarce. Furthermore, existing visualizations of
                    narrative structures remain fairly limited and fail to reveal more nuanced
                    narratological features.
            

                3. On Narratological Analysis
                This section is dedicated to elaborating the analysis tasks and data structures
                    that are common in narratological analysis of literary texts, more specifically,
                    the analysis of the narrative level structure and the temporal representation in
                    these texts. The data used for this research was generated in a
                    computer-assisted, collaborative annotation approach.
               
                
                    3.1 Narratological Analysis
                    One of the main objectives of literary studies is to develop plausible and
                        innovative interpretations of literary texts. In a first approach to
                        interpreting literary narratives, it can be helpful to start with a
                        narratological analysis of the text. Narratology is widely regarded to
                        provide analytic categories that allow for a systematic, detailed, and often
                        intersubjective description of narratives. These descriptions can then serve
                        as a heuristic for interpretation : They point
                        out interesting structural or thematic features of the texts – and one
                        important objective of interpreting the text may lie in finding an
                        explanation of why the text exhibits these particular features.
                    Since narratological analyses are considered a heuristic tool, literary
                        scholars need a way to fruitfully explore these analyses so that they can
                        develop interpretation hypotheses from them. Such an exploration, however,
                        is complicated by the fact that narratological analyses can get very complex
                        and fine-grained – and they are usually scattered throughout the (sometimes
                        rather long) texts, which makes it difficult to get an adequate overview. If
                        the analysis is aimed at comparing different narrative texts across a
                        corpus, its exploration becomes even more difficult.
                    The special challenge for literary scholars developing interpretations with
                        the help of narratological analyses then lies in being able to switch back
                        and forth between an explorative overview over their analysis results and a
                        close view on individual text passages that seem especially interesting and
                        require a more thorough examination. This iterative process of oscillating
                        between part of the text and the text as a whole is a characteristic feature
                        of hermeneutic text understanding and has been described as the hermeneutic
                        circle , 
                        or hermeneutic spiral  in literary theory.
                    In the following, we discuss the specific characteristics of the two
                        narrative phenomena our research focuses on: narrative levels and temporal
                        aspects of narrative representation.
                
                
                
                    3.2 Narrative Levels
                    The term narrative level refers to the phenomenon of embedded
                        narrations that can occur within the ‘frame narration’ of a literary
                        text.
                    The concept of narrative level is special in at least two respects: 
                            Narrative level is an especially important and basic
                                narratological concept insofar as the segmentation of a text
                                according to narrative levels as well as the classification of each
                                level heavily influences the analysis of many other narrative
                                phenomena. To analyze a narration according to its narrative level
                                structure is thus well-suited as a first explorative step with which
                                to start a narratological analysis.
                            Though basic, the narrative level concept is a very complex
                                narratological category. Narrative levels may occur multiply nested
                                and can be distinguished according to a multitude of parameters. The
                                complexity of the phenomenon poses a challenge for a heuristically
                                powerful visualization concept.
                        
                    
                    According to Ryan’s account , the most basic narrative in a text constitutes the
                        primary narration. New, embedded narrative levels can then occur within this
                        primary narration, where they constitute so-called secondary narrations. If
                        new, embedded narrations then emerge from a secondary level, they are called
                        tertiary narrations – and so on. The degree of embedding (primary,
                        secondary, tertiary etc.) is one crucial parameter to consider in narrative
                        level analyses.
                    A new, embedded narrative level occurs whenever an illocutionary or an
                        ontological boundary is crossed. An illocutionary boundary is crossed
                        whenever a new, embedded speaker or narrator occurs, e.g., when a character
                        in the text rises to speakA special case of illocutionary boundary
                            crossing happens when a narrator who retrospectively tells a story in
                            which he or she features as a character quotes his or her
                                previous self: the
                                narrated or experiencing
                            I.. An ontological boundary, on the other hand, is
                        crossed whenever a new system of reality or world
                        occurs in a narration. This is, for example, the case when an entirely new
                        fictional world is narrated in a text – but also if a narrative contains
                        other kinds of non-actual passages, like hopes, dreams,
                        wishes, illusions, etc. Since illocutionary and ontological boundary
                        crossings can occur in combination, but also independently of each other,
                        this makes for three possible combinations: 
                            illocutionary and ontological boundary crossed;
                            illocutionary boundary crossed, ontological boundary not
                                crossed;
                            illocutionary boundary not crossed, ontological boundary
                                crossed.
                        
                    
                    The narrative level analysis is further complicated by the fact that both
                        types of boundaries can be crossed in two different modes: either actually
                        or virtually. In the case of illocutionary boundaries, an actual crossing
                        occurs whenever the utterance of a new speaker/narrator is quoted directly –
                        a virtual crossing, on the other hand, occurs when the new speaker’s
                        utterance is presented in indirect speech. In the case of ontological
                        boundary transgressions, an actual crossing occurs whenever the new,
                        embedded world is presented as new reality. Virtual crossings, on the other
                        hand, occur when the text contains constant reminders of the counterfactual
                        status of the new, embedded world. If we now consider both the type of
                        boundary that is crossed (illocutionary or ontological) and the mode of the
                        crossing (actual or virtual), this now makes for eight possible combinations
                            (Fig. 2).Ryan herself does not
                            account for the whole extent of this complexity: In her listing of
                            possible combinations, she fails to mention cases 2 and 4, without
                            providing arguments for excluding these cases .
                    As becomes immediately clear, a thorough narrative level analysis has to
                        account for so many different parameters (distribution, degree of embedding,
                        narrator, type of crossed boundary, mode of boundary crossing) that it is
                        very challenging to get an adequate overview of all relevant parameters in
                        one representation. 
                            Possible combinations of types and modes of boundary
                                crossings.
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                
                    3.3 Temporal Aspects of Narrative Representation
                    As we mentioned earlier, narrative level analyses directly influence a number
                        of further narratological analyses – even some of the presumably basic and
                        straightforward ones. We would like to illustrate this by taking temporal
                        narratological analysis as an example. According to Genette , the temporal structure of narratives can be
                        analyzed according to three categories: order (is the story presented
                        chronologically or not?), frequency (how often are the events of the story
                        narrated?), and duration (how long does the narration of the story events
                        take?).
                    Now, there are two interesting ways in which an analysis of the narrative
                        level structure of a text and a temporal analysis relate to each other: 
                            As detailed in , the
                                analysis of narrative levels influences the temporal analysis in
                                such a way that a thorough and reasonable temporal analysis is only
                                possible if it is preceded by a narrative level analysis.
                            There are a number of potentially interesting questions concerning
                                the correlation between narrative levels and temporal aspects: (a)
                                Analepses (flashes back in time) and prolepses (flashes forward
                                in time, 
                                can either be presented by a primary narrator who thus deliberately
                                holds an organizing function – or the primary narrator can
                                delegate the navigation through time to secondary narrators. (b)
                                In the case of repetitively narrated events, it can be useful to
                                analyze whether these reports can be attributed to the same narrator
                                or whether different narrators contribute their perspective on the
                                relevant event. Also, if the different accounts of the same event
                                are distributed across narrative levels, it might be interesting to
                                check whether accounts on deeper embedded levels – due to their
                                being mediated around several corners – are less reliable. (c) As
                                for the analysis of duration, it might be a worthwhile task to
                                explore whether there are significant occurrences between embedded
                                narrative levels and either of the three duration categories
                                (isochrony, summary, or scene).
                        
                    
                
                
                
                        3.4 Collaborative Annotations as a Test Bed for Visualization
                        To carry out narratological exploration, it is first necessary to find a
                            way of recording or documenting the analysis results. An especially
                            effective way of doing this is via computer-aided, taxonomy-based
                            annotation: With the help of programs like CATMA , narratological categories can be organized
                            into hierarchically structured tagsets, and a theoretically unlimited
                            number of categories can be assigned to individual text passages.
                            Computer-aided text annotation has the additional advantage that
                            literary scholars are encouraged to read the text very carefully (i.e.,
                            close reading). The benefits of annotation can be increased if different
                            scholars are working on them collaboratively: By discussing their
                            annotations – especially in the case of disagreement – the collaborating
                            scholars can refine their annotation decisions, test definitions of
                            narratological categories, and identify relevant relations between
                            different narrative phenomena .
                        The data we use in this paper is indeed annotation data that was created
                            in the computer-aided, collaborative annotation project heureCLÉA
                            (2013–2016, ). The text corpus for the project
                            was constituted of 21 German short stories by different authors from and
                            around the 19th century. The tagset that was used to conduct the
                            annotations  first consisted of basic
                            linguistic temporal categories as well as Genette’s narratological
                            temporal categories, and was soon enhanced to include a subtagset for
                            the analysis of narrative levels as the influence between the two
                            phenomena became obvious in the annotation process.
                        Concerning the temporal subtagsets used in the project, only the ones
                            comprising Genette’s categories order, frequency, and duration – and
                            only the basic tags corresponding to these categories – are pertinent
                            for the Narrelations visualization. Since these basic tags and their
                            application is rather straightforward, we will not go into further
                            detail here Details can be found in .. The annotation schema for
                            narrative levels, however, is more complex and requires further
                            description. 
                                The narrative level tagset.
                                
                             The tagset for the annotation of narrative levels (Fig. 3) comprises five tags defining the
                            degree of embedding (primary narration, secondary narration, etc.). In
                            the rare case that deeper degrees of embedding occur, additional tags
                            can be added. Usually, the narrative text as a whole is annotated with
                            the primary narration tag. Whenever, within a primary narration, a
                            passage constituting an embedded narration occurs, it is annotated as
                            secondary narration, etc. For example, in Frank Wedekind’s Die Schutzimpfung, the primary narration (Fig.
                            4, gray underline) is conducted by a homodiegetic narrator. After a
                            short introduction, a secondary embedded narration (salmon underline)
                            occurs. 
                                Annotating narrative levels (as displayed in CATMA).
                                
                             Each tag of the narrative levels tagset, starting from
                            secondary narration, includes two predefined properties (illocutionary
                            boundary and ontological boundary), each with three possible values
                            (actually crossed, virtually crossed, not crossed). These properties and
                            values are used to document the type and mode of boundary crossing that
                            constitutes the new narrative level. For example, the first embedded
                            narration in Die Schutzimpfung is constituted by one of the narrated
                            characters, Fanny, becoming a narrator. As can be seen in the bottom
                            right area (Fig. 4), the value for
                            illocutionary boundary is set to actually crossed since Fanny functions
                            as embedded narrator and is directly quoted, and the value for
                            ontological boundary is set to not crossed since Fanny’s utterance
                            concerns the same world as the primary narration.
                        Every text was annotated by at least two annotators in the course of an
                            iterative process  – the annotated corpus can be accessed online . While the task of developing an automated
                            annotation functionality from the annotation data yielded fruitful
                                results,Automated annotation functionalities for tense and
                                temporal signals are already available in the current CATMA version
                                    (www.catma.de), the
                                functionality to automatically identify order phenomena will be
                                implemented in the course of 2019, and an automated annotation of
                                frequency phenomena has been found to be feasible as well.
                            the narratological analysis data created in the project has not yet been
                            evaluated to find out more about the texts of the test corpus in the
                            context of interpretations. The visualization presented in this paper
                            paves the way to tackle this interesting task.
                    
                

                4. Visualizing Narrative Levels in Correlation with Temporal Phenomena                    
                    Narratological analysis poses an intriguing research area for information
                        visualization as it requires the examination of a dataset at multiple scales
                        and from multiple viewpoints. Building on the specific practices of literary
                        scholars who pursue narratology and the particular data structures involved,
                        we aim to conceive a visualization technique that is specifically suited for
                        narratological analysis, i.e., it enables the informative examination of
                        narrative levels along multiple analytical categories in relation to
                        multiple temporal phenomena. Building on the preceding domain
                        characterization of narratological analysis, we hope to address the
                        following specific design goals: 
                            Create overview of narrative levels. A visualization designed for
                                narratological analysis should primarily provide an overview of the
                                nesting and distribution of narrative levels forming the essential
                                structure of every story. Facilitating access to this complex
                                narratological topic through visual representation may provide new
                                insights into the mechanisms of storytelling and show hidden
                                patterns to literary scholars.
                            Reveal temporal aspects linked with narrative levels. An important
                                aspect of nested narrations in stories is their temporal order,
                                frequency, and duration in relation to the events they narrate.
                                Scholars of narratology need to inspect the correlations between the
                                narrative levels and temporal phenomena to perform the appraisal of
                                the multi-layered structures of narration in stories. The integrated
                                representation of narrative levels and temporal aspects may foster a
                                deeper understanding of narrative structures.
                            Couple visual analysis with text reading. The high-level analysis
                                of an entire text through the use of visualization (distant reading)
                                should be as integrated as possible with the close inspection of
                                specific text passages (close reading). The visualization should
                                support the scholar to shift between these modes of analysis to
                                encourage discoveries of patterns at different granularities.
                            Enable focus on specific annotations. A visualization of multiple
                                structural and temporal aspects of narrative levels may be visually
                                complex and overwhelming. In order to support the focused analysis
                                of specific narrative phenomena, interactive mechanisms should be
                                provided that allow for the filtering of annotations along
                                meaningful narratological categories.
                         These design goals (DGs 1–4) provide a set of guiding principles for
                        an iterative and collaborative design process carried out in an
                        interdisciplinary team consisting of interface designers, visualization
                        developers, and literary scholars. Next, we summarize the design process,
                        after which we present the resulting visualization and the findings from a
                        usability test.                
                
                    4.1 Design Process
                    The entire research approach and design process – from devising initial
                        visualization ideas and refining design concepts to developing a functional
                        prototype and evaluating the epistemic potential of the resulting
                        visualization – was iterative and collaborative. Since our aim was to
                        develop a visualization suitable for narratological analysis, a fruitful
                        exchange of knowledge ensued between visualization research and literary
                        studies. The process was also characterized by the constant interplay of
                        designing and evaluating visual representations. 
                            First sketches and visual approaches dealing with the topic of
                                narrative levels suggest a circular layout for nesting and relating
                                different narrative levels.
                            
                        
                
                
                    4.1.1 Speculative Sketches
                    Due to the complexity of narratological analyses of literary texts we set up
                        a co-creation workshop  bringing together
                        students and researchers of design and literature. The aim was to encourage
                        participants (incl. ourselves) to approach and examine stories in
                        unconventional ways that go beyond the linearity of printed text and the
                        rigidity of existing text analysis software. A range of crafting materials
                        and tools (such as threads, stickers, paper sheets, Post-Its, pens, glue
                        etc.) was provided to creatively work with printed texts and arrange them as
                        figured fragments into collages or sketches. In this way, we used visual
                        means of low complexity to devise and discuss abstract ideas and approaches
                        to narrative. While the main categories of narratological analysis provided
                        an important backdrop for this exercise, we avoided thinking too
                        specifically about designing an interface. Instead, the aim was to create a
                        casual approach to the complex topic of visualizing literary narratives, to
                        tease out new ideas and perspectives in a visual way, and to gauge the
                        potential for visual representations of text. During the presentation of the
                        first speculative sketches (see Fig.
                        5), the initial feedback suggested that the circular form of the
                        visualization could support the examination of narrative levels in
                        combination with temporal aspects. 
                            Further development of concept sketches based on provided
                                annotations of the short story Lili.
                            
                        
                
                
                    4.1.2 Plausible Mock-Up
                    By providing the annotated short stories of the heureCLÉA project it was
                        possible to develop a visualization design that relied on actual data (see Fig. 6). To start working with a specific
                        text, we chose the short story Lili by the
                        German author Johannes Proelß (1883), with which we continued working on
                        throughout the next steps. With specific attention to the narratological
                        concepts, we further developed the design concept and visual encoding, which
                        was followed by feedback including suggestions for modification and
                        improvements from a literary point of view, which was again followed by a
                        revision and adaption of the design. 
                            Screenshots of animations demonstrating the interface and general
                                interaction capabilities.
                            
                         In further steps, the focus was put on developing interaction
                        capabilities for the visual implementations of the narratological concepts.
                        In order to devise and explore different interaction capabilities we created
                        animations demonstrating them and the subsequent display changes (see Fig. 7).
                
                
                    4.1.3 Functional Prototype
                    Following positive expert evaluations from the literary scholars of the team,
                        the next step was to develop a web-based prototype in order to visualize
                        different data sets (i.e., annotated stories), refine the interface and
                        interaction capabilities, and more extensively test the potential of the
                        visualization. Furthermore, the prototype allows for a narratological
                        comparison of several short stories, which will be discussed in detail in
                        section 5.
                
                
                    4.1.4 Usability Evaluation
                    To better understand how comprehensible and accessible the visualization
                        would be for other literary scholars beyond our team, we conducted a
                        usability test with an external group of potential users. A usability test
                        helps to uncover issues, which can subsequently be analyzed to identify
                        their causes and inform the refinement of the interface. We performed the
                        test with five researchers and students in literary studies and one cultural
                        scholar. After a few questions about the participants’ professional
                        background and a brief explanation of narratological concepts, the main part
                        consisted of the participants’ description of first impressions of the tool
                        and nine tasks to be solved with the help of the interactive visualization.
                        We used the thinking-aloud method , during which
                        participants articulate their actions, thoughts, and opinions aloud while
                        using an interface. After the test, we requested more information from the
                        participants about their experiences and the problems during the test in the
                        form of a semi-structured interview and questionnaire. The participants
                        shared general feedback about the overall concept behind the visualization
                        as well as specific suggestions for improvement. The main statements of the
                        feedback were documented in written notes and the screen activities and the
                        audio were recorded. We analyzed these observations by organizing them into
                        different categories (e.g., wording, interaction, visual encoding, interface
                        design) and subject areas (e.g., overall arrangement, text area).
                
                
                
                    
                        4.2 Visual Encoding and Interaction Capabilities
                    
                            The interface consists of a text area (left), a set of filters
                                (right), and a circular visualization representing narrative levels
                                and temporal phenomena (center).
                            
                         
                        The interface of the Narrelations visualization is subdivided into
                        three main areas: text, visualization, and filters (see Fig. 8). The text area on the left side provides access to
                        the entire story in a scrollable area. In order to load in other short
                        stories, an import function above the text area is embedded. On the right
                        side, a set of filters allow for the selection of specific narrators and
                        narratological categories. In the center of the interface, a circular
                        visualization of the text represents the two main narratological aspects a
                        given story: the circle lines are used for the representation of narrative
                        levels and the circle interior for the temporal phenomena. 
                    
                
                
                    4.2.1 Encircling Narrative Levels and Temporal Phenomena
                    Since the initial sketches, we explored the viability of a circular
                        representation of the entire text to provide a compact overview of the
                        different narration levels and related phenomena (DG1). This visual
                        structure has repeatedly led to approval and agreement from the literary
                        scholars in our team, in particular due to the ability to display and
                        examine complex temporal phenomena of a story in correspondence with the
                        embedded narrations (DG2).
                    
                            Each circle line represents one narrative level and each thick and
                                colored element on the lines indicates one embedded narration
                                segment. Every speaker (narrator) is displayed in a distinct color.
                                The inner circle line with gray rectangles visualizes the analepses
                                and prolepses.
                            
                        
                    The visualization is read in clockwise direction. Each circle line represents
                        one narrative level: The inner circle with the many blue elements visualizes
                        the primary narrative level, the slightly larger circle denotes the
                        secondary narrative level, and so forth. Each colored element on the these
                        circle lines represents one embedded narration segment (see Fig. 9). The
                        length of one colored element is to scale to the length of the embedded
                        narration (unit: characters). Each color represent one particular speaker.
                        The list of speakers in the filter area is doubling as a legend showing at a
                        glance the number of speakers. The interior of the circle provides space for
                        the examination of three temporal aspects: order, frequency, and
                        duration.
                    The inner circle line with gray rectangles represents the temporal phenomenon
                            order. Rectangles pointing outwards indicate
                        prolepses (flashes forward), rectangles pointing
                        inwards the analepses (flashes backward). Akin to the
                        embedded narrations, the length of the rectangles are to scale to the length
                        of the respective text segments. By visualizing this phenomenon on another
                        circle line, the connections and correlations between the
                        analepses/prolepses and the embedded narrations can be viewed at a glance.
                            
                            Repetitively narrated events are visualized by bubbles in the
                                circle interior and lines connect them with the embedded narrations
                                in which they occur.
                            
                         The repetitively narrated events are visualized by small circles
                        (bubbles) in the circle’s interior and lines connect them with the embedded
                        narrations in which they occur. This visual encoding should enable the quick
                        recognition of how many repetitively narrated events exist in the story (see
                        Fig. 10). The size of one bubble demonstrates the number of reports of one
                        repetitively narrated event, the position is determined by a force-directed
                        layout that places the event bubbles closer to the narration segments in
                        which they occur. In addition, a report of a repetitively narrated event is
                        marked by a dark gray, slightly transparent element within the embedded
                        narration. The length of this mark is to scale to the length of the report
                        of the narrated event (unit: characters). Repetitively narrated events are
                        actions that happen once but are told several times within a story.
                        Therefore the highlighting of multiple reports of one event is important for
                        generating narratological insights and again for identifying the relations
                        with embedded narrations. 
                            Patterns in a bright gray in the background of the visualization
                                represent the annotations of the phenomenon
                                    duration (scenes,
                                    summaries and
                                    isochronies).
                            
                         The third temporal phenomenon that can be examined in the
                        visualization is duration, which is represented as
                        bright gray, fine-grained dot patterns in the background of the circular
                        visualization (see Fig. 11). We encoded
                        different duration categories as the density of the dots. Since the
                            scenes are passages in which the time of narrating
                        is longer than the time it took for the narrated events to happen it can be
                        considered as a stretching of time. This aspect of stretching is translated
                        into the visual form of a pattern consisting of dots that repel each other
                        creating a lot of space between them, thus the pattern with the fewest dots
                        visualizes the annotation scene.
                            Summaries represent a compression of time. Visually
                        translated they are accordingly represented by the pattern with the most
                        dots. The isochronies are displayed as a dot pattern
                        with a visual density approximately between the two other duration
                        categories. Within the filter, which is working as a legend again, all
                        patterns are assigned to the three mentioned categories of
                            duration.
                
                
                    4.2.2 Interactive Reading: Scroll, Hover, Select, Filter
                    The interaction techniques of the Narrelations interface are designed to
                        support close reading and high-level analysis of stories (DG3) as well as
                        the focused examination of narration elements and narratological categories
                        (DG4). 
                            Filtering speakers, type and mode of level transgressions enables
                                a focus on specific annotations. Hovering over an embedded narration
                                displays detailed information. Clicking on an embedded narration
                                either in the text (left) or in the visualization (center) locks
                                this segment.
                            
                         Hovering over narration elements in the visualization opens a
                        small pop-up window with detailed information about the embedded narration:
                        speaker, type and mode of transgression (see Fig.
                            12). In addition, the text area scrolls to the corresponding text
                        passage, which is marked by an underlining matching the color of the
                        respective speaker. This coupling between visualization and text also works
                        in reverse. With these interactions and visual supports we want to
                        facilitate the coupling of visual analysis and text reading.
                    There are also two possibilities to select and lock an embedded narration.
                        Either by clicking on a narration element in the visualization or by
                        clicking on a text passage in the text area. The text of the selected
                        passage is subsequently highlighted with a bold underline and marked with a
                        black border in the visualization. An additional click selection of the
                        locked passage/element, releases the lock again. For the purpose of
                        comparative analysis of several embedded narrations, it is possible to lock
                        multiple text passages and elements, which can be released at once by
                        clicking on the reset button in the lower left corner of the interface.
                    By selecting the respective filter, one can focus on embedded narrations by a
                        specific speaker (see Fig. 12). In order to
                        keep a clear interface, all the passages and elements that do not pertain to
                        the respective speaker are displayed in a bright shade of gray. Filter
                        selections also allow for the focused consideration of embedded narrations
                        with a certain type and mode of level transgression. There are eight
                        possible combinations for types and modes of boundary crossings (see Fig. 2), which can be selected as filters.
                        The embedded narrations that do not have the selected type and mode of
                        transgression are displayed in a bright shade of gray, both in the text area
                        and the visualization.
                    The third general function of the filter is the addition of the temporal
                        aspects of narrative representation order,
                            frequency (repetitive), and
                            duration. Only one of the three temporal phenomena
                        can be selected at a time. Within order and
                            duration, additional selections can be made (see Fig. 9 and 11). When selecting one of the phenomena only the embedded
                        narrations, in which the selected category occurs, retain their opacity and
                        color to ensure the focus and support a quick identification of which
                        passages and elements are relevant for the narratological analysis.
                
                    
                
                    4.3 Findings of Usability Test
                    While the reactions of all participants of the usability test were favorable,
                        with several of them expressing interest in using such a tool for their
                        research, the test helped identify several interaction issues.
                    Four out of the six participants found it difficult to compare two different
                        embedded narrations in the text view: Once a text passage is locked the text
                        does not automatically scroll to the second text passage when hovering over
                        the corresponding embedded narration in the visualization. This fact often
                        led to confusion and distracted the participants since it is subsequently
                        necessary to manually scroll to reach the second text passage or unlock both
                        embedded narrations first in order to hover over the second embedded
                        narration again.
                    Several confusions related to the consistency of selection interactions. For
                        example, most participants were confused about selecting and locking certain
                        annotations of the temporal phenomena by clicking on them as is the case
                        with the embedded narrations. Four out of six test persons tried to click on
                        the elements representing the analepses/prolepses and repetitvely narrated
                        events, which in the current version of the interface do not provide an
                        additional interactive capability.
                    Furthermore there were issues with the interaction concerning the
                        repetitively narrated events in the visualization and text view: By hovering
                        over a bubble representing a repetitively narrated event, the viewer can
                        only see one report in the text area. No participant understood how to
                        display the other instances of this event in the text view; multiple click
                        selections would not cycle through the corresponding text passages. In
                        addition, they clicked on the dark gray mark within an embedded narration
                        representing one report of a repetitively narrated event in order to get to
                        this instance in the text, however, this interaction has not been
                        implemented yet.
                    When the participants had the task to search for a particular text passage
                        they missed an integrated search function within the text area, which allows
                        them to look for specific words, sentences etc. (despite the fact that the
                        browser’s built-in search function can be used for this purpose).
                
            

                5. Merits for Literary Analysis and Interpretation
                As observed during the usability test, the participants are free to choose their
                    own preferred workflow when interacting with the text. The most common path of
                    using the visualization for literary exploration and interpretation will
                    probably start with the more abstract visual analysis provided by the general
                    overview, then proceed to identifying interesting phenomena/correlations
                        (what stands out?), and finally switch to a more detailed
                    investigation of passages in the text view. This procedure can be iterated to
                    the scholar’s liking. In the following, we will illustrate this
                    path in more detail in two steps. After some explorative observations on the narratological
                    features of eight German novellas, we will pursue the advanced interpretation of
                    three of them in a close reading and contextualization.
                Our selected narratives are eight German short stories which were written and
                    published in the 19th century. Most of the eight short stories can be classified
                    as German novella, which is a written fictional text of “indeterminate length”
                         in prosaic form. The
                    content structure of the German novella is often “restricted to a single event,
                    situation or conflict, which produces an element of suspense and leads to an
                    unexpected turning point (Wendepunkt) so that the conclusion surprises even
                    while it is a logical outcome” . More precisely, the German novella is often devoted to topics
                    which are in conflict with social conventions .
                A specific narrow thematic focus often corresponds with the idea of a concise
                    cutout of an individual life . In relation to its sensational topics, however, the theoretical
                    discourse of the German novella reflects different form issues . One question in the theoretical discourse of the
                    novella is to which degree the topic addressed by the novella relates to a
                    narratological composition , . Especially, in comparison to other literary genres,
                    issues of narrative representation and temporality are more foregrounded in the
                    novella, which seems to be a consequence of its relative brevity coupled with
                    the integration of an unexpected turning point .
                Regarding the scientific discourse on the German novella, the characterization of
                    the novella 
                        has always been very dissatisfying according to
                            traditional genre
                        
                    . As Lubkoll points out, 
                        typical formal and structural features are often too
                            unspecific and mostly remain on the surface, if their function for the
                            (con)text is not reflected adequately
                        
                    .
            
            
                5.1 Explorative Observations
                
                    Juxtaposing narrative visualizations of eight novellas: a) Ludwig Tieck:
                        Der Pokal (1811), b) Friedrich Hebbel: Matteo (1841), c) Theodor Storm:
                        Veronika (1861), d) Bertold Auerbach: Die Kriegspfeife (1863), e) Johannes
                        Proelß: Lili (1883), f) Thomas Mann: Der Tod (1897), g) Maria Janitschek:
                        Poverino (1897), and h) Frank Wedekind: Die Schutzimpfung (1903).
                    
                
                When considering the visualizations of all eight narratives side by side, it is
                    easy to make first observations on how the texts differ from one another with
                    regard to their narrative structure in correlation with temporal phenomena
                        (see Fig. 13): 
                        We can see that some texts show a rather regular
                                distribution (e.g., b) Matteo with many embedded narrations throughout, f) Der Tod and h) Die
                                Schutzimpfung with fewer), while others show irregular
                            patterns (e.g., a) Der Pokal shows
                            comparatively few embedded narrations in the first half of the narrative
                            and many in the second half).
                        When it comes to the length of the embedded narrations,
                            some stories (like b) Matteo) contain
                            hardly any longer chunks of embedded levels, some contain the occasional
                            larger chunk (e.g., a) Der Pokal and d)
                                Die Kriegspfeife, e) Lili, and g) Poverino), while others (e.g., h) Die
                                Schutzimpfung) mostly contain medium to large chunks of
                            embedded levels.
                        If we have a look at the degree of embedding, we can see
                            that only f) Der Tod does not contain any
                            embedded narrations on a tertiary level. And the number of the narrators
                            in a text ranges from very few (e.g., h) Die
                                Schutzimpfung and f) Der Tod)
                            to rather many (g) Poverino) – where Der Tod shows the additional peculiarity that
                            a large proportion of the (longer) embedded level chunks are narrated by
                            a narrator on the primary level.
                            Concerning the types and modes of the boundaries crossed in the embedded narrations, we can see that two of the texts (h) Die Schutzimpfung and c) Veronika) only show one ontological crossing, while others show comparatively many (especially f) Der Tod, considering that there are few embedded narrations in total). What also sticks out is that every tertiary narration in b) Matteo is an ontological crossing.
                    
                
                
                    Visualizing temporal order of four selected novellas: a) Frank Wedekind:
                        Die Schutzimpfung (1903), b) Thomas Mann: Der Tod (1897), and c) Ludwig
                        Tieck: Der Pokal (1811), d) Friedrich Hebbel: Matteo (1841).
                    
                
                If we switch on the display of temporal phenomena, we can also make some
                    interesting observations in the inner ring of the circle visualization (see Fig. 14): Concerning temporal order, basically
                    the whole narration in a) Die Schutzimpfung is an
                    analepsis carried out by the primary narrator (the same goes for Die Kriegspfeife) – and the analepsis is only
                    occasionally interrupted. All embedded narrations occur within the scope of the
                    analepsis. Both a) Die Schutzimpfung and b) Der Tod also show comparably many prolepses – while
                     c) Der Pokal is particularly noteworthy having
                    one longer analepsis in the beginning, but many short ones in the second half
                    correlating with embedded narrations. Other texts, especially d) Matteo, only contain comparably few and short
                    analepses. 
                        The frequency of event narrations is represented by the size of
                            bubbles in the inner circle, with only one event in a) Frank Wedekind:
                            Die Schutzimpfung (1903), many events with multiple instances in b)
                            Ludwig Tieck: Der Pokal (1811) and four events in c) Friedrich Hebbel:
                            Matteo (1841).
                        
                     When it comes to frequency, two extremes can be observed (see Fig. 15): On the one hand, we have a) Die Schutzimpfung with only one repetitively narrated
                    event (narrated twice be different embedded narrators); on the other hand, there
                    is b) Der Pokal with 14 repetitively narrated
                    events (some of them four times), with most of them occurring in the last two
                    thirds of the narrative, which is indicated by the positioning of the bubbles
                    towards the left and lower side of the circle. Another text that shows a
                    noteworthy distribution of frequency phenomena is c) Matteo: Here, we have four events that are narrated twice, and each
                    repetition occurs very shortly after the initial reporting of the events.
                        
                        The duration of event narrations is visualized as textures with
                            different granularities: a) Frank Wedekind: Die Schutzimpfung (1903), b)
                            Ludwig Tieck: Der Pokal (1811) and c) Friedrich Hebbel: Matteo
                            (1841).
                        
                     As for duration, we can observe in Fig.
                        16 that a) Die Schutzimpfung (like Die Kriegspfeife) starts and ends with isochronous
                    passages on the primary level, while in b) Der
                        Pokal, a stretching of time shortly after the beginning stands out.
                    In c) Matteo, there are relatively many medium to
                    large summary chunks throughout the whole text, interrupted every now and then
                    by passages of isochronic and scenic narration of the same length.
            
            
                5.2 Interpretation via Close Reading and Contextualization
                After having provided a selected description of the patterns visible in the
                    Narrelations interface, the next step is now to investigate whether and, if so,
                    in which way these observations can be related to other formal, content-related,
                    or contextual features of the narratives. While some of the observations point
                    out methodological choices that were made during the annotation
                        process,Two examples should be mentioned in this context: (1) In the
                        heureCLÉA project, a rather wide concept of embedded narrative levels via
                        illocutionary crossing was applied: A new level occurs whenever a character
                        in the story rises to speak. This choice explains why some visualizations
                        (e.g., the one for Matteo, see Fig. 13) show so many micro level
                            chunks with alternating narrators: they simply show passages of
                        quoted dialogue. Embedded narrations (via illocutionary crossing) in the
                        narrower sense are represented by larger level chunks. (2) As we can see,
                        for example, for Die Schutzimpfung, passages of
                        quoted speech (actual crossings of illocutionary boundaries in embedded
                        levels) always correlate with isochronous narration. This is due to the
                        fact that in heureCLÉA, duration was only annotated on the primary narrative
                        level. The duration annotations and their visualizations thus only show how
                        characters’ speech acts are narrated – but we cannot make any observations
                        concerning the duration of what is told by the characters in the embedded
                        levels. we would like to demonstrate the heuristic value of the
                    visualization by providing three exemplary text analyses and interpretations of
                    narrative structures of varying complexity – the selected novellas are Die Schutzimpfung, Der
                        Tod, and Matteo.
           
            
                5.2.1 Die Schutzimpfung
                The novella Die Schutzimpfung by Frank Wedekind is
                    about a vaccination as a psychological trick a wife employs to prevent
                    her husband from suspecting her infidelity. As we already gain from the overview
                    of Die Schutzimpfung (see
                        Fig. 13, h), the visualization illustrates the structural principle of
                        frame narration, which is a common genre characteristic of the German
                    novella that functions as a bracket around the actual story conveyed in a
                    text. While the border between frame and inner narration can generally be
                    constituted by a persistent boundary crossing, this is not the case for Die Schutzimpfung. As the visualization (coupled with
                    a close reading of the relevant switching passages) shows, it is actually
                    a large – and only occasionally interrupted – analepsis that marks the relevant
                    border between frame and inner narration (see Fig. 14,
                        a). This means that the primary (or frame) narrator of Die Schutzimpfung is also the one narrating the inner,
                        actual story in retrospect. The function of the frame narration in
                        Die Schutzimpfung is to make the narrator’s act
                    of telling explicit . The frame narration of Die
                        Schutzimpfung can be characterized as a conversational frame, in
                    which the narrator introduces the audience to the newsworthy 
                        tellability
                        
                     of a certain psychological oddity, the vaccination.The
                        narrator in Die Kriegspfeife, which is also
                        structured in terms of frame and inner narration, equally points out the
                        outrageousness of the narrated event, e.g. eine ganz
                            absonderliche Geschichte. Raising the interest of the
                    audience involves in Die Schutzimpfung a didactic
                    and moral intent, which seems to cover the sexual sensational content of the
                    story.
                In the context of the frame and inner narration structure of Die Schutzimpfung,
                    both these interruptions as well as the passages before and after the large
                    inner narration can be classified as instances of metanarration .
                            Metanarration and metafiction are umbrella terms
                                designating self-reflexive utterances, i.e. comments referring to
                                the discourse rather than to the story
                        	
                        . Especially significant are the first two longer chunks of
                    interruptions in Die Schutzimpfung. These metanarrative comments appear before
                    and after insinuating content is narrated, e.g., the nudity of a woman. The
                    narrator claims that the insinuating content is not narrated to amuse the
                    audience, but rather to provide proof for the surprising ways of human
                    behavior.
                In addition to this, the visualization shows that the metanarrative comments tend
                    to correlate with stretchings of time. In this particular context a dash
                        –, which suggests a pause before narrating the sensational content,
                    is used: – Sie entledigt sich auch der letzten Hülle und
                        gesellt sich zu mir. (She gets rid of her last
                        piece of clothing and joins me). Regarding the duration
                    phenomena for the whole narration, Die
                        Schutzimpfung seems to play with the tension between hastening and
                    slowness, which can, on the one hand, be regarded as analogy to the sexual
                    tension between the two lovers. On the other hand, it has an impact on the
                    affective and attentive dimension of the text between the narrator and the
                    audience. The hesitation of narrating in correlation with the change of duration
                    also creates an ironic tone. Moreover, with respect to the
                        frequency phenomena (see Fig.
                    15), it seems that the visualization reveals the unexpected ironic turning
                    point of the novella. The event without precedent, i.e., the wife openly
                    telling her husband that she is in love with another man, is narrated twice – by
                    an embedded narrator (the wife) in the first part of the text, and by a second
                    embedded narrator (her husband) in the last part of the text.
                As this short interpretative approach demonstrates, the visualization – coupled
                    with close reading – both points out some significant correlations between the
                    narrative levels and temporal phenomena, and elicits a critical reflection on a
                    genre specific issue, i.e., the covering of the sensational content with a
                    specific narrative and temporal structure.
            
            
                5.2.2 Der Tod
                The visual exploration of Thomas Mann’s Der Tod
                    (1897) invites an interpretation of both form and content that pays particular
                    attention to the interdependencies between the concepts for temporal analysis
                    and narrative levels. As we can see at a glance in Fig.
                        13 (f), this novella appears with only two narrative levels and only a
                    few embedded narrations as outliers. Der Tod consists of 14 journal entries made
                    by a count, who believes his own death will occur on his 40th birthday, October
                    12th. The journal’s entries revolve around the anticipation of that day.
                The dominant primary narrative level appears to correspond to the stream of
                    consciousness or interior monologue of the count facing death. The flow of inner
                    experiences and feelings passing through the mind of the count is evidenced by
                    the dominant length of the primary level. Concerning the embedded narrations, it
                    is important to mention that several of them are narrated by the experiencing I
                    of the primary narrator. The simultaneous presence of the experiencing I in an
                    embedded narration and the primary narrator at the primary level reinforces the
                    stream of consciousness of the dying count and the egocentric focus of his
                    multi-level narration.
                Regarding the boundaries, it is also noteworthy that Der
                        Tod shows many ontological boundaries with virtual crossings (7 out
                    of 17 embedded narrations). Taking a close look at the respective text segments,
                    it is apparent that the ontological boundaries consist of the narrator’s
                    anticipations of death. Although the count is still alive and seems to be
                    impatiently waiting for his own death, the ontological transgressions suggest
                    the yet counterfactual status of death within the story. However, the fact that
                    some of the narrator’s anticipations have been interpreted as prolepses (i.e.,
                    anticipations of actual events in the story) by the annotators undermines this
                    impression and reveals an interesting ambiguity concerning temporality and
                    transience in Der Tod.
                As becomes clear, the visualization enables us to gain a deeper understanding of
                    how Der Tod plays with the element of decay of life
                    by employing a specific narrative structure. Further research could address the
                    more general question of how death and mortality are represented in the German
                    novella with regard to narrative and temporal structure.
            
            
                5.2.3 Matteo
                With the third exemplary analysis of Friedrich Hebbel’s Matteo (1839), we would like to explore more multilayered
                    correlations between narrative structure and temporality. The novella tells the
                    story of a young man of virtue, Matteo. After a disease, which deformed his
                    handsome appearance, Matteo has to deal with female rejection and social
                    humiliation. Hebbel’s novella reflects on the challenge of virtuousness in an
                    unjust and ruleless society, where fate and inconsistency disempower human
                    behaviour.
                Matteo shows many embedded narrations of short length throughout the whole
                    narration (see Fig. 13, b). Concerning the content
                    structure, it appears that the distribution and short length of the embedded
                    narrations correlate with Matteo’s life, which is falling apart. The cascade of
                    injustice bestowed upon Matteo leads him to see the world as unsinniges Kaleidoskop (unreasonable kaleidoscope) without rules or purpose. The idea of
                    life without reasonable meaning seems to manifest itself in the fragmented
                    structure of the novella’s narrative levels.
                A closer investigation of the embedded narrations reveals the role of ontological
                    boundary crossings, which mostly occur on the tertiary level throughout the
                    narrative. In contrast, the first ontological crossing is located on the
                    secondary level and consists of a positive, hopeful dream Matteo has. This
                    dream, however, is soon crushed – and from this moment on, all the remaining
                    ontological crossings (mostly hypothetical anticipations of future events) turn
                    out to be negative and calamitous, thus corresponding to Matteo’s deteriorating
                    fate.
                If we take a closer look at the frequency phenomena in Matteo, we can further see that the repeated narration of events
                    does neither concern single events without precedent linked to a human
                    conflict, nor does it serve as bracketing or connecting element in the narrative
                    as it does in Die Schutzimpfung or Der Pokal (see Fig. 15).
                    Instead, the frequency phenomena are much more isolated and tied to individual
                    text passages, for instance, when Matteo expresses resentment against God.
                
                    Visualization shows the frequency phenomena in Matteo. 
                    
                
                Unlikely for the literary genre of novellas, this analysis indicates that the
                    whole narration is not based on one interpersonal conflict weaving a strong net
                    through the story (as it does, for example, in Lili, Veronika, Der
                        Pokal). Instead, Matteo is an example of a more episodic variant of
                    the novella (see Fig. 17).
                Another noteworthy aspect relating form and content in Matteo is revealed when we closely inspect the organization of
                    temporal order in the narrative. It is striking that there are only
                    a few short analepses in Matteo. Now, if we
                    conceive of time as a continuum in which the presence is influenced by the past,
                    analepses can be used to reflect on or to find explanations for why certain
                    events happened. Considering the aforementioned issue of inconsistency in Matteo, one could argue that the specific makeup of
                    order phenomena reinforces Matteo’s view of the world as an unreasonable
                        kaleidoscope without rules and purpose that makes moments of reflection
                    obsolete.
                
                    Visualization shows the duration phenomenon ‘summary’ in Matteo.
                    
                
                The hurried nature of the narrative becomes also visible in the visualization of
                    duration phenomena emphasizing yet again the pointlessness of being in
                        Matteo. As shown in Fig. 18, a great amount of text passages is classified as summaries.
                    The predominance of summaries, filling in the spaces between individual episodes
                    in Matteo’s life that are narrated in slower pace, gives the impression of a
                    hastening from one negative experience to the next, and thus of an inescapable
                    fate.
                Summarizing the visually supported interpretation of Matteo, we can say that the Narrelations visualization not only points to the more episodic
                    makeup of Matteo, which distinguishes the narrative
                    from most of the other analyzed texts. Matteo is
                    also a good example to show how a multitude of different structural features can
                    be related to overarching thematic aspects of the text – a complex and laborious
                    task that was significantly facilitated by the overview of the visualization and
                    interactive filtering provided by the interface.
            
            
            

                6. Conclusion
                The visual exploration of three exemplary texts demonstrates the heuristic value
                    of the visualization for narratological analyses and interpretations. While the
                    visualization of Die Schutzimpfung serves to elicit
                    critical insights in the discourse structure of the novella, the analysis of
                        Der Tod shows the visualization as a 
                        mediator
                        
                     by helping connect the fragmented narrative structure with the decaying
                    life of the narrator. In the final analysis of Matteo, the visualization helps to understand the significant
                    alliance between content-related and formal issues. With reference to Lubkoll,
                    who claims the academic void that 
                        the different catalogues of typical features mostly
                            appear as static schemes that cannot do justice equally well to all the
                            various manifestations of the Novelle as to the historical change of
                            the genre itself
                        
                    , the Narrelations visualization enables a
                    dynamic analysis of a single novella as well as critical and comparable insight
                    into the genre of German novellas, for instance, the function of the turning
                    point. It thus seems justified to assume that the visualization tends to serve
                    as explorative and discursive function, rather than merely
                    illustrative purposes that one attends to a posteriori one’s
                    intellectual engagement with a work of literature.
                In summary, we have made three main contributions: First, we provided an
                    extensive reflection about the relevance of narratological analysis for literary
                    interpretation, its complex and multilayered makeup, and the difficulty of
                    exploring and evaluating the analysis data. Second, we have presented an
                    interactive visualization technique for narratological analysis of literary
                    works and described the collaborative design process resulting in a specific
                    visual encoding that reveals the nesting and distribution of narrative levels,
                    integrates the representation of temporal phenomena, and facilitates the
                    examination of correlations between these aspects. Third, we utilized the Narrelations interface to explore the relationship
                    between literary content of eight German novellas and their respective narrative
                    structures, and thus demonstrated the heuristic value of visualization for
                    literary analysis and interpretation.
                This being said, it also seems fair to point out the limitations of the
                    visualization. First of all – and this goes for all kinds of heuristic devices –
                    the Narrelations visualization, of course, shows a large number of phenomena and
                    correlations, not all of which are necessarily interesting or relevant. It is
                    always the scholar’s task to appraise the many observations and decide which are
                    meaningful and which are merely coincidental. The possibility to iteratively
                    shift between overview and close reading certainly helps in making these
                    decisions. Second, the visualization certainly does not substitute
                    interpretation at the textual level. What visualization can support, however, is
                    a detailed analysis of the structural makeup of a narrative – the challenge of
                    making sense of it is left to the literary scholar to pursue. And finally, we
                    still have to ask to which extent and in which ways does the visualization help
                    generate new knowledge about narrative form. The observations that we were able
                    to make about the narrative levels of the German novellas were in part guided by
                    the visualization, however, the close reading of the stories constituted an
                    essential part of the research process.
            

                Acknowledgements
                We would like to thank Christian Laesser for supporting us to refine the
                    interface and interaction capabilities and for developing the first web-based
                    prototype of Narrelations which provided the possibility to examine different
                    short stories and test the visualizations potential. We thank Prof. Dr. Jan
                    Christoph Meister and Prof. Dr. Evelyn Gius for their continuous feedback and
                    suggestions for modification and improvements. We would like to thank the
                    participants of the Usability Test, who enabled us to test the functionality and
                    ease-of-use of the Narrelations interface.
                Funding for this research was provided by University of Applied Sciences Potsdam,
                    Universität Hamburg, and Hamburg’s Ministry for Science and Research (3DH
                    Project).
            
