



Conversation the First.

Poems.


To a Green-chafer, on a white Rose.


To a Lady-bird.


The Snail.


A Walk by the Water.


Invitation to the Bee.








Conversation the First.
George—Emily.
In a little Garden called their own.


George
Look, Emily, look at this beauti­
ful shining insect, which has almost hid itself
in this white rose, on your favourite tree. It
is shaped very like those brownish chafers,
which you desired me to take away from
the gardener's children yesterday, because you
thought they were going to torment and hurt
them; but this is not so big, and is much pret­
tier. See what little tassels it has on his horns;
the wings shine like some part of the peacock's
feathers.



Emily
It is very pretty—but indeed,
George, I am afraid it will fly away if you dis­
turb it. I should like to keep it in a box, but
only you know, Mamma says, it is cruel to
deprive even an insect like this of its liberty;
vol. 1.
B


2
perhaps it would not eat if it was to be con­
fined.



George
I wish Mamma could see it, she
would tell us the name of it; and whether,
without hurting it, you might keep it in a
little paper box, which you know I could
make for you of some strong paper, with pin­
holes to give it air. I could carry it gently
on the rose which it has crept into so snugly;
only I do not like to gather the finest flower
on our tree, for the rest of them are not yet
blown so much out.



Emily
But suppose, brother, I stay and
watch it, for fear of its flying away, while you
go and desire Mamma, if she is not too busy,
to come and look at it.



Mrs. Talbot
Where is this treasure that
you have found? O! this is the green-chafer.
There are two sorts, I believe, of them; one is
more of the colour of copper, and the other
more crimson: this is the latter. They are
the most beautiful of that species of insects,
at least of those that inhabit this country; for
in warm climates, where the colours of insects
are much brighter, there are creatures of the
beetle sort, of which the shards, or upper


3
wings, and bodies, appear to be studded with
diamonds, rubies, and emeralds.



Emily
Mamma, may we take this chafer
and keep it? George says he could make a
box with holes for air, and we could feed it
with rose leaves! Would it be wrong?



Mrs. Talbot
No; but I do not think
you would find so much satisfaction in it, as
in letting your chafer enjoy his liberty, and
wander from flower to flower, for they feed on
several sorts. You might have found them on
those beautiful guelder roses, which you know
were in bloom about a fortnight since in the
shrubbery, but the trees were too high for you
to see them creeping among the round white
bunches of blossoms, which the servants and
country people, aptly enough, call snow-balls.
But there is an admirable description of these
flowers in the poem of the Task, you know,
which I read to you the other day. The
Poet calls it a rose from the usual name, and
describes it—
Throwing up, into the darkest gloomOf neighbouring cypress, or more sable yew,Her silver globes; light as the foamy surfThat the wind severs from the broken wave.



4

George
But, Mamma, may Emily keep
the chafer?


Mrs. Talbot
I had rather she would not;
first, because it is cruel to the insect; and also
because, pretty as it is, this sort of chafer has
an offensive smell when touched; and you will
find, Emily, your prisoner a disagreeable in­
mate. Instead, therefore, of contriving the
captivity of the chafer, let us address a little
poem to it.


Emily
A poem to a chafer, Mamma?
—Why the chafer cannot be supposed to un­
derstand it.


Mrs. Talbot
Certainly not; prose, or
poetry, we know to be equally unintelligible
to an insect, as to a bird, a tree, or a flower,
or any other animate, or inanimate being,
that does not possess speech or reason. But
you remember your brother Edward recited
an address, in that style of verse called a son­
net, to a nightingale, which was composed by
Milton, the first of English poets. And the
nightingale, though called the poet of the
woods, is not more qualified to understand
these addresses than this shining insect. Go,
then, bring me a pencil and a drawing card.


5
We will sit down on this bank, under the la­
burnum, and you shall write while I dictate.
Emily, by this hour to-morrow, will learn to
repeat our little address.

To a Green-Chafer, on a White Rose.

You dwell within a lovely bower,
Little chafer, gold and green,
Nestling in the fairest flower,
The rose of snow, the garden's queen.


There you drink the chrystal dew,
And your shards as emeralds bright,
And corselet, of the ruby's hue,
Hide among the petals white.


Your fringed feet may rest them there,
And there your filmy wings may close,
But do not wound the flower so fair
That shelters you in sweet repose.


Insect! be not like him who dares
On pity's bosom to intrude,
And then that gentle bosom tears
With baseness and ingratitude.




Mrs. Talbot
You have written it very well.
Now, George, and you, my Emily, tell me
whether you understand it.

B2


6

Emily
I don't know, Mamma, what shards
are.


Mrs. Talbot
That word is usually un­
derstood to mean the outward wings of bee­
tles, and such insects, which under them have
another pair of light filmy wings, that, when
they fly, are spread out; but at other times
are folded up under their hard case-like wings,
so as not to be perceived.


George
The word corselet I do not quite
comprehend.


Mrs. Talbot
That expression is taken
from the French word for armour, which was
worn to cover the body in battle.


George
I understand it now; and petals,
 
you have told us, mean the leaves of the
flower itself, which should be distinguished
from the green leaves that grow on the
branches.


Mrs. Talbot
Well, then you will assist
your little Emily in learning this to-morrow.
But there is John crossing the garden with
letters in his hand; let us go in to read them.




7


Mrs. Talbot
Your aunt's letter contains a
little poem for you, Emily. Our collection
will increase, I hope, and we shall no longer
be at a loss for pieces fit for you to repeat.
You have often seen the little insects called
Ladybirds. You remember there were so many
of them about the rooms at your uncle's in
Kent, that they were quite troublesome. But
the people in that country are very glad to see
them, believing that their appearance is always
followed by an extraordinary crop of hops.
They are sometimes called burnie-bees, and
sometimes lady-cows.


George
I dare say I can find several of
them in the garden, among the flowers.


Emily
Brother, you need not even go so
far, for I saw two or three in the window this
morning. Here, I have found one already.
It is a very small one, with only two little black
spots.


Mrs. Talbot
There are a great many
sorts of them. Some have more, and others


8
less of these spots; some are dark red, others
of a lighter red; and now and then I have
seen them black with red spots. In shape you
see these little insects resemble the chafer we
saw yesterday. Observe, he unfolds his upper
wings, spreads the gauze-like pinions under­
neath, and prepares to fly. Farewell, Lady­
bird, we are now going to read some verses
about you, made, I see, in the same measure
as the nursery lullaby, which I remember
when I was a child.
To The Lady-BirdOh! Lady-bird, Lady-bird, why dost thou roamSo far from thy comrades, so distant from home?Why dost thou, who can revel all day in the air,Who the sweets of the grove and the garden can share,In the fold of a leaf, who can form thee a bower,And a palace enjoy in the tube of a flower;Ah, why, simple Lady-bird, why dost thou venture,The dwellings of man so familiar to enter?Too soon you may find, that your trust is misplac'd,When by some cruel child you are wantonly chas'd,And your bright scarlet coat, so bespotted with black,May be torn by his barbarous hands from your back.And your smooth jetty corselet be pierced with a pin,That the urchin may see you in agonies spin;For his bosom is shut against pity's appeals,He has never been taught that a Lady-bird feels.9Ah, then you'll regret that you were tempted to rove,From the tall climbing hop, or the hazel's thick grove,And will fondly remember each arbour and tree,Where lately you wandered contented and free;Then fly simple Lady-bird!—fly away home,No more from your nest, and your children to roam.



Emily
I shall be very glad to learn these
lines, Mamma, for I think them extremely
pretty. But should I not first be perfect in
those on the rose, which you desired me to
write yesterday, after I had dressed the flower-
glasses with those beautiful groupes of roses.


Mrs. Talbot
Perhaps you can already repeat them: try.


Emily




Queen of fragrance, lovely Rose!
Thy soft and silken leaves disclose:
The winter's past, the tempests fly,
Soft gales breathe gently through the sky;
The silver dews and genial showers
Call forth a blooming waste of flowers;
And lo! thy beauties now unclose,
Queen of fragrance, lovely Rose!
Yet, ah! how soon that bloom is flown,
How soon thy blushing charms are gone!
To-day thy crimson buds unveil,
To-morrow scatter'd in the gale.
Ah! human bliss as swiftly goes,
And fades like thee, thou lovely Rose.







10

George
You did not make those lines your­
self, Mamma?


Mrs. Talbot
No, George; I found them
in a collection of poems, and changed a few
of the words, and I believe omitted some of
the stanzas.


Emily
And that which my brother wrote
out this morning: did you or my aunt write it?


Mrs. Talbot
You may remember that I
mentioned it was written by the Author of
the Task; or rather he translated it from
the Latin of Vincent Bourne; many others of
whose small poems he has also translated.


George
I liked it on account of the oddity
of the measure; but you altered it a little,
Mamma?


Mrs. Talbot
I did; not however expect­
ing to make the poetry better, but rather to
make my Snail a less selfish and Epicurean
animal than he appears in Vincent Bourne:
let us hear it, George, and then we will go for
our evening walk.



11




The Snail.

To grass, or leaf, or fruit, or wall,
The snail sticks fast, nor fears to fall,
As if he grew there, house or all
Together.


Within that house secure he hides,
When danger imminent betides
Of storm, or other harm besides,
Of weather.


Give but his horns the slightest touch,
His self-collecting power is such,
He shrinks into his house with much
Displeasure.


Where'er he dwells, he dwells alone,
Except himself has chattles none,
Well satisfied to be his own
Whole treasure.


Thus Hermit-like his life he leads
Alone, on simple viands feeds,
Nor at his humble banquet needs
Attendant.


And tho' without society,
He finds 'tis pleasant to be free,
And that he's blest who need not be
Dependant.







12

George
And no being, certainly, can be
more independant than the snail, who carries
his habitation about with him.


Emily
Let us see, brother, as we walk,
whether we cannot find some of those yellow
snails with dark stripes, and others with blood-
coloured stripes, such as you remember we
found in the hedge under the elms. I don't
like those ugly garden snails, that eat the
greengages and peaches, and spoiled so much
of our fruit last year. They are odious, dirty
things.


Mrs. Talbot
Yet by no means without
their use. In some parts of Italy they are used
as an article of food, and are fed and cleaned
for that purpose; they are also prescribed by
certain physicians of Switzerland, as a remedy
for consumptions. But in a garden they are
very obnoxious, and if great pains were not
taken by gardeners and farmers to destroy
these as well as slugs, an insect of the same
species, but without a shell; the labours not
only of the gardener, but often those of the
farmer, would be rendered vain. Plovers, or
Pewits, which are birds that live on heaths
and moors, are sometimes kept in walled gar­


13
dens to destroy these mischievous insects, and
they are devoured by ducks and other birds.
But it is time to end our conversation for this
morning. Your acquaintance, young Scam­
perville, dines here: you must be ready to
receive him, George.



Evening.
Mrs. Talbot—Emily.

Emily
Mamma, I was extremely glad to
get away from that rude boy: I hope he will
not come often here.


Mrs. Talbot
Indeed, Emily, I shall not
encourage the acquaintance; and I do not
believe your brother wishes it.


Emily
I am sure I should not love my
brothers so well as I do, if they were like this
Mr. Scamperville. He is so proud, and con­
tradicts every body, and seems to think him­
self so great; and besides, I never heard any
boy talk so about eating, and sauces, and gravy.


Mrs. Talbot
He has had a very bad edu­
cation; his father and mother are people who
C


14
live very fashionably, and have left him en­
tirely to the chance of a school, and the super­
intendance of a person between a servant and
a tutor, who has no wish but to make advan­
tage of the confidence reposed in him; the
boy is the echo and mimic of the people he
sees, and will probably become an ignorant,
dissipated man of fashion, who would be de­
spised if he was not rich; and will, like many
other such people, blaze for a day, and be
forgotten. But let us avail ourselves of this
interval to do at least part of our evening
lesson. You have learned the stanzas I gave
you yesterday?


Emily
Yes, Mamma, I found them very
easy.
A Walk By The Water.Emily.Let us walk where reeds are growing,By the alders in the mead;Where the crystal streams are flowing,In whose waves the fishes feed.There the golden carp is laving,With the trout, the 
perch, and 
bream:Mark! their flexile fins are waving,As they glance along the stream.15Now they sink in deeper billows,Now upon the surface rise;Or from under roots of willows,Dart to catch the water-flies.'Midst the reeds and pebbles hiding,See the minnow and the 
roach;Or by water-lillies gliding,Shun with fear our near approach.Do not dread us, timid fishes,We have neither net nor hook;Wanderers we, whose only wishesAre to read in nature's book.

Mr. Scamperville and
George come into the
Room.

George
Mother, Harry wishes me to go
down to the river with him: I will go, but
not to fish.


Harry
Then of what use will your going
be? I shall hire a boat; I dare say I can, can't
I? and get a man to row us down the river;
there is monstrous good sport, Germain told
me, a mile or two off; and if we get as low
as where the tide comes up, he says there
are mullets, which are famous good eating.


George
Well, you may do all this with­
out me, you know, as I neither love that sort
of sport, nor care about the goodness of mullets.



16

Mrs. Talbot
George has rather a dislike
to angling, Mr. Scamperville.


Harry
I dare say; one would think, how­
ever, such a quiet sport as that might suit
him, though he says he never had a gun in his
hand in his life, and never rode after the hounds.


Mrs. Talbot
Neither, I believe, have ever
entered his notions of amusement and
pleasure; he has been taught to think, that
hunting, and shooting, and fishing, are made
in general matters of too much importance,
and that those who too ardently pursue them
learn at length to believe, that man is an ani­
mal born only to ensnare and destroy every
other animal. My sons have been educated
to other ideas.


Harry
I suppose, Ma'am, you are afraid
of their being drowned?


Mrs. Talbot
Not at all, I assure you, for
they have both learned to swim very well. But
George has been of several fishing parties, and
has found no pleasure in them, though he is
very fond of the water. However, if you like
to take your favourite river walk, George, go.
—Come Emily, we will resort to our little greenhouse.



17

Harry
Come, come along! Why if one
was to listen to all this prosing, there would
be no pleasure in the world. I cannot imagine,
George, how you contrive to amuse yourself?


George
I have never wanted occupation
or amusement, Harry; but I can find no
pleasure in putting a miserable worm on a
hook, and making it wreath in torture; nor in
seeing the poor fish swallow the bait and hook
too, as often happens; and indeed to stand
dazzling our eyes and wasting whole days to
stare at a bit of cork and a quill, only for such
a sad purpose, seems to me to be a great sa­
crifice of time; I like much better to see the
ponds let down, as they were this spring, and
thousands of little fishes jumping in the nets,
or shining like silver in the shallow water as
they flounce about.


Harry
But where is the difference, pray?
Were not these fishes to be eaten just the
same?


George
No; for they are not caught for
that purpose; when the ponds are drawn they
are often taken out of the water where they
are bred, to be removed to other ponds, where
they remain: my brother and I were em­
C2


18
ployed to carry them to these last; and
our great pleasure was to put them in gently,
one by one, and observe how they seemed to
enjoy themselves as they were restored to
their own element, and swam merrily away.


Harry
O stupid work! I should be
wearied to death of such humdrum amuse­
ment.


George

We are not; besides, my mother
often walks with us, and tells us the names of
different trees and flowers. She describes the
inhabitants of the waters, and the birds that
live on the banks of rivers. There are alders
and willows of different sorts grow on the edge
of the stream, and sometimes the great grey
heron is seen watching under them for fish,
stretching out his long neck over the brink.
Sometimes she has shewn us the place, under
a rocky bank, where there are hollows, which
are inhabited by otters—


Harry
Yes, and it is amazing good sport
to hunt those otters. I was out one day with
my father, Sir Harry, and I saw the dogs kill
one.


George
I once saw one, but it was dead.
Above the river's banks too, on those high


19
sandy rocks that are covered with birch and
broom, there are great cavities, where another
animal finds his dwelling—the badger.


Harry
Oh, yes! that is the animal they
hunt at Winchester on the hills, you know.
I have a cousin there, who says it is famous
sport; they pin him down, and then bait him
with terriers.


George
It may be thought sport perhaps,
but I think it must be extremely cruel to har­
rass a poor defenceless beast.


Harry
Stuff and nonsense! this is cruel,
and t'other thing is cruel; why, George,
since you have been so much at home, you
are become an absolute milksop! just like a
man-milliner.


George
Well, I cannot help your opinion
of me, you know. But to tell you the truth,
Harry, I find much more pleasure and satis­
faction in making my mother contented with
me, than in any thing you call amusement;
and it is now no sacrifice, because I have
never been taught to delight in these pastimes
which you so much admire.


Harry
I can't say I understand all that
sort of thing. It would be curious, I do think,


20
if I was to be tied to my mother's apron-
string, and taddle about so. I wonder which
would be tired first, Lady Scamperville, or
me? Why she never thinks of asking me
to learn any thing in the holidays, or of telling
me what this thing is, and what t'other thing
is made of. We know the things are there;
and if we have money to buy what we like,
that is most material, I think.


George
But how do you expect to have
money to buy what you like when you grow
up, if you take no pains to obtain knowledge
when you are young?


Harry
A curious question indeed! What
you really, with all your sagacity, suppose
then, that I shall be obliged to take to a trade
when I grow up? An excellent notion that!
No! good Mr. George, my father is a Baro­
net, sir; a man of great fortune, and I am his
only son; I shall have no occasion to learn
any thing for the sake of getting money,
when I grow up, I assure you. I shall not
want knowledge for that; I shall have a great
estate.


George
Perhaps, though, it might be
worth your while to try for some knowledge to


21
teach you how to keep it; for I have read
stories of people, and my mother has heard of,
indeed known people, who were once very
rich, but being also very idle, they have
thrown away their fortunes, only because they
did not know how to pass their time; and
when their money was gone, they found
themselves useless beings in the world, and
perhaps obliged to become dependant on
those very persons who had art and cunning
enough to cheat them out of their pro­
perty.


Harry
Really now, Talbot, when I met
you last summer, you seemed to me to be any
thing rather than a formal fellow, with such
queer shopkeeping notions. No, I shall not
be idle, I fancy, though I don't intend to fag,
like a tradesman, or grub like a parson at
at Greek and Hebrew books, which are of no
use to a gentleman. When I am Sir Harry
Scamperville, the first thing I shall do will be
to have the best stud in the county. I'll have
a curricle too, and a tandem with blood
horses; and I'll have, sir, such a pack of fox­
hounds; hoicks, hoicks, my knowing ones;
I'll shew them what it is to have right notions


22
of all that sort of thing: Germain says, I
shall be quite the very thing, the tippy.


George
Pray who is Germain?


Harry
Germain! why he is a sort of
upper servant; that is, a sort of gentleman
that my father keeps to go about with me,
He was abroad with him. He is a German,
a monstrous good fellow, though a great quiz;
it is high fun to see him on horseback, for he
can't ride at all, though he won't own it.
You would die with laughing to see the faces
he makes; he is so afraid: but he has had
some tumbles, which almost killed me, I laugh­
ed so. I always get him upon a spunkey
horse, and the fun is to see his contrivances to
stick fast, while I dash on, on purpose.


George
He don't seem to recommend all
these horses, and hunting schemes, then, to
gratify himself.


Harry
Oh, lord! no, not at all! it is only
because he wishes that I should make a figure,
and all that, as a man in a certain style ought
to do. But there is Jasper Grice, the groom,
that overlooks Sir Harry's stables; it is he
that has made me so well acquainted with all
that sort of thing; he is the boldest rider you


23
know in the country. He taught me to ride,
and to fear nothing when I am in the saddle.
You seem to have no notion of that sort of
thing; I wish I could get you into the field;
you'd soon see what it is to have spirit and
courage: 'gad, I go over every thing, as bold
as a dragon. Why, now, if was on horse­
back, on my filly, Truffle, and the dogs were
to take water, you see, in this part of the river,
or any where ever so dangerous, why I should
no more mind plunging in directly, than I
should――

A boy comes running up.

Boy
Masters, young Masters! pray help
—help, for God's sake: my poor little sister
—she has fell'd into the river. Oh! for cer­
tain she'll be drownded, and what will mother
say? What shall I do?


George
Shew me the place directly: come
Harry, let us run—come, come!


Harry
Run! no, indeed, I shall do no
such thing. Why, George, George, what is
it to you? Don't go: you'll be pulled into
the water. He's gone—a stupid fellow; to
hazard his life for a beggar's brat. I've no


24
notion of that sort of thing; the fool will be
drowned, I dare say; I'll go call for some­
body, to help fish him out: I'm sure he'll be
drowned.

(Mrs. Talbot being abruptly informed of
what had happened, comes up in alarm;
but the child has been taken out of the water
by her son, and is seated on the lap of its
mother.)

The poor Woman
See, Madam! good
Madam, blessings and good luck on Master
George! he has saved my little Nanny. Look,
Ma'am, she's quite come to. God reward
you, Master George! If it had not been for
him, Nanny would have been drownded.


Mrs. Talbot
Indeed I am very glad. Poor
child! I am rejoiced to see her alive. And
you, my son, I delight in your courage and
your safety. I was alarmed, for Mr. Scam­
perville ran to tell me he believed you were
drowned. But the danger is now over. Go
home and change your clothes.


George
I am mad with Scamperville for


25
frightening you so: he had better have helped,
instead of running away. Oh, there he is
coming back, much at his leisure.


Harry
So you ar'n't gone to the bottom,
I see. I was frightened for you, I assure you.


George
So it seems, indeed. You were
frightened, and so you ran away.


Harry
Ran away! No, I went to call
help.


George
You had better have helped me
yourself, if you thought I needed it, such a
fine bold fellow as you are.


Harry
Where would have been the use of
that? two of us could have done no good,
so I thought to have called for some men to
come and assist the little child.


Mrs. Talbot
But if George had been
equally prudent, and had taken so much care
of himself, it would have been too late, and
probably at least the little girl would have
been drowned.


Harry
And if it had, who could have
helped it: those people should take more care
of their children. I wonder if they expect
Gentlemen to be hazarding their lives for such
brats as that.

D


26

Mrs. Talbot
Do you think, Mr. Scamper­
ville, you should have been more alert, if the
child of a person whom you consider as being
of fashion had met with the same disaster.


Harry
Oh! that is not likely, you know:
but these common people should be punished,
I think, for annoying one with such things.


Mrs. Talbot
You have notions admirably
calculated for the promotion of your own ease,
but not quite such as will recommend you
much to the affection of others.


George
Did you never hear of doing as
you would be done by: suppose you had fallen
into the water, and this child's brother or
father had saved you from drowning?


Harry
Well: they would have been hand­
somely paid, and it would have been a good
job for them.


Mrs. Talbot
But let us suppose for a
moment, that instead of being the only son of
Sir Harry Scamperville, you had been the son
of John Needwood the labourer; would it
therefore have been well in those who might
witness the accident to leave you to be drowned?
and is not the life of a prince or a peasant
equal in the estimation of God, who created


27
both with the same feelings and wants, and are
human creatures only to be considered as such
when they happen to be rich?


Harry
Yes, Ma'am: I dare say they are:
but really I never desire, when I come out just
to visit a friend, to be bored with such sort of
things: I wish you a good evening: I shall
not like to give up my rowing plan down the
river. I dare say Germain is waiting for me
by this time. George, have you a mind for a
little dash?


George
Thank you: but I have not the
least wish for it.


Harry
Well! good bye to you then.


George
Farewell.


Mrs. Talbot
There he goes, the echo of
insolent wealth and unfeeling prosperity: to­
tally without any sense of what he owes to
others, and occupied only in gratifying him­
self.


George
I am sure I shall not seek him
again; and I heartily hope he will not seek me.


Mrs. Talbot
But as we walk, which in
your wet clothes must not be slowly, tell me
how it happened.



28

George
Scamperville was boasting about
his courage in hunting, and describing how he
would fearlessly ford the river on his fine mare,
Miss Something as he called her, when Need­
wood's son came running up, and said his little
sister had fallen into the water. I ran to the
place, and Mr. Scamperville, after desiring me
not to go, went away as fast as he could to get
more help.


Mrs. Talbot
And was the water deep?


George
No, indeed, mother, the hazard
was nothing: the little child was so near the
edge, that I had not occasion to swim above
two strokes, and I easily brought her out.


Mrs. Talbot
I will confess, George,
my pleasure is great on this occasion, though
chastened by the remains of the fears I felt.
You are now sensible of the advantage of
having been educated hitherto, in some mea­
sure, in the manner directed by the admirable
author of Les Etudes de la Nature.
J'entre­
mêlerois ces speculations touchantes d'ex­
ercise agréable, et convenable à la fougue de
leur âge. Je leur ferois apprendre à nager,
non pas seulement pour les apprendre de se


29
tirer eux même du peril; mais, pour porter
du secours à ceux qui peuvent se trouver en
danger.

Translation.
I would interpose with these interesting
speculations, exercise suitable to the vivacity
natural at that period of life: I would have
them taught to swim, not only that they
may be enabled to extricate themselves from
danger, but that they may succour others
whose peril may call upon their humanity.

I congratulate myself that you can distin­
guish between that useless headlong rashness,
which often hurries a young person into dan­
ger in a fit of boasting, and that real courage,
which does not shrink from any peril which
duty to a fellow creature calls upon him to
brave; and if the danger in this instance had
been greater, if I had even been deprived of
you in consequence of your humanity, I should,
with whatever anguish in my heart, have felt
like the illustrious Ormond, who, when he lost
the support and consolation of his age, de­
clared that he would not exchange his dead
son, for any living son in Christendom.
D2


30
But now we are arrived, go change your
clothes: I shall say nothing to Emily this
evening of what has happened, as she was not
with me when that stout-hearted Scamperville
came staring up to me, and knew nothing of
the matter. My spirits want to be quieted,
and I would avoid her questions at present.


Emily
Dear Mamma, where have you
been? When I returned with the piece of
matting you sent me for to tie up the convol­
vulus, I could not find you, and I have been
seeking you ever since.


Mrs. Talbot
Well, now I am found; but
I am rather fatigued, so come and read to me.


Emily
Shall I read the history of the bee,
which we were going to begin yesterday?


Mrs. Talbot
Only the abridgement, intro­
ductory to the little poem; we shall have time
for no more.


Emily
Apis mellifica, the common honey
bee, is an insect of important use to mankind.
A hive contains from 16,000 to 20,000 bees,
of which one only is a female; of the rest, some
are drones, but the greater part of them work­
ing bees. On which last, the care of the young
depend, as well as the making of honey,


31
which they collect from almost every flower,
while by a different process, they form the
wax of the pollen of flowers, and build their hex­
agon cells so regularly and neatly, that human
art cannot imitate them. The eggs of the
queen, or the only female bee, are laid in these,
and each is then filled with honey: they have
the art of extracting the nectar from almost all
plants, even those which to us appear to have
but little odour. The blossoms of the heath,
of thyme, of rosemary, and those of fruit trees,
and aromatic herbs, are particularly grateful
to them.


Mrs. Talbot
It was on the thyme in the
kitchen garden, you remarked, I remember,
my Emily, when you were a very little girl,
that the bees were honeying.


Emily
I always liked to watch them at
their work, it seemed so clever in such little
creatures to build those regular cells and fill
them with sweet juice.


Mrs. Talbot
And you recollect my ex­
planation of the expression I use in the verses,
alchemy.


Emily
Yes, you told me alchemy was a
process of chemistry, by which it was long


32
believed inferior metals, such as copper or
iron, might be converted or transmuted into
gold; and that you applied it in a figurative
sense, to describe the change made by the
bees, of other substances, into honey.


Mrs. Talbot
There are many other sorts
of bees, you know; and there are other in­
sects, such as wasps and 
hornets, that resem­
ble them in living in societies, making very
ingeniously the nests where they raise their
young; but in elegance of taste, and delicacy
of manners, these are very inferior. They
live on fruit, meat, and even on other insects.
The author, who writes under the name of
Hector St. John, an American farmer, relates
that in America, it is very common to sus­
pend an hornet's nest in the middle of the
ceiling of a room where the family live, that
these insects may relieve them from the great
number of flies with which the houses are in­
fested, and that it is usual for the hornets to
settle on the faces of children, with no other
intention than to carry away the flies; while
the children accustomed to them express no
fear, and never are stung. These hornets, and
their near relations, the wasps, are great ene­


33
mies of the bees, not only by stealing their
honey, but because they kill the industrious
labourers themselves. In the vast woods of
America there are wild bees that make great
quantities of honey in the hollows of trees,
and the settlers and Indians are guided to
these treasures by a bird, who knows where
they are deposited. There are many other
particulars, which at some future time we
will collect. At present our business is with
the honey-bee of our own country.



Invitation to the Bee.

Child of patient industry,
Little active busy bee,
Thou art out at early morn,
Just as the opening flowers are born;
Among the green and grassy meads
Where the cowslips hang their heads;
Or by hedge-rows, while the dew
Glitters on the harebell blue.—


Then on eager wing art flown,
To thymy hillocks on the down;
Or to revel on the broom;
Or suck the clover's crimson bloom;
Murmuring still thou busy bee
Thy little ode to industry!



34

Go while summer suns are bright,
Take at large thy wandering flight;
Go and load thy tiny feet
With every rich and various sweet,
Cling around the flow'ring thorn,
Dive in the woodbine's honied horn,
Seek the wild rose that shades the dell,
Explore the foxglove's freckled bell,
Or in the heath flower's fairy cup
Drink the fragrant spirit up.


But when the meadows shall be mown,
And summer's garlands overblown;
Then come, thou little busy bee,
And let thy homestead be with me,
There, shelter'd by thy straw-built hive,
In my garden thou shalt live,
And that garden shall supply
Thy delicious alchemy;
There for thee, in autumn, blows
The Indian pink and latest rose,
The mignionette perfumes the air,
And stocks, unfading flowers, are there.


Yet fear not when the tempests come,
And drive thee to thy waxen home,
That I shall then most treacherously
For thy honey murder thee.


Ah, no!—throughout the winter drear
I'll feed thee, that another year
Thou may'st renew thy industry
Among the flowers, thou little busy bee.










Conversation The Second.

Poems.


Hedge-hog.


Early Butterfly.


Moth.


Sonnet to a Glowworm.


Mimosa.


Dormouse.








Conversation The Second.
Mrs. Talbot—George—
Emily.


Mrs. 
Talbot
Whence do you come, my
dear George?


George
After I had been, as you desired
me, to enquire after the poor little girl, who
is as well as if nothing had happened, I went
to see Farmer Warwood's men reaping the
rye. I tried if I could cut some down myself,
but I was so awkward, that the men were
afraid I should cut myself, and desired me
not to attempt it. Afterwards in crossing
from the meadows towards the home field,
just in the middle of the path, I saw some­
thing brown, travelling slowly along; upon
approaching it quickly, it rolled itself up in a
moment. It was this hedge-hog: and that it
might not share the fate of that which I tried
in vain to rescue from the village boys a little
Vol. 1.
E


38
time ago, I put it into my handkerchief, and
brought it home, meaning to let it go in the
copse.


Mrs. Talbot
Do so then, and unpromising
as it appears for a subject of poetry, we will
try if something cannot be made of it, to in­
crease our collection of animals, as subjects of
natural history in verse.
The Hedge-Hog Seen in a Frequented
Path.Wherefore should man or thoughtless boyThy quiet, harmless life destroy,Innoxious urchin?—for thy foodIs but the beetle and the fly,And all thy harmless luxuryThe swarming insects of the wood.Should man, to whom his God has givenReason, the brightest ray of heaven,Delight to hurt, in senseless mirth,Inferior animals?—and dareTo use his power in waging warAgainst his brethren of the earth?Poor creature! to the woods resort,Lest lingering here, inhuman sportShould render vain thy thorny case;And whelming water, deep and cold,Make thee thy spiny ball unfold,And shew thy simple negro face!39Fly from the cruel! know than theyLess fierce are ravenous beasts of prey,And should perchance these last come near thee;And fox or martin cat assail,Thou, safe within thy coat of mail,May cry—Ah! noli me tangere.


Mrs. Talbot
Well, you have liberated your
captive, and here is my address to him.


George
I beg your pardon, my dear mother,
but you know that last verse is not quite right,
for the word is pronounced tangere, and not
tangere.


Mrs. Talbot
Your remark is perfectly
just, my son; and you see, that read properly,
there is a false quantity in the line. But such
licences are now very frequently taken in
short and trifling pieces like this. So we will
relax in the severity of our criticism, and re­
turn to the history of the urchin, or hedge­
hog. This inoffensive animal is among those
to which superstition once affixed malignant
qualities. The witches in Macbeth name its
cry among those of evil omen.
Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd;Twice and once the hedge-pig whined.
And you know Caliban complains of it as


40
one of the creatures that his master, Prospero,
sent to torment him.
		  For every trifle they are set upon me—Sometimes like apes that moe and chatter at me,And after bite me; then like hedge-hogs, whichLie tumbling in my bare-foot path—
And the vulgar still believe, that hedge-hogs
are unlucky, and even more actively mis­
chievous: for, that they eat the roots of the
corn; suck the cows, causing their udders to
ulcerate; and many other misdemeanors are
laid to the charge of this little ugly beast; who,
being guilty of none of them, lives in remote
hedge-rows, copses, and the bottoms of dry
ditches, under leaves and fern, and feeds on
beetles, worms, and flies. Sometimes with its
snout, it digs up the roots of the plantain
among the grass, and makes them a part of
its food. And now, my Emily, we will have
this copied into our little book. It will serve
for your writing-lesson to-morrow.


George
Mother, I wanted to tell you, that
yesterday I was reading the history of moths
and butterflies; I knew it indeed before, and
so did Emily, but I was not aware of the im­
mense variety there are, especially of moths.



41

Emily
Those eggs, brother, on a leaf,
which you bade me put into a box, are
not yet hatched. It will be so long before
they become butterflies, that I shall not have
patience to watch them.


George
If my mother does not dislike it,
I will search for some of these insects in a more
advanced state; that is, when they are become
chrysaliss's, which is their intermediate form
between the caterpillar and the butterfly.
My book says they are to be found at all
times of the year.


Mrs. Talbot
And a very likely place is
the old room at the end of the green-house;
I have hardly ever failed to meet with several
sorts there; and as early as last March, I
found one of the most beautiful and delicate
of English butterflies. Probably the next night's
frost killed it, for on the following day I could
not find it, and if it had got out, it would have
found no flowers to feed on, for the weather
afterwards became very severe. However, there
is a yellow butterfly, with dark iron coloured
spots, and pointed wings, which is frequently
seen abroad before the common cabbage-fly,
so usual and so destructive in gardens, is hardy
E2


42
enough to venture. When I was very young,
I was very fond of catching butterflies, to
paint from nature, but I was soon disgusted
with the attempt to kill them. It appeared
so cruel, to impale an insect on a pin, and let
it flutter for hours, and even days in misery,
that I could never bear to do it. I was after­
wards shewn how to kill them immediately,
by pouring a drop of æther on their heads;
but I thought I had no right to deprive one
of these beautiful creatures of their short exis­
tence, which in some sorts lasts only a day.
And therefore I contented myself with copy­
ing from flies in collections already made.
There are some of these insects in the East
and West Indies, of a very large size and the
most dazzling beauty.


George
But, mother, though you did not
like to destroy the butterflies you speak of,
you might have found them good subjects
for our poetry.


Mrs. Talbot
It is difficult, George, to say
any thing that is not mere common place on
so obvious and hackneyed a subject; but open
the drawer in my chiffonier, and take out my
book; I have just recollected a few stanzas to


43
the butterfly, called Rhamni, which makes its
appearance early in March.
The Early Butterfly.Trusting the first warm day of spring,When transient sunshine warms the sky,Light on his yellow spotted wingComes forth the early butterfly.With wavering flight, he settles nowWhere pilewort spreads its blossoms fair,Or on the grass where daisies blow,Pausing, he rests his pinions there.But insect! in a luckless hourThou from thy winter home hast come,For yet is seen no luscious flowerWith odour rich and honied bloom.And these that to the early dayYet timidly their bells unfold,Close with the sun's retreating ray,And shut their humid eyes of gold.For night's dark shades then gather round,And night-winds whistle cold and keen,And hoary frost will crisp the ground,And blight the leaves of budding green!And thou, poor fly! so soft and frail,May'st perish e'er returning morn,Nor ever, on the summer gale,To taste of summer sweets be borne!44Thus unexperienc'd rashness will presumeOn the fair promise of life's opening day,Nor dreams how soon the adverse storms may comeThat hush'd in grim repose, expect their ev'ningprey.
That last line, you know, is from Gray,
that admirable poet, who speaks of insect-life
so beautifully in his Ode to Spring.

The insect youth are on the wing,Eager to taste the honied spring,And float amid the liquid noon.Some lightly o'er the current skim,Some shew their gaily gilded trim,Quick glancing to the sun.
The moth, however, or phalena, which the
French call papillione du soir, or night but­
terflies, are by no means fond of shewing their
varied plumage to the sun; while the butter­
fly, as soon as he quits the armour with which
nature has provided him, dries his moist and
newly unfolded wings in the rays of noon, and
encouraged by the warmth, launches into the
air; the moth, though his case, or skin, may
at the same time burst, yet never thinks of
venturing from the leaf or piece of wood to
which he is attached, till the sun is set; then


45
you may see millions of moths of different
sorts flitting about and feeding on flowers.


Emily
But, Mamma, about a week ago,
while the weather was so very hot, I went up
stairs into your book-closet with a wax taper;
the window was open, and I put the candle
down on your table under it, when in an in­
stant there were I don't know how many
moths round it, and one so large flew against
it that it was put out; which was fortunate
enough for the rest, at least for a little time,
since they seemed determined to be burnt to
death. However, as I wanted a book which I
could not find in the dark, I rang for another
candle, and in an instant the foolish insects
were trying which could singe itself first. I
remember thinking then, that they were like
silly people who will not take advice, for many
of them, even after they were singed, flew
back into the candle.


Mrs. Talbot
The comparison is obvious,
my dear little girl, yet it is not every little girl
who would have made it. The obstinacy
with which the moth perseveres in fluttering
around the flame that inevitably destroys it,
has been the subject of many comparisons.


46
Like verses on the butterfly, any attempt on
the subject of the moth may perhaps be trite;
but, as George has finished, I see, what he was
about, he will be my scribe while I dictate.
The Moth.When dews fall fast, and rosy dayFades slowly in the west away,While evening breezes bend the future sheaves;Votary of vesper's humid light,The moth, pale wanderer of the night,From his green cradle comes amid the whispering
leaves.The birds on insect life that feastNow in their woody coverts rest,The swallow slumbers in his dome of clay,And of the numerous tribes who warOn the small denizens of air,The shrieking bat alone is on the wing for prey.Eluding him, on lacey plume,The silver moth enjoys the gloom,Glancing on tremulous wing thro' twilight bower,Now flits where warm nasturtiums glow,Now quivers on the jasmine bough,And sucks with spiral tongue the balm of sleeping flowers.Yet if from open casement streamsThe taper's bright aspiring beam,47And strikes with comet ray his dazzled sight;Nor perfum'd leaf, nor honied flower,To check his wild career have power,But to the attracting flame he takes his rapid flight.Round it he darts in dizzy rings,And soon his soft and powder'd wingsAre singed; and dimmer grow his pearly eyes,And now his struggling feet are foil'd,And scorch'd, entangled, burnt, and soil'd,His fragile form is lost—the wretched insect dies!Emblem too just of one, whose wayThro' the calm vale of life might lay;Yet lured by vanity's illusive firesFar from that tranquil vale aside,Like this poor insect suicideFollows the fatal light, and in its flame expires.


Mrs. Talbot
Well! that being completed,
let us prepare for our walk. It is a lovely
evening after the slight rain, and every blade
of grass and leaf will give us their delightful
odours. I remember too, my Emily, that you
were desirous of finding another glow-worm,
since the turkeys or guinea-fowl certainly de­
voured those you so carefully placed on the
lawn the other night; and these shining crea­
tures will not appear above a week or ten
days longer. Come, George, will you not ac­
company us?



48

George
As soon, Mother, as I have written
out the Moth fair in my book; I have al­
ready finished Emily's.


Mrs. Talbot
Hasten then, dear boy, and
we will go down the green lane which leads to
the woodlands. It was there that Emily and
I found several glow-worms a few nights ago;
and as we brought them home on the leaves and
blades of grass, Emily would hardly be per­
suaded that they were by day-light very ugly
insects, without either lustre or beauty of shape.


Emily
Indeed, Mamma, the sonnet you
taught me was quite discouraging. Here,
however, is a glow-worm, and here comes my
dear George to help me collect two or three
to take home.


George
I don't remember the sonnet,
Emily: what is it?





The Glow-Worm.

If on some balmy breathing night of Spring
The happy child, to whom the world is new,
Pursues the evening moth of mealy wing,
Or from the heath-flower beats the sparkling dew,


He sees, before his inexperienc'd eyes,
The brilliant glow-worm like a meteor shine
On the turf bank; amaz'd and pleas'd he cries,

Star of the dewy grass, I make thee mine!




49

Then, e'er he sleeps, collects the moisten'd flower,
And bids soft leaves his glittering prize enfold,
And dreams that fairy lamps illume his bower,
Yet with the morning shudders to behold


His lucid treasure, rayless as the dust.
So turns the world's bright joys to cold and blank disgust.






Emily
I will not look at these insects by
day-light, for if I do I shall never admire them
any more, or fancy them the fairies' illumi­
nations.


Mrs. Talbot
Thus it is but too often, my
dear girl, in matters of more importance than
our disquisition on insect beauty. We are
frequently determined to see only the bright
and glittering part of any object of our imme­
diate pursuit, and will not believe, nor see even
when it is evident the object as it really is.
It is not only the glow-worm that will not
bear inspection when its lustre is lost by the
light of day; but all those luminous insects
that bear the same phosphoric fire about them;
such as the lanthorn fly of the West-Indies,
and of China, of which there are several sorts;
some of which carry their light in a sort of
snout, so that when you see them in a collec­
tion they are remarkably ugly.
There is also an insect of this luminous sort
F


50
common in Italy, called the lucciola. An in­
telligent traveller relates, that some Moorish
ladies having been made prisoners by the Ge­
noese, lived in an house near Genoa till they
could be exchanged; and on seeing some of
the lucciola, or flying glow-worms, darting
about in the evening in the garden near them,
they caused the windows to be shut in great
alarm, from a strange idea which seized them,
that these shining flies were the souls of their
deceased relations.


George
But what could possibly put such
an absurd notion into their heads?


Mrs. Talbot
It is not possible to say, un­
less more was known of the popular supersti­
tion of their country. But chimeras equally
wild and absurd have often been entertained
by persons, who have the advantage of living
in countries where knowledge is more univer­
sally diffused. Some particular noises, though
they can easily be accounted for, have appalled
persons of reason and courage; and as you re­
member I told you, when were talking of
the hedge-hog, that some animals and birds
are thought by the illiterate country people to
be unlucky and to betoken misfortune. I


51
actually knew a woman of sense, who was
much discomposed if in beginning a journey
or a walk she happened to meet three magpies.


Emily
Indeed, Mamma, she must have
been very silly, for if any harm was going to
happen to her, the magpies could certainly
know nothing of the matter.


Mrs. Talbot
Assuredly not. It is not by
such means that a foreknowledge of events
would be communicated. I knew another
poor woman, who lost half her time in wait­
ing for lucky days, and made it a rule never
to begin any work, write a letter on busi­
ness, or set out on a journey on a Friday:
so her business was never done, and her fortune
suffered accordingly. It would have been
much wiser for her to have considered, that
every day is lucky in which we possess strength
of mind and body to do our duty, in whatever
line of life we are placed; and that persons
who trifle away their time in waiting for fortu­
nate days, will probably be unfortunate in
proportion as they are idle and foolish.


George
But, Mother, I want to hear more
of these lanthorn or fire flies.


Mrs. Talbot
I have no books at hand,


52
George, that enable me to give you correct
information on this subject; but I will write
to a friend, who has a great collection of na­
tural history, to send me such books as may
help you in you enquiry: perhaps we may
inform ourselves on this subject.


George
I was reading in some voyage
that the sea is sometimes all bright with light,
something like that of the glow-worm, and
that it was supposed to be occasioned by sea
insects.


Mrs. Talbot
Many different opinions
have arisen as to that appearance. Some have
thought the light owing, as you say, to sea in­
sects, and others to a degree of putridity;
because whiting, and some other fish which
are in a state of decay, shine if taken into a
dark room. But there may be other causes.
It has happened in particular states of the air
at sea, that phosphoric lights have been seen
on the rigging and masts of ships; and on the
land such phenomena are not very unfrequent.
A gentleman and his servants were once riding
up one of the high Sussex downs in a gloomy
or rather stormy evening in Autumn, and on
a sudden the servant, who followed his master,


53
cried out in extreme terror that his horse's
ears and mane were on fire. The master, a
man of great coolness, replied as he jogged
on, Don't hbe frightened, Thomas, for my
horse's ears and mane are on fire too. And
in fact the fire continued wavering about for
some time, and was probably of the same na­
ture as those wandering fires which are called
igneus fatuus; and seem to have been always
known under the names of Will-with-the
wisp, Jacko'-lanthorn, or the friar's-lanthorn.
Though Dr. Darwin says, he has travelled in
all countries, and at all hours of the night,
and at all seasons of the year, yet never hap­
pened to see any of these exhalations. But it
is time to go to our early dinner, that we may
prepare for our walk in the afternoon.



Afternoon.
Mrs. Talbot—George—
Emily.
A Conservatory and Garden.

Mrs. Talbot
There are few sights, my
children, that afford me so much pleasure as
F2


54
a collection of plants, where the produce of
every quarter of the world is assembled. In
the stove the natives of the torrid zone; in the
conservatory the inhabitants of milder regions,
which are yet too tender to bear the winter in
this country. There, planted in a swampy
soil, brought from heaths and moors, are the
beautiful productions of North America; in
another spot of compost earth are Alpine
plants; and on that artificial rock those that
flourish on dry and stony places, where little
else will vegetate. Can any thing exceed in
loveliness those orange trees, bearing at once
the most fragrant flowers, and fruit in every
stage, from the first falling of the blossom to
the golden orange in its utmost perfection?
These myrtles too, aspiring like cypresses to
the top of the conservatory, are delightful.


George
And that beautiful tree which
seems to bear white lilies, what is it?


Mrs. Talbot
The datura
 arborea, or tree
thorn-apple, which is a native of Mexico and
Peru, and is of the same genus as the common
thorn-apple, a plant frequently found in lanes,
and among rubbish by the sides of roads, and
which is of so poisonous a nature, that village


55
children have sometimes been destroyed by
eating the fruit it bears.


Emily
Oh, Mamma! how I should like
to have such a place as this to walk in! when
abroad it is cold, and wet, and comfortless,
when there are no leaves on the trees, no
flowers in the fields.


Mrs. Talbot
Yet it so happens, that many
of those who have these enviable luxuries
have no taste for them; and having once
built and stored them with plants, hardly
enter them again.


George
Then, what is the use of their
having spent so much money?


Mrs. Talbot
Very frequently, because it is
the fashion to have, or to affect a taste for
plants; just as it is to do many other things,
which perhaps those who appear the most
eager had much rather let alone, if they were
not governed by fashion. The pleasure af­
forded, however, by these, the loveliest of
nature's productions, is in some degree com­
mon to almost all the human race; and the
humblest inhabitant of a garret has a few
springs of mint or angelica, faintly attempting
to vegetate in his wretched abode in some


56
narrow alley, where it is hardly possible to
breathe; while the very fine lady, when she
gives a splendid fete in town, goes to an im­
mense expence to ornament her rooms in the
middle of winter with lilacs, syringas, and
roses; and winds her festoons of coloured
lamps round orange trees and laurels.


George
I have been in the stove, Mother,
but I could not remain there long, it is so
extremely hot and sultry. The gardener has
shewn me coffee, cocoa, and the bread fruit
tree; the sugar cane, indigo,
		 and ginger.
Will you not go for a moment?


Mrs. Talbot
Yes, and I am very glad you
have seen these plants, as they give you a
much clearer idea of those productions thus
growing, than can be conveyed by any de­
scription.


George
Was it not the bread fruit which
the Indian from the South Sea islands was so
affected by, when he saw it in the King's
Garden at Paris, because it brought to his
memory his dear native country?


Mrs. Talbot
I am not sure; nor do I
now recollect whether the Abbé de Lille, who
has so happily introduced the circumstance


57
into his Poem des Jardins, has told us what
tree it was. We must not forget to look for
the passage when we return home.


Emily
Mamma, I touched a very light
pretty plant that is like an acacia, only much
smaller and with finer leaves, and instantly it
withered away.


George
I could have told you what that
is; it is the sensitive plant: I saw them, you know, Mamma, at a nursery gardener's.


Mrs. Talbot
And perhaps you may re­
member that I then told you, it is called the
emblem of excessive sensibility; and a great
many fine things have been said of persons
whose delicate nerves make them resemble
this plant; of which, however, there are se­
veral sorts, some with more and others with
less of this extraordinary quality; while the
more robust of the genera do not possess it at
all. There is one sort which bears no flower
in this country, and is of so very frail a tex­
ture, that the approach of an insect, or the
breathings of the air, cause its leaves imme­
diately to fall, and fold over each other. Your
aunt compared this singular species of the
mimosa, to persons who yield to an excess of


58
sensibility, or what is termed so; which arises
much oftener than is generally imagined, from
their having too much feeling for themselves,
and too little for others. While we sit in this
recess, and recover ourselves from the faint­
ness occasioned by the heat of the stove, I
will endeavour to recollect and repeat the
lines she addressed to
The Mimosa.Softly blow the western breezes,Sweetly shines the evening sun;But you, mimosa! nothing pleases,You, what delights your comrades teizes,What they enjoy you try to shun.Alike annoy'd by heat or cold,Ever too little or too much,As if by heaviest winds controul'd,Your leaves before a zephyr fold,And tremble at the slightest touch.Flutt'ring around, in playful rings,A gilded fly your beauty greeted;But, from his light and filmy wings,As if he had lanced a thousand stings,Your shuddering folioles retreated!Those feathery leaves are like the plume,Pluck'd from the bird of Indian skies;But should you therefore thus presume,While others boast a fairer bloom,All that surrounds you to despise?59The rose, whose blushing blossoms blow,Pride of the vegetal creation,The air and light disdains not so,And the fastidious pride you show,Is not reserve, but affectation.

But it is time to return home, and we will
walk through the lanes, though it is a little
farther than over the fields. At every period
of the year, I am delighted with the scents in
forest walks and copses; and at this season of
ripened summer they are particularly de­
licious. Nor are such scenes as those we are
now entering upon entirely divested of plea­
sure in winter, though then they are wholly
silent; or the silence is broken only by the
cawing here and there of a solitary rook; an
hare sometimes limps fearfully across the path,
or a pheasant shakes the frozen snow from the
trees, as he flies up among the branches. The
other animals of the woods are then torpid, at
least partly so.


George
What animals?


Mrs. Talbot
The squirrel and the dor­
mouse. The squirrel indeed does not alto­
gether confine himself to the nest he has built,
and the stores he has laid up; but the dor­


60
mouse, like a larger creature of the same
species, the marmot, an inhabitant of the
Alps, becomes torpid in cold weather, and
rolling himself into a ball which has hardly
any appearance of life, he remains snug within
his nest, till the first warm day calls him out
to nibble a little of his winter store; but the
chill winds of evening again congeal his blood,
and he sleeps soundly. This little creature is
not classed with the common rat or mouse,
but with the marmot, squirrel, and hare. Of
these the marmot inhabits the highest Alps,
where trees will not grow, and forms little
societies of fourteen or twenty, feeding on
roots, grass, and such plants as grow on those
bleak summits. They make burrows, some­
thing like those of rabbits, and line them very
industriously with moss and dried grass.
They go into these retreats as soon as the
first frosts set in, and sleep with great per­
severance till March. They are easily tamed;
but are in winter so much disposed to sleep,
that even in a warm room they are hardly
kept awake. So much for the marmot; and
when I tell you, that the first rhymes I ever
made were on the loss of a favourite dormouse,


61
killed by an accident, which I then, at about
six years old, really thought the greatest cala­
mity that ever was endured by an unhappy
little girl, you will easily comprehend how it
happens, that I am even now rather partial to
that small animal, which certainly is not half
so lively and entertaining as many others, that
are usually kept by children for their amuse­
ment.


Emily
Mamma, you never showed us
those verses; I should be so pleased to read
them.


George
Do, Mother, let us hear them,
they must be quite curiosities.


Mrs. Talbot
My dear children, I have
forgotten them many years ago; nor have I
the least notion whether they were more or
less foolish than such an infant might be
supposed to make; but to make you ample
amends, and add a little sleeper, as the
country people call it, to your collection of
minor poetry, it has just occurred to me,
that I have some quatrains on the imprison­
ment of a dormouse, written some years ago
by your aunt, which, as soon as we have
rested a little after our long walk, I will try to
G


62
find in a book, where several of our poetical
attempts in former days are inserted — —
— — — — — — —
— — — I have fortunately found it;
and perhaps there are other verses in it that
may amuse you. In a short time, your
brother and sister, returning from their long
visit, will open to us new sources of enjoy­
ment. Here, George, with good emphasis
and discretion, read this Address to a Mouse,
taken in its insensible state, and presented to
a little girl.





The Dormouse Just Taken.

Sleep on, sleep on, poor captive mouse,
Oh, sleep! unconscious of the fate
That ruthless spoil'd thy cosey house,
And tore thee from thy mate.


What barbarous hand could thus molest
A little innocent like thee,
And drag thee from thy mossy nest
To sad captivity?


Ah! when suspended life again
Thy torpid senses shall recall,
Poor guiltless prisoner! what pain
Thy bosom shall appal.



63

When starting up in wild affright,
Thy bright round eyes shall vainly seek
Thy tiny spouse, with breast so white,
Thy whisker'd brethren sleek;


Thy snug warm nest with feathers lin'd,
Thy winter store of roots and corn;
Nor nuts nor beech-mast shalt thou find,
The toil of many a morn.


Thy soft white feet around thy cage
Will cling; while thou in hopeless pain
Wilt waste thy little life in rage,
To find thy struggles vain!


Yet since thou'rt fall'n in gentle hands,
Oh! captive mouse, allay thy grief,
For light shall be thy silken bands,
And time afford relief.


Warm is the lodging, soft the bed,
Thy little mistress will prepare;
By her kind hands thou shalt be fed,
And dainties be thy fare.


But neither men nor mice forget
Their native home, where'er they be,
And fondly thou wilt still regret
Thy wild woods, loves, and liberty!












Conversation The Third.

Poems.


Snow-drops.


Violets.


The Humble Bee.


The Grasshopper.


The Squirrel.


The Glowworm.



G2





Conversation The Third.
Mrs. Talbot—George—
Emily.

Emily
Brother, my dear brother, here is
only pleasant news for us to-day: in the first
place, in Mamma's book there are several
little poems which she had forgotten; and in
the next, my aunt writes to say that she will
be here in a fortnight, with Edward, Fanny,
and Ella; and then, after staying with us a
few days, we are all going together to the
sea-side for a month.


George
Indeed that is pleasant news.
Mother, I do not think that either Edward
or I have any reason now to envy Mr. Scam­
perville.


Mrs. Talbot
I trust, my dear boy, that
you never will have any.


George
And yet, I assure you, he looks
upon me, and I dare say would on Edward


68
if he was here, with the utmost contempt.
I met him this morning on horseback: he was
smarter than ever, with leather breeches, boots,
and a knowing coat, which he desired me to
admire, as well as his horse, which his father,
he said, had just purchased for him, that he
might sport a figure and cut a dash at the
famous races which begin this morning. He
had two servants with him, with whom he
had been betting, he said, on the horses that
were to run. He was so good as to pity me
extremely for not being able to go; and said,
if he had known it time enough, he would
have lent me his old poney.


Mrs. Talbot
And could you, George,
hear all this without a wish to see this splendid
shew? Have buckskin breeches, fashionable
boots, and a knowing coat, no charms in
your imagination?


George
Indeed, Mother, I have been and
am very happy without all these. I have
never been taught to number them among my
wants, and my not possessing them does not
give me any pain.


Mrs. Talbot
What? not though you are
thought a quiz, and a coddle, and a humdrum


69
fellow, by these bucks, Mr. Scamperville and
his friends.


George
No, Mother; I must care more
about them than I now do, before I shall be
concerned at what they say of me; but if they
are impertinent to me, it will be another
affair.


Mrs. Talbot
I trust you will always have
that proper degree of spirit, my George,
which you now possess; and since you do not
think fate has used you immeasurably ill;
though you find yourself, this sultry morning
of July, sitting with me and Emily, instead of
scampering with all sorts of people, who ap­
pear half mad, to the races, amidst clouds of
dust, and confused noises, tell me what will
most amuse you, till we dine?—afterwards I
have a project to go and regale on wood straw­
berries and cream at the dairy farm, on the
edge of the forest, or rather to take out our re­
past and eat it under an old beech tree, and
fancy ourselves like the banished duke and his
followers, in George's favourite play of As
you like it.


Emily
It will be delightful indeed, my
dear Mamma! I shall only be sorry that Ed­


70
ward and Ella, and my cousin Fanny, cannot
be with us.


Mrs. Talbot
When they come, we shall
contrive another party of the same sort, per­
haps; at present we must be as happy as we
can by ourselves, unless indeed you would like
to have the Miss Mincings, or Miss Brockly,
invited to go with us.


Emily
O no, Mamma, indeed I had ra­
ther not; the Miss Mincings are so prim, and
make such a fuss about their frocks and their
shoes, and their bonnets; and the maid that
waits upon them cries every moment, Miss
Maria, you will spoil your new bonnet; Miss
Jane, you will tear your best japan muslin;
that the poor girls have no peace, and dare
not play and amuse themselves. So as they are
taught to think these frocks and bonnets are
the things of the greatest consequence, they
are always telling me what this cost, and that
cost, and asking me if what I wear cost as
much; and indeed, Mamma, I am so tired
with them, that I am very glad when they
gone.


Mrs. Talbot
But Miss Brockly—she is
willing enough to play, I am sure!



71

Emily
And willing enough to eat. When
I go to see her, there is always such a quantity
of cakes and fruit, that I wonder those who
eat them are not sick, and if she comes here,
she is never satisfied, unless there is something
nice, as she calls it, to eat; and you know she
devoured all the preserved cherries, and every
thing that you ordered Margaret to let us
have, when she was here last.


Mrs. Talbot
She is very piggishly brought
up, indeed; but to live well, as it is called, is
the taste of that family, and the child sees no­
thing else, and hears of nothing else, than the
gluttonous delights of eating, from the hour
she rises till she goes to bed.


Emily
Then you know, Mamma, there is
not much pleasure with these Miss Minc­
ings.


Mrs. Talbot
Not with Miss Brockly, to
be sure, Emily, when strawberries and cream
are in question.


Emily
Oh, Mamma, you know very well,
it is not on that account, but I am happier
with only you and my brother; and as to
George, he don't like any of those little girls
at all.



72

Mrs. Talbot
But George is often too
severe in his judgment; I am afraid he will
become satirical and cynical as he grows older,
and that will not do, perhaps, for a boy who is
to make his way in the world.


Emily
But, Mamma, you would have him
always speak the truth, would you not, and
never say to any one what he does not think?


Mrs. Talbot
Certainly; a strict adherence
to truth is the basis of every other good qua­
lity, and without it no virtue or goodness can
exist. But while the truth should be our first
principle, there is no occasion to tell people
with whom we have nothing to do, that we
contemn and despise them. George has such
good qualities, and is in some respects so much
superior to most other boys, that I sometimes
apprehend his very excellencies will produce
faults, and that the consciousness of uncom­
mon understanding will make him proud and
fastidious. But I cannot imagine where he is
gone to all this time.


Emily
He is coming at this moment across
the garden.


Mrs. Talbot
Why, George! you suddenly
disappeared; we were going to examine far­



73
ther into the contents of this book, in which
your aunt and I have entered several little
poems that we either collected or wrote some
years ago, as well as others of later date.


George
I would not have absented myself,
my dear Mother, but I went down to Master
Headham's, whom I met in the garden. He
came to ask the gardener for some herbs, to
make what the poor man told me was to be a
fermentation for his grandson's leg.


Mrs. Talbot
He means fomentation: but
what is the matter with it then?


George
Two fine gentlemen, he says,
going to the races, desperate grand folks to be
sure, drove along so fast in their chai, with
two horses, that the poor lad, who was running
to open a gate for them, was knocked down,
and so hurt with the wheel, that at first he
thought his leg was broke; but the doctor,
who happened luckily enough to be visiting a
poor woman in the village, says it is only sadly
bruised, though the skin is torn off from his
knee to his foot; so I thought I would go
down to see the boy, who, poor fellow, is in
great pain, but he does not want for any thing
just now. The old man and woman are in
Vol. 1.
H


74
sad trouble about him, for he was an indus­
trious boy, and just beginning to be an help
to them; but they say they should not have
minded the misfortune so much, as their
child's leg is not broke, if these very grand
gentlemen, though they saw him fall, and
knew he was very much hurt, had not sworn
at him most terribly, struck at him with a
whip, and then drove away faster than ever.


Mrs. Talbot
And does nobody know who
they are?


George
They are strangers, I believe, on a
visit at Sir Harry's. Their servants, who
came along afterwards, said they would have
served the little rascal right, if they had killed
him on the spot; for what business had he in
the way? But farmer Dewsberry, who saw
the whole business, declared, that the horses
were so violent, and unmanageable, that one
of them flew out of the road and knocked the
poor boy down, and it was impossible for him
to get out of the way before the wheel nearly
tore his leg off.


Mrs. Talbot
And is it thus, that young
men, who aspire to be thought spirited and
fashionable, trifle with the lives of others,


75
while they hazard their own? But what an
aggravation, thus to add cruelty to fool-hardi­
ness! Go, my dear, and send Margaret down
to the cottage of these poor old people, or per­
haps you would like to go yourself.


George
Yes, I shall go quicker.


Mrs. Talbot
Give them this piece of
money. Tell them they shall not be under
the necessity of applying to the parish to pay
the apothecary, as I dare say that is one of
their apprehensions; but we will take care of
that; and in my walk this evening I will call
upon them.


George
Poor creatures! that will comfort
them—but indeed, Mother, I think some one
ought to apply to the men who did this mis­
chief, to make poor Jack some amends.


Mrs. Talbot
If they do not break their
own necks before night, which is highly pro­
bable, and which would not be half so great a
loss to society as that of one honest labourer,
who supports his children with difficulty by
the utmost exertion of his strength, they will
probably forget after a nine o'clock dinner,
and sitting up the rest of the night at the
gaming-table, that such an accident happened.


76
Or if they could be brought to remember it,
they are much more likely to resent an appli­
cation to their justice and humanity, than to
listen to it. So we will do for poor Jack as
well as we can; and while you hasten to tell
him so, Emily and I will only read such of our
new found collection as you have before seen;
for some, I know, are familiar to you.


Emily

Mamma, what is the reason, that
such men as these, that drove over the poor
boy, are so cruel and hard-hearted? Do they
think that poor people have not as much feel­
ing as they have?


Mrs. Talbot
They never think about poor
people at all.  They were probably brought up
with every luxury about them, and how others
fared they were never taught to consider. Self-
gratification is their governing principle, and
while they fly about from one place to another
in search of pleasure, the wants and woes of
the humble class of society, without whose
toil these flashing men could not exist, are
wholly overlooked. I do not mean however
to say, that is the case with all young men
of fortune; but I fear there are too many of
this unfeeling disposition, and that it is a dis­


77
position that is rather gaining ground. How­
ever, since we can do but little, Emily, to
amend them, let us endeavour to correct our
own faults, and we shall seldom want employ­
ment, if we candidly examine ourselves. And
now while George is gone to poor Jack, let us
read these two little poems on two favourite
early flowers. The first I wrote, as I now re­
collect, when, after having been some time in
town, I went in Spring to pass a few days at a
place, where in my early years I had lived fre­
quently for two or three months at a time, with
some young people of nearly my own age.
We had made gardens of our own, as you and
your brothers and sisters do now, and planted
several flowers. After a long absence, I once
more revisited the spot; it had been converted
into a yard to dry the household linen; yet
among the grass with which our former par­
terres was now covered, and notwithstanding the
frequent inroads of pattens and bucking baskets,
a few of our former favourites raised their heads
here and there among the posts and lines. The
yellow hellebore and the 
snow-drop were the
most remarkable. The latter of these, you
know, is indigenous in this country, and often
H2


78
grows spontaneously on the edges of fields and
in extensive orchards, whitening the ground
with its elegant drooping blossom. It is sup­
posed that the roots, if boiled and treated like
those of the orchis, of which saloop is made,
would be equally nutritious; but at present
its greatest merit seems to be in its delicate
white petals, those within being elegantly
veined with green; and its early appearance, as
the advanced guard, if I may use a military
expression, of the loveliest productions of nature,
and as announcing, though yet at a distance,
the approach of the loveliest season of the year.
Two lines of Mrs. Barbauld's on this flower
are so beautiful, that they cannot be too often
quoted—
As Flora's breath, by some transforming power,Had chang'd an icicle into a flower.
Now read the less happy verses at the third
page of my old book.



To The Snow-Drop.

Emily


Like pendant flakes of vegetating snow,
The early herald of the infant year,
E'er yet the adventurous Crocus dares to blow
Beneath the orchard boughs, thy buds appear.



79

While still the cold north-east ungenial lowers,
And scarce the hazel in the leafless copse
Or sallows
 shew their downy powder'd flowers,
The grass is spangled with thy silver drops.


Yet when those pallid blossoms shall give place
To countless tribes of richer hue and scent,
Summer's gay blooms, and Autumn's yellow race,
I shall thy pale inodorous bells lament.


So journeying onward in life's varying track,
Even while warm youth its bright illusion lends,
Fond Memory often with regret looks back
To childhood's pleasures, and to infant friends.




Mrs. Talbot
The next, which is also ad­
dressed to a flower, is not altogether my own.
Indeed some of the lines are entirely taken
from a little poem, I believe written by Mr.
Gifford, and I adapted them to my purpose,
which was for your sister to learn; but I left
the book in town, and forgot that some of these
were written in it, till George's taste for rhyme,
and the facility with which you both learn
any thing written in measure, made me recol­
lect it was among the last papers and manu­
scripts that were sent me from thence.



80




Violets.

Emily


Sweet Violets! from your humble beds
Among the moss, beneath the thorn,
You rear your unprotected heads,
And brave the cold and cheerless morn
Of early March; not yet are past
The wintry cloud, the sullen blast,
Which, when your fragrant buds shall blow,
May lay those purple beauties low.
Ah, stay awhile, till warmer showers
And brighter suns shall cheer the day;
Sweet Violets, stay, till hardier flowers
Prepare to meet the lovely May.
Then from your mossy shelter come,
And rival every richer bloom;
For though their colours gayer shine,
Their odours do not equal thine.
And thus real merit still may dare to vie,
With all that wealth bestows, or pageant heraldry.






Mrs. Talbot
And here comes your brother
from his charitable mission.


George
The boy is easier, Mother, and the
poor old people, comforted by your kindness,
have ceased to lament themselves. Some of the
neighbours have offered to drive up their cow,
and do such things as the old man used to be
assisted in by his grandson.



81

Mrs. Talbot
How little do those who live in
luxury, whose every want is provided for, and
every wish prevented, know or comprehend of
the difficulties with which the poor patiently
contend, only to be enabled to live from day to
day. It is almost impossible for one who has
always lived in splendid houses, moved from
place to place in convenient carriages, and
been constantly pampered with delicacies, till
their appetites are even jaded, to put them­
selves in the place of a fellow being, who rises
from his flock bed before the sun, to work all
day, and has nothing perhaps but bread for
himself and his children, and not always
enough of that. It is not possible for the
former of these men to conceive, of what im­
portance a shilling is to the latter; and how
happy the industrious poor man would think
himself, to receive in the course of an whole
year as much as is, in a single journey of whim,
expended by the idle rich one, who perhaps
yawns all the way, and when he arrives at the
place he has hurried to reach, wonders why he
came at all, and scampers back again. And
yet so little real happiness does this unmeaning
waste of money and time bring to those who


82
practise it, that if the fact could be ascertained,
I am very sure the infirm labourer, Thomas
Hardham, who is old and lame, and poor, and
who has lost his children, and met with a
great many misfortunes, is a much happier
being, than those unthinking and unfeeling
men who were the occasion of his present
misfortune.


George
I wish though they could be per­
suaded to make him some amends for it; and
I wish I was of an age to say to them that it is
only their duty.


Mrs. Talbot
Your endeavours would be in
vain at any age, I believe. But since we have
now done all that our means allow to mitigate
a misfortune we could not prevent, let us re­
turn to our beloved natural history. There we
meet with nothing to give us pain, but the
more we study it, the more we are taught the
truth of the observation so simply but justly
expressed by Goldsmith: How much kinder
is God to his creatures than they are to each
other! Have you remarked nothing new,
George, in your walks these last days?


George
Yes: I sat down on a dry bank
behind Hardham's cottage garden, while I


83
waited to hear what Mr. Grant, the Apothe­
cary, who called upon Jack the second time,
thought of him. And as I remained there, I
saw two of those large bees, which we call
humble bees, go into a small hole in the ground.
They seemed to unload themselves just as the
honey bees do; for one of them came out
again while I remained there, without that
yellow meally substance on his thighs which
I saw when he went in, and which I suppose
is the material with which the cells are made;
and therefore I thought these humble bees
might have in some hollow place in the bank,
a sort of hive or store, and that they were wise
to hide it from the robbery of man. Have
they any such contrivance?


Mrs. Talbot
I think there are several sorts
of what we call humble bees—the apis ter­
restris or earth bee, and the apis nemorum or
wood bee, and some others; but those two are,
I believe, the commonest sorts, and the first
is what you saw go into his subterraneous
house. As they appear as busy as the common
honey bee, and to collect the nectar and the
pollen of flowers in the same manner, it is
probable that their habits are nearly the same;


84
yet I never recollect having heard that their
hoards of honey had been discovered in dig­
ging into banks, or those places which they
are known to frequent. And it was on the
supposition that they were not equally provi­
dent with their congeners, the honey bee, that,
as a lesson of industry and forecast, the verses
were composed which I am going to repeat.
They were written for a little girl, who had
expressed great curiosity on this subject. Af­
ter all, however, it is probable that my moral
is given at the expence of the humble bee's
character, which is perhaps very unjustly de­
famed.



The Humble Bee.

Good morrow, gentle humble bee,
You are abroad betimes, I see,
And sportive fly from tree to tree,
To take the air;


And visit each gay flower that blows;
While every bell and bud that glows,
Quite from the daisy to the rose,
Your visits share.


Saluting now the pied carnation,
Now on the aster taking station,
Murmuring your ardent admiration;
Then off you frisk,



85

Where poppies hang their heavy heads,
Or where the gorgeous sun-flower spreads,
For you her luscious golden beds,
On her broad disk.


To live on pleasure's painted wing,
To feed on all the sweets of Spring,
Must be a mighty pleasant thing,
If it would last.


But you, no doubt, have wisely thought,
These joys may be too dearly bought,
And will not unprepar'd be caught
When Summer's past.


For soon will fly the laughing hours,
And this delightful waste of flowers
Will shrink before the wintry showers
And winds so keen.


Alas! who then will lend you aid,
If your dry cell be yet unmade,
Nor store of wax and honey laid
In magazine?


Then, Lady Buzz, you will repent,
That hours for useful labour meant
Were so unprofitably spent,
And idly lost.


By cold and hunger keen oppress'd,
Say, will your yellow velvet vest,
Or the fair tippet on your breast,
Shield you from frost?

I


86

Ah! haste your winter stock to save,
That snug within your Christmas cave,
When snow falls fast and tempests rave,
You may remain.


And the hard season braving there,
On Spring's warm gales you will repair,
Elate thro' chrystal fields of air,
To bliss again.




And now to dinner, and then we will set
out on our forest walk.



Second Part.
Mrs. Talbot—George—
Emily.
A Forest, and walk Home.

Mrs. Talbot
Now, after our repast, we will
ramble into the forest. There is no scene
more pleasing to me than these extensive
woods, and none that are less frequently en­
joyed in England.


George
If he had not been recorded as a
robber, as well as an inhabitant of the woods,
I have often thought, Mother, that I should


87
have liked to have lived with Robin Hood,
and his followers, in Sherwood Forest.


Mrs. Talbot
And I remember, George,
when I was a girl, having an equal delight in
wandering about woods and copses, but par­
ticularly among those beautiful beech woods,
that shade some of the South Downs, where
they descend to the weald. And as I grew
older, and became acquainted with the poets,
I delighted to imagine myself engaged with a
party of young friends, to act Milton's Masque
of Comus, in a great wood that was not far
from my then residence.


Emily
But you never did so, Mamma?


Mrs. Talbot
No; I should not have been
allowed to have undertaken a part in any
theatrical performance. It was merely one
of those visions in which I sometimes indulged
myself. At other times, I used to fancy I
could meet in those woods with some of the
Knights and Damsels that Spencer tells us of
in the Fairy Queen.


George
Did you really believe then that
such persons existed?


Mrs. Talbot
No; I certainly knew they
did not; yet a great deal of desultory read­


88
ing, and a lively imagination, without having
any friend who knew how to direct either the
one or the other, made me in my early youth
extremely romantic; but though all these
fairy visions have long since disappeared, a
woody scene has still a thousand charms for
me; I love to frequent it in all seasons of the
year, and especially if it be of such an extent
as this where we now are.


George
The forests in France and Ger­
many are much larger than ours.


Mrs. Talbot
Beyond comparison. The
Forest of Orleans covered many leagues, and
is still very extensive, though not of its former
magnitude. There are other forests in France
of immense extent, though many, and espe­
cially those that were appropriated to the
amusement of the King and Princes of the
blood and nobility, as hunting grounds, are
much lessened since the revolution. And as
the people of France use no other fuel than
wood, and very little care is taken to secure
a succession by carefully planting and pre­
serving trees, the fuel becomes every year
scarcer, and has long been at an extravagant
price in France, where the natives are pre­


89
possessed with a notion that coal is unwhole­
some. The woods of Germany, many of
which are of oak, cover immense portions of
the country, and feed very great droves of
swine. But even these, and the pine forests
of Sweden, Russia, and Norway, are described
as being inferior in extent and magnificence
to the stupendous forests of America, which,
notwithstanding the considerable tracts that
have been cleared by the settlers from Europe,
still cover unmeasured extents of country, and
consist of trees, which in size, as well as beauty,
greatly exceed all we have any idea of in
England. You have seen, I think, a picture,
or at least a print of an African forest, where
the lion, the 
leopard, and 
tyger, prowl under
trees that seem to be loaded with tropical
fruits, but which I should think, with such
accompaniments, would afford little temp­
tation.


George
And there were snakes, I re­
member.


Mrs. Talbot
Snakes of great size are
found both in Africa and America. In the
latter, you know, is the formidable rattle-
snake, whose bite is so fatal; but they do not
I2


90
attack man, unless trod upon, or otherwise
provoked: when they move, the horny rings
in their tails, falling over each other, make a
kind of tinkling sound, which gives notice of
their approach; but the rattle-snake is, you
know, said to possess the power of fascination;
so that if a bird, a mouse, or squirrel, once
sees the creature fix its eyes upon it, the
wretched animal, perfectly conscious of the
fatal attraction, cannot escape, but, as if be­
witched, it is impelled to approach its enemy,
and it comes nearer and nearer, still uttering
cries of distress and terror, till the jaws of the
monster close upon it. It has sometimes
seemed to me, that there are people exactly in
the case of the animal thus fascinated by the
rattle-snake. How often does one see that a
fatal impulse, contrary to reason and common
sense, seems in despite of both to drag away
some unhappy person to their own destruction;
and though they are told, and really feel
themselves that they are plunging into ruin,
yet nothing can stop their headlong course till
that ruin overwhelms them.


George
But is it true that the rattle-snake
has this power?



91

Mrs. Talbot
It has been averred so re­
peatedly, that notwithstanding travellers are a
little too apt to exceed or misrepresent the
truth in their relations, one must believe it to
be true; and the ancient fable of the basilisk
that killed with its eyes, seems to have origi­
nated in an opinion that an animal possessing
this power actually existed.


Emily
Dear! how much I should be
terrified, Mamma, if we were to hear in this
wood a noise resembling that which the rattle-
snake makes.


George
But that, you know, Emily, is
impossible; for there are no rattle-snakes in
England, and no snakes here hurt at all.


Emily
I am sure I would not trust them
though, for I saw a frightful one the other
day, just by the cucumber bed; and I ran
away as fast as I possibly could.


Mrs. Talbot
And what did the snake do?


Emily
It ran away too, I believe; for I
looked behind me, being rather afraid it
would have pursued me; but I saw it making
its way towards the hot beds quicker than I
ran to the house. The gardener said, when I
told him how it had frightened me, that he


92
had killed another great snake there the day
before, and found a great many of their eggs.


Mrs. Talbot
It is rather prejudice against
them from their ugliness, than any real in­
jury they do, that causes these reptiles to be
so generally persecuted; and I much doubt
whether they are not extremely useful in
destroying insects, that would otherwise prey
on the gardener's cucumbers, or injure their
roots. Vipers are dangerous; and I once
saw an instance of a boy being severely bitten
by them, when, believing there was a nest
of young birds in a hollow tree, he thrust his
hand among a family of vipers: his hand and
arm were so dreadfully swelled, that we were
obliged to send for an apothecary, and it was
some time before the boy recovered. In
general, however, the snakes of this country
are quite harmless; and even in India, where
the poison of reptiles and insects, as well as of
plants, is exalted, and rendered more power­
ful by the heat of the sun, there are some
creatures of this species who are objects of
veneration to the simple natives. In a book
of Poems on various subjects, I found not
long ago a few very pretty lines, which I be­


93
lieve I can remember. It was the petition of
an Indian girl to an adder, to stay while she
copied the beautiful colours of his skin to
weave a fillet for her lover, and is said to have
been written in the year 1740, by an emi­
nent literary character, then at Winchester
School, which made me imagine it might
probably be Dr. Warton.
Stay, stay, thou lovely fearful snake,Nor hide thee in yon darksome brake,But let me oft thy form review,Thy sparkling eyes and golden hue:From them a chaplet shall be wove,To grace the youth I dearest love.Then ages hence, when thou no moreShalt glide along the sunny shore,Thy copied beauties shall be seen;Thy vermeil red, and living green,In mimic folds thou shalt display;Stay, lovely, fearful adder, stay!


Emily
Indeed the Indian girl should not
choose a pattern for me, if she preferred the
colours of a snake to those of beautiful flowers,
or to the colours of the butterflies. But pray,
Mamma, tell me—what is that loud shrill noise?
I often used to hear it last Summer, but never
when I happened to be walking with you;


94
and I could not describe it so as to get any one
to tell me what creature made it. Listen, I
hear it now!


Mrs. Talbot
You mean the chirping or
song of the field cricket; or perhaps of some
of the various sorts of grasshoppers that now
are heard in many places, forming but a poor
substitute, however, for the birds, many of
which, soon after Midsummer, cease to sing.


Emily
Yet I like to hear those crickets and
grasshoppers, the sound is so Summerish, if I
may use the expression.


George
There is another sort too, a great
deal larger than either field crickets or grass­
hoppers, that make a sort of shrill noise of a
night; the gardener called it the fen cricket,
or the churr worm, and said it did a great
deal of mischief in the grass down by the side
of the water. But I saw no great harm it
could do; for one that I observed appeared to
be a very innocent and helpless creature, and
to get in its hole in the grass again as soon as
it could.


Mrs. Talbot
It is the Talpo Grillus, usually
called the mole cricket. The noise made by
that insect is, I think, particularly pleasant of


95
an evening, heard as it usually is in solitary
and remote places near water, where it in­
habits: the grasshopper is a dweller among
meadows, and is of the same species as the
cicada, those little creatures which, when you
are walking in the grass, seem to fly some
yards before you. Of this race are the insects
called Cicala, in Italy, and other warm coun­
tries, whose chirping is at some seasons so
loud, as to be very annoying, and who are so
voracious as often to strip the shrubs and trees
of their leaves at a very early period of the
Italian Summer.
To this family, the grilli and cicada, also
belongs the locust; which has covered whole
countries as with a cloud, and carried famine
and desolation with it wherever their terrific
hosts have settled, eating up every green leaf
and blade of grass, and even the thatch of the
houses, and every vegetable substance they
alighted upon. But fortunately they never
find their way to these northern regions. And
see, George, here is another insect, which in
this country is only of very trifling inconve­
nience to the husbandman or the gardener,
but in some parts of the world is so destructive,
as to inflict ruin on those whose property it


96
seizes upon: I mean the ant. Look at that
brown hillock under the trees, it seems all alive
and in motion. It is formed by the horse or
wood-ant, one of the largest of a numerous
species, some of which are as industrious,
though less useful than bees. But in the West
Indies such immense swarms of the black ant
have sometimes appeared, that the ground for
many miles seemed to move; they too devour
every thing in their way, eating not only vege­
table but animal substances; and they are said
sometimes to have destroyed the helpless negro
children, whom their unfortunate mothers have
left on the ground while they worked. But
we have wandered from our former subject.
I meant, George, to have asked, if you do not
recollect Cowley's translation of Anacreon's
Grasshopper, which, as I thought him too
much of an Epicurean to be respectable, I
altered a little before you learned it.


George
I am not sure that I remember it,
but I will try.
The Grasshopper.Happy insect, what can beIn happiness compar'd to thee,Fed with nourishment divine,The dewy morning's chrystal wine;97For Nature waits upon thee still,And thy verdant cup doth fill.All the fields which thou dost see,All the plants belong to thee;All that Summer suns produceAre, blest insect! for thy use.While thy feast doth not destroyThe verdure thou dost thus enjoy;But the blythe shepherd haileth thee,Singing as musical as he;And peasants love thy voice to hear,Prophet of the ripening year.To thee of all things upon earth,Life is no longer than thy mirth.Insect truly blest! for thouDost neither age nor winter know;But, when thou hast danc'd and sungThy fill, the flowers and leaves among,Sated with thy Summer feastThou retir'st to endless rest.


Emily
But, Mamma, I want to know
what use these creatures are of; for both the
insects we have been talking of seem in some
places to do a great deal of harm, and I don't
understand that they do any good.


Mrs. Talbot
Certainly they are of use,
for they afford food to a great number of
birds, besides other purposes, which they
are doubtless created to answer, though we
K


98
do not immediately perceive those purposes.
Of these little creatures just before us, who
are so busy, some in carrying those straws,
and others white substances about, the first
are providing a place for the reception and
security of the young, while some are carry­
ing the young themselves; but their toil will
probably be rendered in a great degree use­
less, for the pheasants, with which these
woods abound, find in these insects a prin­
cipal article of their food, and devour great
quantities whenever they can meet with them.
The black game, and all other fowls of that
sort, as well as many smaller birds, also eat
them; and the good housewives send children
into the woods to collect the pupa, or what
we usually call, eggs of ants, for their young
Turkies and Guinea fowl.


George
And so every animal preys upon
some inferior animal.


Mrs. Talbot
And man upon them all.


George
But I should think, Mother, that
as far as relates to pheasants, and others of
those wild birds, which are called game, some
other creatures go more than halves with man.
Foxes and wild cats live in these woods, and I


99
dare say kill great numbers of the pheasants
and hares.


Mrs. Talbot
And there are weasels, 
pole-
cats, and other creatures of that race, who
also put in their claim. The squirrel alone,
of all the quadrupeds that inhabit these wild
scenes, seems to be the least at enmity with
other creatures.


George
And he is rewarded, I think, by
being less persecuted.


Mrs. Talbot
And yet he is not without
his troubles: the wild cat and martin cat can
reach his airy abode, and destroy his infant
family; and man, though the squirrel cannot
be considered as fit for food, pursues and
destroys him in mere wantonness, using a
short stick, loaded at each end, which, thrown
with great force among the boughs, often
bring these pretty lively creatures bleeding to
the ground. Sometimes too an idle sports­
man, who has perhaps been disappointed of
his game, fires his gun among them, and
brings two or three down, maimed or dead,
from their happy domicile above him.


Emily
How extremely barbarous! If I
had brothers who were so cruel out of mere


100
wantonness, I am sure I could not love them.
I should think they would torment me just the
same, if they could.


George
Well but, Emily, you don't con­
sider, that if none of the creatures we see
about us were ever to be destroyed, we should
ourselves be devoured by them, and even the
least of them might do a great deal of mischief.


Emily
Yes; but it is one thing to kill
them for food, or in defence of our property;
and another, you know, Mamma, to kill them
or make them suffer in sport. Remember the
lines in Cowper, which we wrote out.


Mrs. Talbot
Well, suppose, since there is
reason here on both sides, which very rarely
happens in an argument, that we add to our
reason a little rhyme, and try what we can
say of the squirrel in verse, as we walk home;
for it grows late.
The Squirrel.The Squirrel, with aspiring mind,Disdains to be to earth confin'd,But mounts aloft in air:The pine-tree's giddiest height he climbs,Or scales the beech-tree's loftiest limbs,And builds his castle there.101As Nature's wildest tenants free,A merry forester is he,In oak o'ershadow'd dells,Or glen remote, or woodland lawn,Where the doe hides her infant fawn,Among the birds he dwells.Within some old fantastic tree,Where time has worn a cavity,His winter food is stor'd;The cone beset with many a scale,The chesnut in its coat of mail,Or nuts complete his hoard.And of wise prescience thus possess'd,He near it rears his airy nest,With twigs and moss entwin'd,And gives its roof a conic form,Where safely shelter'd from the stormHe braves the rain and wind.Though plumeless, he can dart away,Swift as the woodpecker or jay,His sportive mate to woo:His Summer food is berries wild,And last year's acorn cups are fill'dFor him with sparkling dew.Soft is his shining auburn coat,As ermine white his downy throat,Intelligent his mien;With feathery tail and ears alert,And little paws as hands expert,And eyes so black and keen.K2102Soaring above the earth-born herdOf beasts, he emulates the bird,Yet feels no want of wings:Exactly pois'd, he dares to launchIn air, and bounds from branch to branchWith swift elastic springs.And thus the Man of mental worthMay rise above the humblest birth,And adverse Fate control;If to the upright heart be join'dThe active persevering mind,And firm unshaken soul.


Emily
Oh! lovely little squirrel; I shall
always delight to see them, and to recollect
these verses.


Mrs. Talbot
But we have not yet reckoned
up all the enemies of our squirrel. Kites and
hawks, that live on the edges of these great
woods, frequently strike them.


George
But small birds are the chief
pursuit, I believe, of birds of prey.


Mrs. Talbot
Yes, for they can more
conveniently get at them. Scug does not
very willingly expose himself in the open
day far from his trees; he rather avoids the
sun, and sports and amuses himself in the
fine moon-light nights of summer, when the


103
squirrels are seen darting about after each
other, down this tree and up that, and squeak­
ing in a peculiar note of satisfaction.


Emily
If I had a place where they could
live, I would not let any body disturb them;
and as for those odious kites and hawks, I
would have them shot.


Mrs. Talbot
And yet, Emily, those kites
and hawks have as much right to enjoy the
life God has given them as your favourite
squirrel, or as any of the other inhabitants of
this wood, or any other place.


Emily
Perhaps so, Mamma; but you
know man is allowed to kill all creatures that
do him harm.


Mrs. Talbot
Now there, on the trunk of
that white poplar, there is a creature which
does a great deal of harm, but which is so
beautiful, that you would hardly consent to
its being shot.


Emily
What is it? I see only two little,
very little birds, not so big as mice, clinging
to the trees.


Mrs. Talbot
No, it is not those minute
birds, which are vulgarly called tree-creepers,
that I mean; but a larger bird. It is gone!


104
I speak, however, of the woodpecker, or
yaffil.


George
Yes, I know; the bird that makes
the noise I love so much to hear, like laughing.


Mrs. Talbot
Exactly as if he was heartily
enjoying some excellent joke; but notwith­
standing his gaiety and his splendid plumage,
which excels that of most British birds, he is
a mischievous fellow; for if in any tree he
discovers the least hole, he bores it with his
strong bill, till he makes it big enough some­
times to receive his whole family; and while
he and his feathered companion are at that
employment, you may hear their noise re­
sounding to a great distance through the
woods; but it does great mischief to the tree,
and occasions it to rot. The food of this race
of birds is insects, which harbour in the
rugged or decayed bark; and these they get
out of their hiding-places by means of the
long slender tongue which they are furnished
with: but we must hasten, or we shall be
benighted.


George
Let us go down the way that
Emily calls her glow-worm walk.


Mrs. Talbot
Most willingly. They will


105
not be visible much longer, those shining
insects which Emily so much admires. But,
see! there are two or three: let us try if we
cannot find something to say of them more
flattering to Emily's partiality, than the
sonnet which described their appearance by
day-light.
The Glow-Worm.Bright insect! that on humid leaves and grassLights up thy fairy lamp; as if to guideThe steps of labouring swains that homeward pass,Well pleas'd to see thee cheer the pathway side,Betokening cloudless skies and pleasant days;While he whom evening's sober charms inviteIn shady woodlanes, often stops to gaze,And moralizing hails thy emerald light!On the fair tresses of the roseate morn,Translucent dews, as precious gems appear,Not less dost thou the night's dark hour adorn,Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear.Though the rude bramble, or the fan-like ferns,Around thee their o'ershadowing branches spread,Steady and clear thy phosphor brilliance burns,And thy soft rays illuminate the shade.Thus the calm brightness of superior mindsMakes them amid misfortune's shadow blest,And thus the radiant spark of Genius shines,Though screen'd by Envy, or by Pride oppress'd.


Emily
O, Mamma! these verses are the


106
prettiest we have heard yet, and a great deal
less mortifying to my favourite insects, which
I like to fancy the fairies' flambeaux, such
you know as they are called in the song I
learned when I was a very little girl; where
the Fairy tells of the table made of a mush­
room, and of the food it was covered with;
and two lines, you know, are,
And when the moon doth hide her head,The glow-worm lights us home to bed.


Mrs. Talbot
And now it must do us that
good office, for we have loitered till the sun is
quite gone: and we must be early risers to-
morrow; for perhaps we may hear by the
post that your aunt, and Edward, and Ella,
and Fanny expect us to meet them. Then
we may parody a line of Milton, and say,
To-morrow for fresh walks, and verses new!






Conversation The Fourth.

Poems.


To a Butterfly in a Window.


Wild Flowers.


The Hot-house Rose.








Conversation The Fourth.
Mrs. Talbot—George—
Emily.


Mrs. Talbot

The day opens propitiously
for our meeting the dear friends we expect.
I never saw the sun rise with more beauty, or
promising finer weather.


George
In half an hour, mother, we shall
be on our way; and in two hours we shall
meet them; shall we not?


Mrs. Talbot
I hope so; and, as you
know we were talking of omens yesterday,
I will consider it as a favourable prognostic to
the pursuit of our little studies in natural
history, that I this morning found in my
window one of those beautiful butterflies
called the Admirable, and sometimes the
Colonel, a fly which is rarely found in the
house, though others, such as the Nettle
Tortoise-shell, frequently are. In an im­
Vol. 1.
L


110
promptu I addressed my captive, and then
gave him his freedom.


Emily
It is that large black butterfly,
with bright scarlet and white spots, one of
which I saw in the garden yesterday.


Mrs. Talbot
The same; but perhaps I
have not been altogether correct in my poe­
tical history, insomuch as I have described
the butterfly as emerging from the retreat it
had chosen during the cold months; but it is
more probable that the individual insect in
question has been produced this Summer.
For the progress of this species I understand
to be, that a few that have passed the incle­
ment season in the chrysalis state, are seen on
the wing early in May; soon after which the
female lays her eggs singly on the leaves of
nettles. The caterpillar, immediately on
being hatched, sews the leaf on which it finds
itself round it like a case; the effect of won­
derful instinct, to preserve itself from a par­
ticular species of fly called the ichneumon,
which otherwise would destroy it, by deposit­
ing its eggs in the soft body of the caterpillar.
But, as the caterpillar must have food as well
as shelter, it feeds on the tender part of this


111
covering, till the leaf becomes in too ruinous
a state to be longer inhabited; then crawling
to another, it again wraps itself up; and this
happens till it is nearly full grown, and so
much increased in size, that one leaf will not
serve it both for food and raiment. It there­
fore becomes more ambitious, and reaching
the top of the nettle, connects several leaves
together to make its house, and supply its
appetite; till being at length full grown, it
suspends itself from a leaf, and puts on the
armour that nature directs it to assume before
its last and complete state of existence, which
happens in sixteen or twenty days, according
to the temperature of the air. Then the ugly
deformed caterpillar is metamorphosed into
the beautiful butterfly, one of which by some
singular chance I found to-day.
To a Butterfly in a Window.Escaped thy place of wintry rest,And in the brightest colours drest,Thy new-born wings prepar'd for flight,Ah! do not, Butterfly, in vainThus flutter on the crystal pane,But, go! and soar to life and light.112High on the buoyant Summer galeThro' cloudless ether thou may'st sail,Or rest among the fairest flowers;To meet thy winnowing friends may'st speed,Or at thy choice luxurious feedIn woodlaunds wild, or garden bowers.Beneath some leaf of ample shadeThy pearly eggs shall then be laid,Small rudiments of many a fly;While thou, thy frail existence past,Shall shudder in the chilly blast,And fold thy painted wings and die!Soon fleets thy transient life away;Yet short as is thy vital day,Like flowers that form thy fragrant food;Thou, poor Ephemeron, shalt have fill'dThe little space thy Maker will'd,And all thou know'st of life be good.


George
Mother, I think our book will
be so full of our verses, that we must begin
another when my aunt brings us those she has
promised us.


Emily
And I shall never be weary of
learning them. You thought, Mamma, that
I should not have all our present collection
complete, both in my book and my memory,
before my aunt, my brother and sister, and
my cousin Fanny came; but I believe I can
go through them without missing a line.



113

Mrs. Talbot
I am as willing, as I am
happy to believe it, my Emily; but now we
have hardly time to talk of our acquisitions,
for the chaise is, I see, just driving through
the lawn.


George
I am ready; Emily, make haste,
I am going for my horse, and shall ride round
by the time you get in. Mother, you cannot
imagine how well the poor old fellow Dumplin
looks, since I have got a better bridle and had
his mane hogged: I shall have a delightful ride!


Mrs. Talbot
I hope so. But what has
John in his hand? A letter? It is, and from
your aunt: something, I am afraid, has hap­
pened to prevent her meeting us.


George
Oh! Mother, pray tell me what
it is. Surely nobody is ill?


Emily
I am frightened so that I dare not
ask.


Mrs. Talbot
My dear children, be not
alarmed. Thank God, it is not illness among
our beloved party, that deprives us for a time
of the happiness we hoped to be enjoying in
a few hours; but the unexpected arrival at
my sister's house of an old friend of hers under
affliction, who comes to her for consolation,
L2


114
and to whom she cannot refuse the alleviations
that friendship and sympathy give to the un­
happy.


George
Well I am very sorry, to be sure,
for the disappointment; but since it is so, and
that none of our own dear folks are sick, I
must not vex about it.


Mrs. Talbot
I should be vexed with you,
George, if you did. The disappointment to
you is surely not worth thinking of, since your
poney, Dumplin, with his new bridle and his
hog mane, will look and go quite as well
another day; and you may even take a gallop
with him immediately if you will, since you
and he are equipped. But consider with
yourself a moment what would have been the
disappointment of your aunt's afflicted friend,
if, in order to keep her appointment, and to
have been here a few days sooner, she had re­
fused to remain to comfort the unhappy.
Consider too how much more severely we
should have felt this mortification, had it
arisen from any misfortune having fallen on
those we expected.


George
Indeed, Mother, I am very sen­
sible that all you say is true; and I hope you


115
don't think me so unreasonable as to murmur,
though I own I was a little vexed at first.


Mrs. Talbot
And you, Emily? Come,
confess that you bear this disappointment with
even less fortitude than your brother.


Emily
I was frightened, Mamma, while
you were reading the letter, for I was sure
almost by your look that something was the
matter; I was afraid my brother, or my sister,
or Fanny had been ill; or my aunt herself.
But indeed, since it is not so, I do not mind
the disappointment on my own account, and
am only sorry for my aunt's poor friend.


Mrs. Talbot
My children, I am the more
earnest with you on this occasion, as I so well
recollect with regret, how ill I bore disap­
pointment myself, when I was a girl, and how
frequently I was weak enough on such occa­
sions to lose my own temper, and try that of
the good aunt whose care I was under. A
rainy day when I was promised a long walk,
or to pass the morning with any favourite
play-fellow, seemed then to be a misfortune
which was not to be endured. I remember
that a party of ladies who lived at some dis­
tance, and with whom my family were on


116
terms of ceremonious visiting, happened to
arrive one morning just as I was eagerly setting
out to see the river fished, that ran through
the grounds, and about the sport it would
afford, I had heard a great deal for some days
before. Every body was gone but my aunt
and I; and already I had heard by the boys
and people that were running backwards and
forwards, of the great pike that had been taken,
and the quantity of fine fish they expected.
The ladies, I thought, need not detain me, as
I could not amuse them, and was sure they
could not amuse me; so I was earnestly soli­
citing leave to go, and had nearly obtained it,
when they all entered the room, and with
them a girl of my own age, who was at home
for the holidays, and whom her mother brought
to exhibit, as she was remarkably accom­
plished for her age; and I believe it was in­
tended to mortify my aunt by the comparison.
The little Miss was formally introduced to me,
and no hope remained of my seeing the river
fished; I ought, you know, to have made
light of such a trifling deprivation, and have
been civil to my visitor. Instead of that I was
silent, and I am afraid sullen; while she dis­


117
played all her acquirements; played on the
piano forte, sung a fashionable air, shewed a
new pas grave, which her dancing-master had
lately introduced, and desired with an air of
triumph to see my drawings, which when I
was obliged by authority to fetch, she turned
over in a mighty negligent way, as not likely
to be worth her criticism; and the elder ladies
hardly deigned to look at them; Lady Prunely
gravely assuring my aunt, that a much better
method was now adopted than that which I
seemed to have been taught by. My patience
was now quite exhausted; and all this affront­
ing parade of superiority as I then thought
it, operating upon my mind embittered by
disappointment, I forgot every thing but my
extreme desire to escape from society I did
not like, to an amusement particularly pleasing
to me. Under pretence therefore of carrying
away my drawing book, I hurried as fast as I
could to the river, where my brothers were
highly enjoying themselves, while the men in
dresses on purpose waded into the shallow
water, and threw quantities of fish on the
banks. My eagerness was not exceeded by
that of the boys, in the midst of whom I was


118
presently busy in putting the fish into baskets
to be carried to the ponds; and in despite of
my maid's lectures that morning about my
white frocks and petticoats, I was as deep in
the mud as the boys themselves, when my
persecutors, Lady Prunely, her elegant daugh­
ter, and the whole party appeared, and a
message was sent to me to join them imme­
diately, as they could not think of approaching
very near on account of the dirt. Most un­
willingly I attempted to obey; but there were
several nets that had been thrown on the bank;
in one of them I became entangled, and en­
deavouring impatiently to disengage myself,
I fell among the mud and weeds with which
the bank was covered; and a more deplorable
object than I appeared when I recovered my
feet cannot be imagined. I escaped an heavy
censure at that moment, because I was not in
a condition to approach the nice group who
beheld my disgrace, as they thought it, with
horror and amazement. But Lady Prunely,
who had an high opinion of her own sagacity
and superior knowledge, took that opportunity
to advise my aunt very seriously to send me
to school. Really, said the dictatorial


119
Lady, Miss Caroline is a good fine girl, but
my dear Ma'am, she is, I am sure, vastly too
much for your tender spirits. Forgive me,
my dear Ma'am, but I know you are of so
gentle a disposition, that you cannot controul
a child of that extreme vivacity. It would be
of infinite use to her if you were to send her
to school. That where my Arabella is, to be
sure, is very expensive, but my dear Ma'am,
if your niece were to be sent to it, for only a
couple of years, I would engage that you
would be highly satisfied, and sure I am that
you would find Miss Caroline quite another
thing.
This advice, though it was given in the
proud consciousness of fancied wisdom, was,
I believe, very good advice, as we lived in a
place where little or no good instruction was
to be had. There were objections to taking a
governess into the house, and persons well
qualified for that office were even more diffi­
cult to be found then, than they are now.
Miss Caroline, undismayed by her disaster
after it was once over, continued to be perhaps
too fond of digging with her brothers in the


120
garden; running about without her hat, swing­
ing in the barn with them, and even mounting
an ass; all of which were then reckoned very
indecorous amusements. So Lady Prunely's
council was in a few months followed, and I
was sent to the school where her daughter
was. But you see here was an event of some
importance in my life, produced by the impa­
tience with which I bore a trifling disappoint­
ment; for had I been civil, as undoubtedly
I ought to have been, and smiled, and bowed,
and praised Miss Arabella Prunely, instead of
being, as the Lady her mother described me,
ruder than a young Hottentot, I should
not perhaps have been so soon, if at all, sent
from home.


George
But then, Mother, you would
have been a hypocrite; and if hypocrisy is
hateful in persons grown up, it is ten times
worse in children and young people.


Mrs. Talbot
But one purpose of education,
George, is, to teach us, not hypocrisy, but to
live for others as well as ourselves, and even in
matters of indifference not to offend the feelings
or prejudices of those we live among, whether


121
our superiors or equals, or those whom fortune
has placed beneath us. You meet with people
every day whom you dislike, do you not?


George
Yes, indeed, and I long to tell
them so.


Mrs. Talbot
I know you do; but what
right have you to offend these people with
disagreeable truths, or such speeches as you
think truths? Should you like to have one of
them come up to you, and tell you you were
awkward or ill bred, or that you were not so
rich as they themselves?


George
I should not much care about the
last, because I know it very well, and there is
no disgrace in not having a great fortune; and
as to being awkward and ill bred, that is mere
matter of opinion, and I had rather be both
than a finical coxcomb.


Mrs. Talbot
But if they were to tell you
you were guilty of meanness or falsehood?


George
I suppose I should knock any
man down that was to charge me with either,
at least if I could.


Mrs. Talbot
And yet, George, I have seen
you tell people, almost as plainly as the most
unequivocal words could have done, that you
M


122
had as ill an opinion of them as those words
imply.


George
Well, Mother, but if they deserved
that opinion?


Mrs. Talbot
You are too young to judge
yourself of the characters of individuals; and
you should not take evil report upon trust.
There was Farmer Delverstone who came the
other day for taxes; you had heard he was
remarkable for his avarice, and for being cruel
to the poor as Overseer or Churchwarden, and
I was really afraid you were going to tell him
so. Then whenever Miss Commere is here,
you are always talking of gossiping meddling
old women, who go about from house to house
tale-bearing, and making quarrels among
neighbours. It is very true, she does do all
that; but you cannot now reform her, for it
is an inveterate habit acquired and fixed in a
long life; yet you have excited her dislike,
and she tells every body that you are utterly
ruined by my false indulgence. I would
always have you despise and avoid vice of
every kind, and look on meanness and malice
with as much contempt and abhorrence as you
do now; but it is not necessary to offend the


123
forms of the world by a rough and obtrusive
manner, which reforms nobody, but renders
almost every body your enemy. However,
here is a much longer lecture than I intended
for this time; before it is too hot take your
ride; but I advise you not to let it be towards
Sir Harry's, for how would your philosophy
bear a comparison between Mr. Scamperville's
famous mare, and our poor old Dumpling?


George
Well enough, I hope. It would
not be right or reasonable in me to ask you to
go to such expence as Sir Harry can afford;
and I should be more ashamed if people were
to say, there goes George Talbot on a fine
horse, when his mother and sisters never go
out but in an hired chaise. Besides, Mamma,
I like riding very well, and wish to be a tole­
rable good horseman, because it is useful to
be able to take journeys on horseback, if ne­
cessary; but I do not want to ride like one of
Sir Harry's training grooms.


Mrs. Talbot
I am perfectly satisfied with
your reasoning, my dear boy; and have little
to wish, but that you may always judge as
rationally as you do now of the value of those
objects, which excite so much amibition among


124
boys, and are allowed to give so strong a bias
to the characters of their subsequent lives.
Adieu then for this morning! Emily is going
to read to me the poem which you were so
pleased with when you met with it in one of
your cousin Fanny's school books. So for
the present farewell.


Emily
Mamma, I have now several little
copies of verses on insects, and some on plants:
I have the squirrel too, the dormouse, and the
hedgehog, which are beasts, but we have none
that tell of birds.


Mrs. Talbot
And yet none of the various
inhabitants of the earth are more entitled to
our attention, or more worthy of our admira­
tion. We must apply to your aunt for her
assistance, and try to enrich our collection
with some subjects from that department of
natural history; at present let me hear the
poetical collection of
Wild Flowers.Fair rising from her icy couch,Wan herald of the floral year,The Snow-drop marks the Spring's approach,E'er yet the Primrose groups appear,Or peers the Arum from its spotted veil,Or odorous Violets scent the cold capricious gale.125Then thickly strewn in woodland bowersAnemonies their stars unfold;There spring the Sorrel's veined flowers,And rich in vegetable goldFrom Calyx pale, the freckled Cowslip born,Receives in amber cups the fragrant dews of morn.Lo! the green Thorn her silver budsExpands, to May's enlivening beam;Hottonia blushes on the floods;And where the slowly trickling streamMid grass and spiry rushes stealing glides,Her lovely fringed flowers fair Menyanthes hides.In the lone copse or shadowy dale,Wild cluster'd knots of Harebells blow,And droops the Lily of the valeO'er Vinca's matted leaves below,The Orchis race with varied beauty charm,And mock the exploring bee, or fly's aerial form.Wound in the hedgerow's oaken boughs,The Woodbine's tassels float in air,And blushing, the uncultured RoseHangs high her beauteous blossoms there;Her fillets there the purple Nightshade weaves,And the Brionia winds her pale and scolloped leaves.To later Summer's fragrant breathClemati's feathery garlands dance;The hollow Foxglove nods beneath,While the tall Mullein's yellow lance,Dear to the meally tribe of evening, towers,And the weak Galium weaves its myriad fairy flowers.M2126Sheltering the coot's or wild duck's nest,And where the timid halcyon hides,The Willow-herb, in crimson drest,Waves with Arundo o'er the tides;And there the bright Nymphea loves to lave,Or spreads her golden orbs upon the dimpling wave.And thou! by pain and sorrow blest,Papaver! that an opiate dewConceal'st beneath thy scarlet vest,Contrasting with the Corn flower blue,Autumnal months behold thy gauzy leavesBend in the rustling gale, amid the tawny sheaves.From the first bud, whose venturous headThe Winter's lingering tempest braves,To those which 'mid the foliage deadSink latest to their annual grave,All are for food, for health, or pleasure given,And speak in various ways the bounteous hand of Heaven.



Evening.

Mrs. Talbot
Your excursion then was a
pleasant one?


George
Remarkably so, indeed, my dear
Mother. The woods are in general as green
as they were in Spring; only here and there


127
a bough is just tinted with yellow: but the
birds are almost silent, at least very few are
heard in comparison of the numbers we
listened to, when three weeks since we took
our long forest walk.


Emily
Oh, dear! those yellow leaves tell
us of the approach of Autumn; and then
comes Winter, cold, cheerless, dreary Winter.


Mrs. Talbot
But, Emily, why do you
seem to dread it so much? To you surely it
has never yet been cheerless. And Autumn,
you know, is generally the season chosen now
for enjoying the country. No person of
fashion thinks of leaving London till July or
August; and some not till September.


George
They cannot have much taste
though for the beauty of the country; Spring
and Summer are so delightful! and there is
such a joyous appearance about every object.


Mrs. Talbot
You would not be allowed
to have any taste, my dear George, either by
the sportsman, or the lover of good eating,
were they to hear you assert, that the Spring
and Summer are the most joyous. Your ac­
quaintance, Mr. Scamperville, were you to
enquire of him, would tell you, that all per­


128
sons who are as he calls it in a certain style,
find the pleasures of those seasons to consist of
parties in London, lounging up and down
Bond-Street, riding and driving in the Park,
all the morning; and in an evening, frequent­
ing crowded rooms, where people of a
certain rank vie with each other in the ex­
cessive expense of entertainments; while those
who cannot, without injury to their fortunes,
emulate these luxurious exhibitions, are half
undone by their prodigality. It is for them
that nature is forced, and that cherries are
produced in February, and roses bloom at
Christmas; for what would become of people
in a certain style, if they could only eat
cherries and smell to roses, when the plebeian
can equally enjoy both?


George
Well! I shall never regret not
being in a certain style, if those things only
are denied to a plebeian; for I am quite con­
tent, are not you, Mother, to have roses and
cherries in the common course?


Mrs. Talbot
Undoubtedly I am; yet I
certainly have great delight in the productions
which Art gives us in our cold and capricious
climate, especially plants, of the warmer


129
latitudes. Nor is this a luxury unattended
with extensive benefit; for great numbers of
people are supported by the culture, not in­
deed of exotics, and rare plants, for that
branch of gardening, however great its present
perfection, can comparatively occupy but a
few; but the culture of early vegetables, and
forced flowers, employs many men; and we
may say with the Poet,
But hence the poor are cloth'd, the hungry fed,Health to himself, and to his children breadThe labourer bears.
And when I have sometimes seen a crown
given for a rose in Winter, and have thought,
as it is impossible not to think, on the strange
inequality with which the gifts of fortune are
divided; I have consoled myself with this
reflection, and have said, that though my
acquaintance, Lady Felicia Fidwell, could
throw away, for the indulgence of a few
moments' gratification, a sum, which would
purchase food during the week for the poor
outcast of his family, who stands soliciting an
halfpenny of her ladyship's footman, as a
small acknowledgment for having swept the
mud from the crossing, which this fine fellow,


130
with his tasselled cane, his ruffles and laced
hat, was obliged to pass on a message of his
Lady to the Circulating Library over the way;
yet that some other poor man was long em­
ployed and found bread in performing the
offices requisite for the production of this
rose; and I have, by that recollection, con­
quered my disposition to find it strange, that
things are so unequally divided.


George
I remember, Mother, you said
one day, that roses blown by artificial heat are
more beautiful than those that blow in the
usual season in the garden.


Emily
So they are indeed, Brother. I had
a bunch given me by my cousin, who had a
whole flower-pot full made her a present of;
and they were the sweetest and most beautiful
roses I ever saw in my life.


George
Now, I think, Emily, that you
only fancied them so, because it was at a time
when they were scarce, and you had not seen
roses a great while.


Mrs. Talbot
Not altogether so, George.
Roses blown by artificial heat are more delicate
than those which ornament our gardens in
June, lovely as they are. I know not whether


131
their scent be more exquisite, and indeed I
doubt it; but they are usually more free from
blight, and those insects which sometimes
destroy our garden roses. Since we are upon
this subject, I will repeat to you a little poem
written some years ago by your aunt, in
which the effect of the culture of the rose by
artificial heat is represented, as being like
that of education on the female mind. You
will hear the pleadings of Nature and of Art,
who are here personified.


Emily
Excuse my interrupting you,
dearest Mamma; but you always bid me
ask, when I do not understand the meaning
of a word. You used this the other day, and
I could not then ask you. What is meant by
personified?


Mrs. Talbot
I will endeavour to explain
it as well as I can. It is a very usual figure in
modern poetry; and has, in many instances,
superseded the use of the imaginary Deities
of the Heathen Mythology, where love was
called Cupid, you know; beauty was Venus;
and wisdom Minerva or Pallas, and so on;
but now a Poet personifies the virtue, vice, or


132
passion he would represent. Collins's poetry
is full of those bold figures. Mercy is called
Gentlest of sky-born forms, and best ador'd.
And Fear is admirably pourtrayed, as well as
many other human passions: and it is
common to apostrophise, or for the Poet to
address himself to one of those imaginary
passions or virtues, as in Smollett's Ode to
Independence, and many others. Scenes of
Nature are often personified. Thus Gray,
you may remember, George, addresses him­
self to Father Thames, in one of the verses
of his beautiful Ode on a Distant Prospect
of Eton College. However, we will have
a farther dissertation on this another day;
I have at present said enough, I believe,
Emily, to make you comprehend what is
meant by personification. And now attend to
the pleadings of Nature and Art, on the im­
provement bestowed by the latter on the
darling production of the former.



133
The Hot-House Rose.An early Rose borne from her genial bowerMet the fond homage of admiring eyes,And while young Zephyr fann'd the lovely flower,Nature and Art contended for the prize.Exulting Nature cried, I made thee fair,'Twas I that nurs'd thy tender buds in dew;I gave thee fragrance to perfume the air,And stole from beauty's cheek her blushing hue.Vainly fastidious novelty affectsO'er alpine heights and untrod wilds to roam,From rocks and swamps her foreign plants collects,And brings the rare but scentless treasures home.'Midst Art's factitious children let them beIn sickly state by names pedantic known,True taste's unbiass'd eye shall turn to thee,And love and beauty mark thee for their own.Cease, goddess, cease, indignant Art replied,And e'er you triumph, know that but for meThis beauteous object of our mutual prideHad been no other than a vulgar tree.I snatch'd her from her tardy mother's arms,Where sun-beams scorch and piercing tempests blow;On my warm bosom nurs'd her infant charms,Prun'd the wild shoot, and train'd the straggling bough.134I watch'd her tender buds,  and from her shadeDrew each intruding weed with anxious care,Nor let the curling blight her leaves invade,Nor worm nor noxious insect harbour there;At length the beauty's loveliest bloom appears,And Art from Fame shall win the promis'd boon,While wayward April, smiling through her tears,Decks her fair tresses with the wreaths of June.Then, jealous Nature, yield the palm to me,To me thy pride its early triumph owes;Though thy rude workmanship produc'd the tree,'Twas Education form'd the perfect Rose.






Conversation The Fifth.

Poems.


The Robin's Petition.


The Captive Fly.


The Cricket.


The Close of Summer.








Conversation The Fifth.
Mrs. Talbot—George—
Emily.

George
And is it at last fixed that we are
to go on Thursday to meet my aunt, and
Edward, and all of them; and is it quite
certain, Mother?


Mrs. Talbot
As certain as any thing can
be that depends on human will and human
power; but you know that there is a greater
power which governs the world, and without
whose permission, we are taught, that not
even a sparrow falls. Now, it may so happen
that some occurrence or other, which we can
neither foresee nor prevent, may counteract
our present intentions, and therefore we ought
never to say that any thing is absolutely
certain. There is an aphorism, you know,
which says, Man proposes, but God dis­
poses.

N2


138

Emily
I am sure I hope nothing will
happen any more to put our journey off.
It is near four months since Ella has been
away! And we never saw Edward at the
last holidays.


Mrs. Talbot
Well, Emily, I trust a few
pleasant weeks passed at the sea side, with all
those we love, will make us amends for all
our disappointments. We shall be there first,
however, by more than a week.


Emily
To-day is only Friday. It is five
days still before we shall set out; and Summer
is almost gone.


Mrs. Talbot
We shall enjoy, therefore,
with greater pleasure, the change of scenery.
The downs, near the sea, are almost always of
a brighter green than such high lands that are
more remote from the coast, because the
vapour arising from the sea nourishes the
short turf.


George
Delightful green downs! Mother,
almost the first thing I remember was going
out with you, and while Edward held my
hand, trying to run up and down one of the
slopes upon the hill. And you sat down on
the opposite side, and laughed to see me


139
scramble up; till at last I was able to do it
without Edward's help, and I was as proud as
possible of my performance.


Mrs. Talbot
Yes, George, you had then
just left off your petticoats, and in your own
idea you were already a man, and emulated
your elder brother, who was six years old.


George
I was not three years old, I be­
lieve, yet I remember it very well.


Mrs. Talbot
Early impressions long re­
main, even when more recent events, if of no
great consequence, are obliterated. I, who
have passed so many more years since my in­
fancy, have a very perfect recollection of what
happened when I was only three or four years
old, while I have forgotten a great many
things that have occurred within these few
years; and I have observed, that very old
people often talk of their lives in their early
youth, yet seem to have little remembrance of
what they saw last year.


George
That is very odd, I think.


Mrs. Talbot
It is easily accounted for:
but, not to enter into this enquiry at present,
I must tell you, that your aunt has sent you
something to amuse you and Emily, knowing


140
how tedious you would think the days that are
yet to pass before we meet.


Emily
Oh, how good she is! Let us see
the something, Mamma. It is a Tale, or a
Poem, I know.


Mrs. Talbot
You may call it both. It is
the history of a bird. I told your aunt in one
of my letters, that animals, and insects, and
plants, had been celebrated in the verses of
our book, but that it was not yet enriched
with one bird. She has, therefore, sent you
an account of a favourite Robin, and added
a little Poem, which I am sure you will be
pleased with. George shall read it. There
have been so many verses written about this
bird, which used to be held sacred to the
household gods, that it was not very easy to
give these any novelty. But the subject of
them was highly interesting.—This is what
your aunt says.



Two years ago, towards the close of the
month of August, a Robin frequented the
drawing-room at B. and became in the
course of the Winter so tame, that as soon
as the windows were open in the morning he
used to come in, and seemed to consider it as


141
his domicile, though he always roosted
among the shrubs near the window. On
being called, he readily made his appearance,
and used to sit and sing at the back of a chair,
or on the pianoforte. He was a constant
attendant at the breakfast table, and expected
to be fed like a domestic animal; for when
we went out for a few days, he resorted to
the offices, and followed the servants into the
larder. My pretty Robin, however, was a
very Turk in disposition, and would suffer
no Brother near the Throne; for he drove
away, with every mark of resentment, any
of his compatriots, who during the hard
weather shewed any inclination to share the
advantages he had appropriated to himself;
of which indeed he seemed to feel all the
value, for as winter advanced, he became so
familiar as to sit and sing on my daughter's
shoulder, and appeared to have totally lost
all the apprehensions of a wild bird. If he
chose to go out, instead of beating himself
against the window, he sat on the edge of
the frame till it was opened for him; or
taking an opportunity when the door was
open, he flew through the green-house or


142
through the passages, till he found his way
out. He was a great favourite as well in the
kitchen, as in the parlour: and it was with
general regret, that early in the Spring he
was missed, and never returned. Had he
retired to build, as Robins are said to do, in
woods and copses, he would not have gone
far from the house, around which there were
so many thickets and shrubs, and where it
is probable he was bred. It is therefore most
likely, that being so tame and fearless, he
was destroyed by a cat.


I might have written his Elegy for Emily,
but I thought it would be less imitative of
verses of the soame description, to Sparrows
and Canary-birds, and Robins, if I intro­
duced him such as he would have been on
our first acquaintance, had that acquain­
tance been begun in such hard weather,
as usually drives the smaller birds, but par­
ticularly the Robin, to the shelter and food
afforded in and about the habitation of
Man. My composition is therefore called,


143
The Robin's Petition.A suppliant to your window comes,Who trusts your faith and fears no guile,He claims admittance for your crumbs,And reads his passport in your smile.For cold and cheerless is the day,And he has sought the hedges round;No berry hangs upon the spray,Nor worm nor ant-egg can be found.Secure his suit will be preferr'd,No fears his slender feet deter;For sacred is the household bird,That wears the scarlet stomacher.Lucy the prayer assenting heard,The feather'd suppliant flew to her,And fondly cherish'd was the bird,That wears the scarlet stomacher.Embolden'd then, he'd fearless perchHer netting or her work among,For crumbs among her drawings search,And add his music to her song;And warbling on her snowy arm,Or half entangled in her hair,Seem'd conscious of the double charmOf freedom and protection there.144A graver moralist, who usedFrom all some lesson to infer,Thus said, as on the bird she mus'd,Pluming his scarlet stomacher—Where are his gay companions now,Who sung so merrily in Spring?Some shivering on the leafless bough,With ruffled plume, and drooping wing.Some in the hollow of a cave,Consign'd to temporary death;And some beneath the sluggish waveAwait reviving nature's breath.The migrant tribes are fled away,To skies where insect myriads swarm,They vanish with the Summer day,Nor bide the bitter northern storm.But still is this sweet minstrel heard,While lours December dark and drear,The social, cheerful, household bird,That wears the scarlet stomacher.And thus in life's propitious hour,Approving flatterers round us sport,But if the faithless prospect lower,They the more happy fly to court.Then let us to the selfish herdOf fortune's parasites prefer,The friend like this our Winter bird,That wears the scarlet stomacher.




145

George
That is, in my opinion, the
prettiest of all our poems. I shall be im­
patient to transcribe it, though I do not quite
understand what is meant by the scarlet
stomacher.


Mrs. Talbot
It is an old-fashioned ex­
pression, used by an old-fashioned poet,
Dr. Donne, in celebrating the robin. But
it needs explaining to you, because it is an
article of dress no longer in use. It means a
piece of silk, or other material, formed to the
shape, and covered with ribbands, or lace, or
jewels. I have seen such among the wardrobe
of a good old lady who had hoarded up many
of the ornaments of her youth, and who used
to descant with great eloquence on the ele­
gance of stomachers, robeings, and double
ruffles; and was, I believe, firmly persuaded,
that the world was degenerated since those
ornaments had given place to the modern
fashions, which she thinks so preposterous.
But to return to our Winter friend. The
robin, you know, sings at seasons when every
other bird is silent, and even the chirping and
clamorous sparrow is little heard. But his
song is not confined to the more melancholy
Vol. 1.
O


146
fall of the leaf, or the dreary season of
Winter. Throughout the year he sings, but
his weaker voice is lost in the chorus that fills
the copses and hedgerows before Midsummer;
when the wood-lark, the 
linnet, the thrush,
the blackbird, seem to vie with each other;
while the nightingale, like the robin, is only
heard at night, in the greatest perfection,
because his voice is in the day-time often
drowned in the songs of other choristers.


George
And now we hear hardly any of
them, except the robin; most of them are
already silent.


Mrs. Talbot
Towards the end of July that
always happens. August, the present month,
is said, by an accurate observer of nature, to
be one of the most silent in the year, for later,
a few birds renew their notes, just as there are
a few faint flowers, that blow when the bloom
of Summer beauty is gone.


Emily
Alas! they are almost all gone
now! I could not to-day find roses to fill
even one flower-pot. I was going to gather
the blossoms of a tall pink, and white bell-
shaped flower in the lower shrubbery, the
name of which I do not know; but I found


147
that in many of the flowers, there were dead
flies.


Mrs. Talbot
It is the Apocynum, or tutsan
leaved dog's-bane. I did not recollect that it
was likely now to be in bloom, or I should
have looked at it.


George
Shew it me, Emily, when we go
for our walk.


Mrs. Talbot
It is one, among some other
flowers, that has the singular property of
catching insects.


George
Yes, you remember, Mother, we
were shewn one at Mrs. Roberts's, which
caught flies by means of teeth set on each
side of the leaf, just like the trap, or gin,
which I have seen the men use in the stable,
or farm-yard, to catch rats. And the leaf
seemed to have a spring within it, for when a
fly settled upon it, the jagged teeth set on
each side of the leaf closed and crushed the
poor insect.


Mrs. Talbot
That is a very different
plant; it comes from the swamps of North
America, and has received the name of
Dionæa muscipula, or Venus's fly-trap; it is
white, and without any great share of beauty.


148
You should tell your sister, George, that
Dione is one of the many names given to
the imaginary deity, Venus, the goddess of
beauty.


George
I tried to explain some parts of
the Heathen mythology the other day, when
we were looking at those beautiful prints in
the fine edition of Virgil; but Emily said she
was sure it was so wicked that she would not
listen to it.


Mrs. Talbot
We must, however, find some
method to make our Emily acquainted with
these mythological fables, or rather allegories;
because without some knowledge of them,
many books cannot be understood, nor can we
comprehend or enjoy those beautiful works of
art, that represent the beings with which the
ancients peopled the heavens and the earth.
We should not disdain to acquaint ourselves
with the deities acknowledged by some of the
wisest and greatest of mankind, and whose
existence Cato and Cicero made a part of that
faith which they professed, although we know
there is only one God, the father of light and
life, and the creator of the universe. But at
present let us return to our plant, the Apo­


149
cynum. There is a drawing of it in the
Botanic Garden, and an account of the manner
of its catching the flies, which is, however,
more correctly explained, I believe, in No. 280
of Curtis's Botanical Magazine, where there
is a much better drawing of this plant, the
Apocynum Androsæmifolium, or tutsan leaved
dog's bane.
The author of Les Etudes de la Nature,
who saw this plant in the royal botanic garden
at Paris, where it has long been cultivated,
speaks of it as another Dione; but except in
its quality of catching insects, it has no resem­
blance to the plant so called, and is quite of a
different species. The one receiving the flies
on a foliole, or part of the leaf armed with
spines; while this, the Apocynum, takes them
in its cup, or flower; partly by the construc­
tion of the anthers in which the insects get
entangled, and partly by the viscid quality of
the honey-like substance that attracts them.
This curious Apocynum, which is not so com­
mon as it might be made, since it is raised
without much trouble, and will thrive in the
open air, has given occasion to a little Poem,
which I am going to read to you.

O2


150

Emily
Oh, thank you, Mamma! I wish
sometimes that I could write Poems as you
and my aunt do, on all sorts of subjects, but
especially flowers and plants.


Mrs. Talbot
There are many persons who
doubt whether it be a desirable faculty or no.
However as it cannot perhaps be acquired, I
shall be quite content, Emily, if you learn to
describe these subjects of natural history, ele­
gantly and accurately with your pencil, and if
you will take as much pains to excel in that
art, as may not interfere with other more ne­
cessary, because more useful acquirements.
But now your brother will read the poem.
Come, George, it is not new to you.


George
No, Mother, I remember having
once heard it.
The Captive Fly.Seduced by idle change and luxury,See in vain struggle the expiring fly,He perishes! for lo, in evil hour,He rushed to taste of yonder garish flower.Which in young beauty's loveliest colours drest,Conceals destruction in her treacherous breast,While round the roseate chalice odours breathe,And lure the wanderer to voluptuous death.151Ill-fated vagrant! did no instinct cry,Shun the sweet mischief?—No experienc'd flyBid thee of this fair smiling fiend beware,And say, the false Apocynum is there?Ah wherefore quit for this Circean draughtThe Bean's ambrosial flower, with incense fraught,Or where with promise rich, Fragaria spreadsHer spangling blossoms on her leafy beds;Could thy wild flight no softer blooms detain?And tower'd the Lilac's purple groups in vain?Or waving showers of golden blossoms, whereLaburnum's pensile tassels float in air,When thou within those topaz keels might creepSecure, and rock'd by lulling winds to sleep.But now no more for thee shall June uncloseHer spicy Clove-pink, and her damask Rose;Not for thy food shall swell the downy Peach,Nor Raspberries blush beneath the embowering Beech.In efforts vain thy fragile wings are torn,Sharp with distress resounds thy small shrill horn,While thy gay happy comrades hear thy cry,Yet heed thee not, and careless frolic by,Till thou, sad victim, every struggle o'er,Despairing sink, and feel thy fate no more.An insect lost should thus the muse bewail?Ah no! but 'tis the moral points the taleFrom the mild friend, who seeks with candid truthTo show its errors to presumptuous Youth;From the fond caution of parental care,Whose watchful love detects the hidden snare,152How do the Young reject, with proud disdain,Wisdom's firm voice, and Reason's prudent rein,And urge, on pleasure bent, the impetuous way,Heedless of all but of the present day,Then while false meteor-lights their steps entice,They taste, they drink, the empoisoned cup of vice;Till misery follows; and too late they mourn,Lost in the fatal gulph, from whence there's no return.


George
Now I like that better than any
other.


Emily
And I like it very well: extremely
well, only it is rather too grave.


Mrs. Talbot
Tell me, Emily, should you
not have preferred the history of some bird,
for birds, I find, are at present very much the
fashion with you, as boys say of their sports at
school? Should you not have preferred an
elegy or an eulogium on a bullfinch, to this
somewhat serious poetical lamentation over a
fly, ending with so serious a moral?


Emily
To say the truth, Mamma, I
should.


Mrs. Talbot
Well! I have a bird or two
hatching for you, but they are not yet in a state
to make a figure in our Museum of animals.
Let us have recourse therefore to some expe­
dient to fill up our time, if not our book.


153
Come, read to me Cowper's translation of Vin­
cent Bourne's verses to the Cricket, in
which, though it is something like sacrilege to
change a word of his, you will see I have made
a few alterations. George can write out the
last poem, while we read this.
The Cricket.Little inmate full of mirth,Chirping on my humble hearth,Wheresoe'er be thine abode,Always harbinger of good,Pay me for thy warm retreatWith a song most soft and sweet,In return thou shalt receiveSuch a song as I can give.Though in voice and shape they beForm'd as if akin to thee,Thou surpassest, happier far,Happiest Grasshoppers that are;Theirs is but a Summer song,Thine endures the Winter long,Unimpair'd, and shrill and clear,Melody throughout the year.Neither night nor dawn of dayPuts a period to thy lay.Then Insect! let thy simple songChear the winter evening long,154While secure from every storm,In my cottage snug and warm,Thou shalt my merry minstrel be,And I delight to shelter thee.


Emily
I don't love crickets much, Mamma,
they are not pretty: and I remember when
we called once at poor old Dame Beech's cot­
tage, she complained that ever since the boys
had killed her cat, the crickets over-run her so
that they spoiled every thing.


Mrs. Talbot
You know you saved a kitten
for her, and I dare say she has no more crickets
now than she wishes to have.


Emily
Why should she wish to have any?
I should not suppose she has as much taste as
the Poet had for their music.


Mrs. Talbot
Perhaps not; but you may
remember when we were talking of these in­
sects one morning, while Mary Ambrose was
in the room helping me to measure some linen,
she said it was counted, to use her expres­
sion, very bad luck indeed when the Crickets
all went away from an house; and this
superstition is, I believe, still very general
among the cottagers.


Emily
What nonsense!



155

Mrs. Talbot
I never could hear any reason
assigned for this prejudice; and indeed reason
has nothing to do with such sort of notions,
that are handed down from one uninformed
person to another. I believe the fact is, that
at certain seasons of the year these insects go
into the fields, and assume in some degree the
habits of the Gryllus Campestris, or field
cricket, which we were speaking of a little
while ago.


George
And which are heard particularly
loud now, Mother. Last night I listened a
long time to the mole cricket and the common
cricket, and was surprised at the loudness of
their noise.


Mrs. Talbot
It is generally so in hot and
dry weather. In the warmer countries of
Europe, Italy, 
Spain, and the South of France,
these cicada or cicala make such a clamorous
chirping of an evening, that it is very dis­
agreeable; and they are less pleasant to hear,
because they are such devourers of the green
leaves, as to disfigure the country, and are
besides very prejudicial.


Emily
Indeed if we were not going to the
sea side so soon, I should perhaps, Mamma, be


156
a little apt to do that which you have often
said nobody ought to do.


Mrs. Talbot
Indeed! And pray what is
that?


Emily
Be discontented with the weather,
Mamma, and murmur at the heat and the dust,
and wish it was Spring or Summer, or even
Winter, rather than this hot dull parched up
Autumn.


Mrs. Talbot
How foolish to murmur at the
revolutions of the seasons, and how much
worse than foolish to dislike the period when,
in the harvest, God gives to the industry of
man, the support he has worked for throughout
the year!


Emily
I know it, Mamma, and I don't
mean to murmur, only there are so few flowers,
the grass is so burnt, and the roads and lanes
so dusty, that it is not pleasant.


Mrs. Talbot
I allow that the beauty of the
country is greatly injured, yet it is only in very
hot summers that in England the verdure of
the fields is so entirely gone as we now see it.
Sometimes, as in the year 1799, perpetual rain
renders the country in August as green as it
usually is in May. But the effect of this is far


157
from desirable. I then saw from one of the
Sussex hills many hundred acres of wheat, and
other grain, covered with water. The rivers
overflowed, and swept away the produce of
whole farms; and the sad consequence was,
a scarcity of bread, amounting almost to
famine; a deprivation most severely felt, par­
ticularly among the poor, who, though assisted
by subscriptions, were unable to purchase
enough for the support of their families, so that
sickness soon followed, and a long train of evils.
Let us, therefore, learn to thank God for this
fine weather, and let us see with pleasure and
gratitude the last load of wheat carried by,
dressed with boughs by the little peasant boys,
who are mounted upon it, hallooing and
rejoicing, while the men and women who have
been employed in reaping, binding, and carry­
ing it, are enjoying by anticipation the harvest
supper; and look forward with still more
satisfaction, to the certainty of having bread
for their children during the ensuing winter.


George
And that sight, Emily, we may
enjoy this evening, for I have been in the last
field, helping a little, and Master Oakbridge
says he shall finish his wheat by five o'clock
P


158
and desired me to come and see them pitch
the last load.


Mrs. Talbot
Well, go, my Emily, with
your brother; I shall have some papers and
books to look out, and some directions to give
about what I would have done in my absence
from home, but I will meet you on your return
from your walk.


Emily
I will go, Mamma, certainly; but—


Mrs. Talbot
But what?


Emily
Why only, Mamma, you know I
cannot do any good in pitching the wheat as
George can; and it is so hot, I had rather stay
with you.


Mrs. Talbot
Do as you please, I only
meant your amusement.


George
Mother, I should like to see the
harvest in France.


Mrs. Talbot
So should I have done once,
George.


George
But you have seen it?


Mrs. Talbot
Never. Tell me however,
what makes you think the harvest there a
spectacle, (to use the phrase of that country
for all sorts of sights) so particularly desirable?


George
Because they at once collect the


159
three articles which are named in Scripture,
as being necessary to the life of man; corn,
wine, and oil.


Mrs. Talbot
I admire your reason. But
the fact is not exactly so. The corn in the
northern provinces of France, la récolte, le
moisson, is not gathered much, if at all, earlier
than ours in England; and there are no olive
trees in those provinces, and very few grapes;
I mean comparatively. There are more, and
better grapes than in England, but the wine
is little worth, and very little of it is made.
The peasantry of Normandy are content with
le bon cidre; and it is indeed excellent.


George
But in the southern provinces?


Mrs. Talbot
In some of those, as in the
Limosin, there is very little corn, the poorer
classes being very much indebted to the woods
for their support.


George
To the woods?


Mrs. Talbot
Yes, they are fed by a bread,
or paste, made of what we call Spanish ches­
nuts, which I am assured is no contemptible
substitute. The wheat they have, however, is
ripe much earlier than with us. The olives
are a late harvest; and the grapes of which


160
wine is made, are never gathered until after
the first frosts. The colour of the wine depends
on the simplest circumstances, as whether the
dew is on or off the grapes when they are
carried to the press. But I have not time now,
my dear children, to tell you the little, that
books have told me on these matters; one day
or other, perhaps, if ever France should be
tranquil, and at peace with us, you may
witness the joyous scene of the vintage, la
Vendange, in that delicious country.


George
The olive tree, I think you told me,
was not at all beautiful.


Mrs. Talbot
I believe it is neither beau­
tiful individually as a tree, or when grouped;
it is grey, and pale like the willow, but without
the silver lined leaves or flexible branches of
the aquatic. The most beautiful things are
not always the most useful. The history of
the olive tree is worthy, however, of further
investigation, and we must enquire into it more
at leisure. And now, while you, Emily, go
after dinner to your plants, and give your
charge to old David to take care of them,
George will go to the harvest field; and busy
as I am, I will try a sort of impromptu on the


161
subject of our discourse; this autumnal heat
which offends you so much.


George
Come then, Emily, the sooner we
go the better.


Emily,
returning
Well, my dear Mamma,
have you in the midst of your packing com­
posed these verses?


Mrs. Talbot
I have. They may perhaps
want some polishing, for they are literally an
extempore composition, and here comes George
to read them.


George
And have you done the stanzas so
soon, Mother?


Mrs. Talbot
Read them.





The Close of Summer.

Farewell ye banks, where late the primrose growing,
Among fresh leaves its pallid stars display'd,
And the ground-ivy's balmy flowers blowing,
Trail'd their festoons along the grassy shade.


Farewell! to richer scenes and Summer pleasures,
Hedge-rows, engarlanded with many a wreath,
Where the wild roses hang their blushing treasures,
And to the evening gale the woodbines breathe.

P2


162

Farewell! the meadows, where such various showers
Of beauty lurked, among the fragrant hay;
Where orchis bloomed with freak'd and spotted flowers,
And lychnis blushing like the new born day.


The burning dog-star, and the insatiate mower,
Have swept or wither'd all this floral pride;
And mullien's now, or bugloss' lingering flower,
Scarce cheer the green lane's parched and dusty side.


His busy sickle now the months-man wielding,
Close are the light and fragile poppies shorn,
And while the golden ears their stores are yielding,
The azure corn-flowers fall among the corn.


The woods are silent too, where loudly flinging
Wild notes of rapture to the western gale,
A thousand birds their hymns of joy were singing,
And bade the enchanting hours of Spring time hail!


The stock-dove now is heard, in plaintive measure,
The cricket shrill, and wether's drowsy bell,
But to the sounds and scents of vernal pleasure,
Music and dewy airs, a long farewell!


Yet tho' no beauteous wreaths adorn the season,
Nor birds sing blythe, nor sweets the winds diffuse,
This riper period, like the age of reason,
Tho' stript of loveliness, is rich in use.






Emily
These will be a great acquisition to
our book, but there are some things mentioned


163
in the lines that I do not quite understand. I
know, I believe, all the flowers; but what is a
months-man?


George
One who is hired by the farmer,
to work for him for a month, during harvest;
for which time the men have in proportion
more wages, than at any other time of the
year.


Emily
Well, I understand that; but what
kind of birds are stock-doves?


Mrs. Talbot
There are in this country,
two or three sorts of wild pigeons and doves.
One is the ring-pigeon, which is called in
Scotland the cushat; it seems to be continually
confounded with the ring-dove that is often
brought from Spain, and the opposite coast of
Africa, though they do not at all resemble each
other. The most common is the stock-dove,
or wood-pigeon, which you hear make a plea­
sant, but somewhat melancholy noise during
the summer, and particularly towards its close;
but in September they leave their woodland
retreats, and are heard no more till the fol­
lowing March, when they return to build in
this country. And now you may amuse your­


164
selves as you please an hour or two, for I am
obliged to attend to a person, who comes to
me on business, which before I leave home
must be settled.



