Title:  Building A Volunteer Community: Results and Findings from
                        
Volume:  006
Issue:  2
Date:  12 October 2012
Abstract:  
                
                This paper contributes to the literature examining the burgeoning field of
                    academic crowdsourcing, by analysing the results of the crowdsourced manuscript
                    transcription project, Transcribe Bentham. First,
                    it describes how the project team sought to recruit volunteer transcribers to
                    take part, and discusses which strategies were successes (and which were not).
                    We then examine Transcribe Bentham's results during
                    its six-month testing period (8 September 2010 to 8 March 2011), which include a
                    detailed quantitative and qualitative analysis of website statistics, work
                    completed by the amateur transcribers, as well as the demographics of the
                    volunteer base and their motivations for taking part. The paper concludes by
                    discussing the success of our community building with reference to this
                    analysis. We find that Transcribe Bentham's
                    volunteer transcribers have produced a remarkable amount of work – and continue
                    to do so, carrying out the equivalent labour of a full-time transcriber –
                    despite the nature and complexity of the task at hand.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Crowdsourcing is an increasingly popular and attractive option for archivists,
                    librarians, scientists, and scholarly editors working with large collections in
                    need of tagging, annotating, editing, or transcribing. These tasks, it has been
                    argued, can be accomplished more quickly and more cheaply by outsourcing them to
                    enthusiastic members of the public who volunteer their time and effort for free
                        .For a detailed cost-benefit analysis of
                            Transcribe Bentham, see . Crowdsourcing also benefits the public by
                    making available and engaging volunteers with material hitherto only accessible
                    to diligent researchers, or with sources previously considered too complex for a
                    non-expert to understand. A project like Galaxy
                    Zoo, for example, has successfully built up a community of more than
                    200,000 users who have classified over 100 million galaxies, thus supporting a
                    great deal of academic research . Crowdsourcing aims
                    to raise the profile of academic research, by allowing volunteers to play a part
                    in its generation and dissemination.
                The Bentham Project at University College London (UCL) sought to harness the
                    power of crowdsourcing to facilitate the transcription of the manuscript papers
                    of Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832), the great philosopher and reformer. The purpose
                    of the Bentham Project is to produce the new authoritative scholarly edition of
                        The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham, which is
                    based in large part on transcripts of the vast collection – around 60,000 folios
                    – of Bentham manuscripts held by UCL Special Collections.The British
                        Library holds another 15,000 or so folios of material by and relating to
                        Bentham. The Bentham Project was founded in 1958, and since then
                    20,000 folios have been transcribed and twenty-nine volumes have been published.
                    The Project estimates that the edition will run to around seventy volumes;
                    before the commencement of Transcribe Bentham
                    around 40,000 folios remained untranscribed.
                This new edition of Bentham’s Collected Works will
                    replace the poorly-edited, inadequate and incomplete eleven-volume edition
                    published between 1838 and 1843 by Bentham’s literary executor, John Bowring
                        . The Bowring edition
                    omitted a number of works published in Bentham’s lifetime, as well as many
                    substantial works which had not been published but which have survived in
                    manuscript; a forthcoming Collected Works volume
                    entitled Not Paul, but Jesus – only a part of which
                    was previously published by Bentham, and was left out of the Bowring edition
                    altogether – will recover Bentham’s thinking on religion and sexual morality.
                    This material has significant implications for our understanding of utilitarian
                    thought, the history of sexual morality, atheism, and agnosticism. Bentham’s
                    writings on his panopticon prison scheme still require transcription, as do
                    large swathes of important material on civil, penal, and constitutional law, on
                    economics, and on legal and political philosophy. In short, while Bentham’s
                    manuscripts comprise material of potentially great significance for a wide range
                    of disciplines, much of the collection – far from being even adequately studied
                    – is virtually unknown. A great deal of work, both in exploring the manuscripts
                    and producing the Collected Works, clearly remains
                    to be done.
                The Bentham Papers Transcription Initiative – Transcribe
                        Bentham – was established to quicken the pace of transcription,
                    speed up publication of the Collected Works, create
                    a freely-available and searchable digital Bentham Papers repository, and engage
                    the community with Bentham’s ideas at a time when they are of increasing
                    contemporary relevance.For example, the British government, in late 2010,
                        announced plans to measure the nation’s happiness, with
                        the first results due in 2012.
                    Transcribe Bentham crowdsources manuscript
                    transcription, a task usually performed by skilled researchers, via the web to
                    members of the public who require no specialist training or background knowledge
                    in order to participate. The project team developed the Transcription Desk, a website, tool and interface to facilitate
                    web-based transcription and encoding of common features of the manuscripts in
                    Text Encoding Initiative-compliant XML. Transcripts submitted by volunteers are
                    subsequently uploaded to UCL’s digital repository, linked to the relevant
                    manuscript image and made searchable, while the transcripts will also eventually
                    form the basis of printed editions of Bentham’s works.For development of
                        the transcription tool and UCL’s digital repository, see , and . The
                    products of this crowdsourcing will thus be utilised for both scholarly and
                    general access purposes. Transcribe Bentham was
                    established and funded under a twelve-month Arts and Humanities Research Council
                    Digital Equipment and Database Enhancement for Impact (DEDEFI) grant. The
                    funding period was divided into six months of development work from April 2010,
                    and the Transcription Desk went live for a six-month testing period in September
                    of that year.The call for the AHRC’s DEDEFI scheme was issued in September
                        2009, and the results were announced in February 2010. Interviews for the
                        Research Associate positions were held in March 2010.
                
                Crowdsourcing is becoming more widespread, and thus, it is important to
                    understand exactly how, and if, it works. It is a viable and cost-effective
                    strategy only if the task is well facilitated, and the institution or project
                    leaders are able to build up a cohort of willing volunteers. Participant
                    motivation in crowdsourcing projects is, therefore, attracting more focused
                    attention. The teams behind the Zooniverse projects
                    have analysed the motivations and demographic characteristics of their
                    volunteers in an attempt to understand what drives people to participate in
                    online citizen-science projects, while the North American
                        Bird Phenology Programme, established to track climate change by
                    crowdsourcing the transcription of birdwatchers’ cards, also assessed its
                    participants’ opinions. Rose Holley has also offered several invaluable general
                    insights on user motivation, drawing on the experience of crowdsourcing the
                    correction of OCR software-generated text of historic newspapers at the National
                    Library of Australia (NLA), while Peter Organisciak has provided a useful
                    analysis of user motivations in crowdsourcing projects. 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    .
                However, Transcribe Bentham differs from previous
                    crowdsourcing and community collection schemes, in that its source material is a
                    huge collection of complex manuscripts. Though several projects have
                    crowdsourced manuscript transcription, the material they have made available is
                    generally formulaic, or at least reasonably straightforward to decipher and
                    understand 
                    
                    . Transcribing the difficult handwriting, idiosyncratic
                    style, and dense and challenging ideas of an eighteenth and nineteenth-century
                    philosopher is more complex, esoteric, and of less immediate appeal than
                    contributing to a genealogical or community collection.
                This paper describes how the Transcribe Bentham team
                    sought to attract volunteer transcribers and build an online community. It
                    outlines which strategies worked and which did not, and, drawing on qualitative
                    and quantitative data, analyses the complexion of our volunteer base, comparing
                    its demographic and other characteristics with those of other crowdsourcing
                    projects. This evidence will shed more light on the nature of user
                    participation, crowdsourced manuscript transcription, and provide guidance for
                    future initiatives. Section one will describe our attempts to recruit a crowd
                    and build a community of users; section two will analyse the make-up of this
                    user base, and assess site statistics, user contributions, and motivations; and
                    section three will consider the success of our community building with reference
                    to this analysis.
            

                Crowd or Community?
                Caroline Haythornthwaite has discerned two overlapping patterns of engagement in
                    online peer production initiatives like Transcribe
                        Bentham, distinguishing between a crowd and a
                        community. Contributions made by a crowd, which Haythornthwaite
                    describes as lightweight peer
                        production, tend to be anonymous, sporadic, and straightforward,
                    whereas the engagement of a community, or heavyweight peer production, is far
                    more involved. A community of volunteers engaged in the latter requires,
                    Haythornthwaite suggests, qualitative recognition, feedback, and a peer support
                    system. Contributors tend to be smaller in number, to be less anonymous, and to
                    respond to more complex tasks and detailed guidelines. Heavyweight peer
                    production might also involve a multi-tiered progress system to sustain
                    motivation; a crowd on the other hand, is satisfied with quantitative
                    recognition, perhaps in the form of progress statistics, and a two-tiered
                    hierarchy such as that of contributor and moderator. These two patterns,
                    Haythornthwaite contends, are often discernable within one project .
                
                    Transcribe Bentham blends both heavyweight and
                    lightweight peer production. We attracted an anonymous crowd of one-time or
                    irregular volunteers, along with a smaller cohort of mutually supportive and
                    loyal transcribers. We aimed to cast our net wide by opening the Transcription
                    Desk to all, by creating as user-friendly an interface as possible, and by
                    simplifying the transcription process as much as we could (Figure 1). But, as
                    transcribing Bentham’s handwriting is a complex and time-consuming task which
                    requires considerable concentration and commitment, we also tried to build a
                    dedicated user community to enable sustained participation by, for example,
                    implementing a qualitative and quantitative feedback and reward system. The
                    following section will describe the strategies we devised first to recruit the
                    crowd, and then to foster the community.
                
                    The Transcribe Bentham Transcription
                        Desk
                    
                
                
                    Recruiting the Crowd: The Publicity Campaign
                    Our publicity campaign targeted a variety of audiences including the general
                        public, academic community, libraries, archives professionals, and schools.
                        We devised audience-specific tactics as well as more general strategies,
                        taking advantage of services offered by UCL to help us implement our
                        campaign; these included the various Media Relations, Corporate
                        Communications, Outreach, Public Engagement, and Learning and Media Services
                        teams. In devising these strategies we had to consider issues of cost and
                        timing. Transcribe Bentham had a limited budget
                        to spend on publicity – £1,000 – and, as our testing period was six months
                        only, a short time-frame in which to execute the plan. Though we hoped to
                        target the English-speaking world, many of our strategies were, by
                        necessity, confined to the United Kingdom.
                    
                        The General Public
                        As a web 2.0 project, it was vital to have a visible and interactive
                            online presence. We created a project blog which was regularly updated
                            with progress reports, details of media coverage, and forthcoming
                            presentations, and which linked directly to, and became the main entry
                            point for, users to the Transcription Desk. We also utilised social
                            media by creating a Twitter profile and a Facebook page, which were
                            integrated into our blog and main Bentham Project website, which also
                            prominently featured Transcribe Bentham. A
                            Google Adwords account was created when the Desk went live in order to
                            generate traffic which, owing to budget constraints, was established on
                            a trial basis. We prepaid £60 on our account which was exhausted by the
                            end of September.
                        Besides the web we attempted to generate awareness of the project through
                            traditional media. With the help of UCL Media Relations, a press release
                            was drawn up at the launch of the project in September 2010, and
                            distributed to major British newspapers and magazines. UCL Corporate
                            Communications assisted in designing a Transcribe
                                Bentham leaflet for distribution, 2,500 copies of which were
                            printed at a cost of £295 (excl. VAT). We distributed the leaflet at
                            academic conferences and institutions in Britain, Europe, and
                            Australasia, and the leaflet was also dispensed throughout the year at
                            Bentham’s Auto-Icon in UCL’s South Cloisters.Bentham’s will, made
                                shortly before his death on 6 June 1832, stipulated that his body be
                                donated to medical science, and his skeleton be dressed and
                                preserved as an Auto-Icon. The Auto-Icon and its cabinet were
                                brought to UCL in 1850, and it is on public display at UCL. See http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project/who/autoicon for
                                more information, and http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project/who/autoicon/Virtual_Auto_Icon
                                for the new Virtual Auto-Icon, in which Bentham can be
                                explored in fine detail.
                            Transcribe Bentham was also promoted via a
                            video produced by UCL Media Services, which was embedded into our
                            websites, and hosted on UCL’s YouTube channel.
                                Transcribe Bentham video: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CtEqW4WwMHU.
                        
                    
                    
                        The Academic and Professional Community
                        At the outset, we believed that the academic and professional community
                            would be the most receptive to our project. We targeted not just
                            existing Bentham scholars, academics, and students with an interest in
                            history and philosophy, but also those interested in digital humanities
                            and crowdsourcing, palaeography, and information studies. We hoped to
                            encourage a range of scholars to embed Transcribe
                                Bentham in teaching and learning, thereby helping to build a
                            dedicated user base and encourage Bentham scholarship.
                        We considered placing advertisements in academic journals and more
                            mainstream subject-focused magazines. However, an advert in a single
                            journal, with a limited print run, would have swallowed up nearly half
                            of the publicity budget, and we felt that free coverage in the national
                            press would achieve greater impact. Therefore, in order to reach a
                            potentially diverse academic audience, the press release was sent to,
                            amongst others, The Guardian, TechCrunch, The
                                Register, Wired, Mashable, Times Higher
                                Education, Times Educational
                                Supplement,
                            The Times, BBC History
                                Magazine, and History Today. In
                            July 2010 two articles mentioning Transcribe
                                Bentham had appeared in the Times
                                Higher Education, and it thus seemed sensible to approach
                            that publication in the hope that it would run a follow-up piece 
                            .
                        Notifications were sent to a large number of academic and professional
                            mailing lists, online forums, and the websites of academic societies.
                            Though some bodies failed to respond, most of those contacted circulated
                            an announcement about Transcribe Bentham
                            via their list or featured it on their websites. Besides these
                            initiatives, project staff delivered presentations on Transcribe Bentham at several seminars,
                            conferences, and workshops throughout the year.Full and up-to-date
                                list of talks given by Transcribe
                                    Bentham team members (including in some instances audio
                                and video): http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/talks/. 
                            We also engaged in consultation with representatives from different
                            repositories including the National Library of the Netherlands, The
                            National Archives (UK), the Natural History Museum (UK), and Library and
                            Archives Canada.
                        To promote Transcribe Bentham to
                            palaeography, information studies, and research methods students, we
                            contacted individual academics, libraries, archives, and educational
                            bodies including the Higher Education Academy History Subject Centre,
                            Senate House Library, and The National Archives. This outreach was
                            generally successful and met with enthusiastic responses, though The
                            National Archives responded negatively, stating that only notifications
                            relating to government departments, archives and organisations
                                directly relevant to the activities of The National Archives
                            could be posted on their site. On the recommendation of the HEA History
                            Subject Centre, we created pages on the reading of historical
                            manuscripts to demonstrate how Transcribe
                                Bentham could be used as a tool in teaching and
                                learning.Assistance on reading historical manuscripts: http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/palaeography/.
                             The Subject Centre subsequently produced a review of the
                            resource recommending its use for palaeographic and historical training
                            in undergraduate History classes . Dr Justin
                            Tonra, then a Research Associate on the project, also contributed a
                            tutorial using Transcribe Bentham to TEI by Example, an online resource run by the
                            Royal Academy of Dutch Language and Literature, King's College London,
                            and UCL.TEI By Example: http://tbe.kantl.be/TBE/examples/TBED06v00.htm.
                        
                    
                    
                        Schools
                        At the development stage, project members anticipated that school pupils
                            and their teachers, particularly those undertaking A-levels in Religious
                            Studies, Philosophy, History, Law, and Politics, could be another
                            potential audience, especially considering Bentham specifically features
                            in the curricula for Religious Studies and Philosophy. Once the project
                            got underway, it was tailored in such a way so as to attract schools and
                            colleges. We created pages with information explaining how Transcribe Bentham related to relevant
                            A-Levels and Scottish Highers, including reading lists and direct links
                            to groups of manuscripts of relevance to particular areas of
                                study.Information relevant to A-Level and Higher study: http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/information-for-schools/a-levels-and-scottish-highers/.
                            We aimed, moreover, to target school teachers and pupils through the
                            media and the web. Our press release was sent to educational
                            publications, while notices and invitations to post links to our site
                            were sent to a range of educational websites and bodies.
                        A-level pupils from the Queen’s School in Chester visited the Bentham
                            Project in summer 2010 before the Transcription Desk went live, where
                            they tested the website; their experience was written up in the school’s
                            website and in the local newspaper . A link
                            to the Transcription Desk was later included on the school’s virtual
                            learning environment. In order to attract more schools to the project we
                            invited school groups to visit the Project to see the Auto-Icon, hear a
                            short lecture, and participate in the transcription exercise. We drew up
                            a letter outlining these details which we sent, along with the Transcribe Bentham leaflet, to c.500 state
                            schools in London, the cost of printing and postage for which was around
                            £360. Raines Foundation School in Bethnal Green, London, responded
                            positively to the outreach letter and arranged a visit in November of
                            A-level Philosophy students who participated in the initiative . The class teacher and one of his pupils
                            were also interviewed about Transcribe
                                Bentham for a broadcast journalism project at City
                            University London.
                    
                    
                        Success?
                        In terms of raising awareness of the initiative, the publicity campaign
                            has been a success. Despite mainly targeting English-speakers and the
                            UK, particularly with our press release, the project has received media
                            coverage in twelve countries including the United States, Australia,
                            Japan, Germany, Norway, Sweden, Austria, and Poland. We estimate that
                            the project has been mentioned in around seventy blogs, thirteen press
                            articles, and two radio broadcasts. As of 3 August 2012, we have
                            acquired 853 followers on Twitter, and 339 fans on Facebook. Transcribe Bentham has certainly made an
                            impact on the academic community and libraries and archives profession;
                            its progress has been tracked by JISC and the Institute of Historical
                            Research, and it has been reviewed by the Higher Education Development
                            Association, and the Higher Education Academy 
                            
                            
                            . Transcribe
                                Bentham is also being used as a model for archives discovery
                            by repositories in Europe and North America, and has been featured in
                            the professional blog of the British Library .
                            The project has been embedded, moreover, into teaching and learning in
                            Queen’s University Belfast, Bloomsburg University, the University of
                            Virginia, and King’s College London. 
                        More recently, Transcribe Bentham was
                            honoured with a highly prestigious Award of Distinction in the Digital
                            Communities category of the 2011 Prix Ars Electronica, the world’s
                            foremost digital arts competition, and staff were given the opportunity
                            to speak about the project at that year’s Ars Electronica
                                festival.See the list of winners of the 2011 Prix Ars
                                Electronica, http://new.aec.at/prix/en/gewinner/2011/, and the Transcribe Bentham citation, http://prix.aec.at/winner/403/. There were 407 entries in
                                the Digital Communities category. The Award of Distinction thus
                                constitutes joint second place, and carries a prize of €5,000.
                                Pictures from the winners’ forum are available (http://www.flickr.com/photos/arselectronica/sets/72157627336428579/),
                                along with a video recording of the session (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vvD3ipgZCTQ). This
                            is testimony to the project’s international impact, both inside and
                            outside the academy, with the Digital Communities jury commending Transcribe Bentham for its potential to create the
                                legacy of participatory education and the preservation of heritage
                                or an endangered culture
                            . Transcribe
                                Bentham was also one of five crowdsourcing projects
                            shortlisted for the 2011 Digital Heritage Award, part of that year’s
                            Digital Strategies for Heritage Conference.Digital Heritage Award
                                2011: http://www.dish2011.nl/news/digital-heritage-award-2011-nominees.
                        
                        We hoped that our considerable efforts in publicising the project, and
                            crowdsourced transcription, would help us to recruit a large crowd of
                            volunteers. We also implemented strategies to retain this crowd and
                            transform it into a loyal community.
                    
                
                
                    Building the Community
                    
                        The Interface
                        Retaining users was just as integral to the project’s success as
                            recruiting them in the first place. It was therefore important to design
                            a user-friendly interface which facilitated communication in order to
                            keep users coming back to the site, and to develop a sense of community
                            cohesion . The Transcription Desk was
                            developed using MediaWiki, an interface familiar to, and easily
                            navigable by, the millions of those who have browsed, used and
                            contributed to Wikipedia. It was decided that offering remuneration for
                            contributions would be contrary the collaborative spirit of the project,
                            and so platforms such as Amazon’s Mechanical
                                Turk were discounted, in favour of open source software. An
                            alternative approach would have necessarily limited participation in
                                Transcribe Bentham, as well as the
                            level of engagement with and access to material of national and
                            international significance.
                        
                            The Transcription Toolbar
                            
                        
                        
                            Transcribing and Encoding a Manuscript
                            
                        
                        The features of MediaWiki were utilised in an attempt to forge a virtual
                            community engaged in heavyweight peer production. We provided detailed,
                            clearly-written guidelines to explain the process of transcription and
                            encoding, along with a quick-start guide to summarise the main
                            points. Training videos and downloadable files were embedded in order to
                            provide an audiovisual aspect to the learning experience, and an
                            intuitive toolbar was developed so that volunteers otherwise unfamiliar
                            with text encoding could add the relevant TEI-compliant XML tags at the
                            click of a button (Figures 2 and 3). In order to give regular feedback
                            to users and to provide a platform for shared resources, we included a
                            discussion forum on the Desk’s main page where volunteers could swap
                            ideas, ask questions, or make requests of the project editors. Each
                            registered participant was given a social profile which could be left
                            anonymous or populated with an avatar and personal information,
                            including his/her home town, occupation, birthday, favourite movies, and
                            favourite Bentham quotation (Figure 4). Each volunteer profile also
                            included a personal message board and an add friends function; we
                            hoped that registered users would be able to message each other
                            privately or publicly and build up a cohort of transcriber friends. 
                        
                            Example of a Transcribe Bentham
                                volunteer profile
                            
                        
                        
                            The Transcribe Bentham
                                Benthamometer progress bar
                            
                        
                        
                            The Transcribe Bentham
                                Leaderboard
                            
                        
                        The project editors used the message function on a daily basis to
                            communicate with and provide feedback to transcribers. The
                                Benthamometer
                            The Benthamometer: http://www.transcribe-bentham.da.ulcc.ac.uk/td/Benthamometer.
                             tracked the progress of transcription, while the leaderboard
                            recorded and publicly recognised the efforts of the most diligent
                            transcribers (Figures 5 and 6).
                                Transcribe Bentham leaderboard: http://www.transcribe-bentham.da.ulcc.ac.uk/td/Top_Users.
                            Volunteers received points for every edit made; as an incentive we
                            devised a multi-tiered ranking system, a progress ladder stretching from
                                probationer to prodigy for transcribers to climb.
                                Transcribe Bentham volunteer ranks:http://www.transcribe-bentham.da.ulcc.ac.uk/td/Help:User_levels.
                            We also intended to utilise a gift function which allowed editors to
                            award users with virtual gifts – an image of the Collected Works for example – whenever they reached a
                            milestone. Team-building features like these have been found to
                            be useful in stimulating participation by other projects like Solar Stormwatch and Old
                                Weather: we hoped to facilitate interaction between users,
                            to generate healthy competition, and to develop a sense of community.
                            However, some of the social features of the site, including the add
                                friends option and the gift-awarding feature, malfunctioned at
                            the development stages. These problems, as will be discussed below, may
                            have been an impediment to social integration.
                    
                    
                        Community Outreach: Beyond the Virtual
                        Though we aimed to create a cohesive online community, we were also keen
                            to move beyond the virtual and add a personal element to the initiative
                            by organising a series of public outreach events. This programme was
                            arranged in consultation with local amateur historians and aimed to
                            start a dialogue between professionals and amateurs, to engage the
                            public, and to situate Bentham and UCL more firmly within the local
                            community. We wanted to engage the interest of amateur historians in
                                Transcribe Bentham as well as to give
                            our regular transcribers a chance to meet project staff. These events
                            were held in May 2011 and included two information sessions, one held at
                            UCL and one held externally, as well as a guided walk around Bentham’s London.
                                Bentham in the Community public events:
                                    http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project/news/events/events_archive/BITC.
                            In terms of integrating the Transcribe
                                Bentham community, this strategy, discussed in more detail
                            below, had limited success.
                        The project team devised, therefore, a range of strategies to recruit a
                            crowd and build a cohort of dedicated transcribers; on his blog
                            discussing crowdsourced manuscript transcription, Ben Brumfield
                            commented that Transcribe Bentham
                            has done more than any
                                other transcription tool to publicize the field
                            . As Transcribe
                                Bentham's attempts to crowdsource highly complex manuscripts
                            are novel, the project team was only able to draw on the general
                            experiences of other crowdsourcing projects when making its decisions
                            regarding the recruitment plan. The strategies employed were to a large
                            extent experimental. The following sections of this paper will assess
                            the complexion of our user base and consider how successful these
                            strategies were in forging a Transcribe
                                Bentham community.
                    
                
            

                The Results
                Our six-month testing period lasted from 8 September 2010 to 8 March 2011, and
                    during this time 1,207 people registered an account (discounting project staff,
                    and seven blocked spam accounts).Spam was not a significant issue, and nor
                        have any transcripts been vandalised with obscene language or content. The
                        handful of attempts to spam the site saw the creation of user pages
                        containing commercial links, or placing these links in the discussion forum
                        or Facebook page. These were quickly deleted and the offending users
                        blocked. Spam was often brought to staff’s attention by users. During July
                        and August 2012, a number of spambot accounts were generated, though these
                        caused no problems to the site and were easily removed. Between them
                    these volunteers transcribed 1,009 manuscripts, 569 (56%) of which were deemed
                    to be complete and locked to prevent further editing. Though the fully-supported
                    testing period has ceased, the Transcription Desk will remain available
                    dependent on funding, and Transcribe Bentham has
                    become embedded into the Bentham Project’s activities. As of 3 August 2012, the
                    project now has 1,726 registered users. 4,014 manuscripts have been transcribed,
                    of which 3,728 (94%) are complete and locked to prevent further editing.
                    However, unless otherwise stated, the analysis below pertains to the six-month
                    testing period.Progress updates are issued each Friday, via the discussion
                        forum, project blog, Facebook, and Twitter accounts.
                
                In this section, we will assess site statistics, user demographics, behaviour,
                    and motivations. Our findings are derived from quantitative data provided by a
                    Google Analytics account,The AHRC grant provided for the commission of a
                        server log analysis, to be carried out by UCL’s Department of Information
                        Studies. Owing to staffing issues within DIS, the log analysis was not
                        completed, and we have instead relied upon Google Analytics for site
                        statistics. analysis of statistics collated from the Transcription
                    Desk, qualitative findings from a user survey, and comparisons with other
                    studies of crowdsourcing volunteer behaviour.The user survey was available
                        from 25 January to 24 March 2011, and consisted of a combination of
                        multiple-choice questions and free-text boxes in which respondents could add
                        specific details and observations. It was open to all, and advertised via
                        the project blog, Facebook page, Twitter feed, a site notice on the front page of
                        the Transcription Desk, and by placing a message on each registered
                        volunteer’s user page. A full copy of the questions asked is available from
                        the authors upon request. The survey received 101 responses – about
                    8% of all registered users – 78 of which were fully completed. While it is,
                    therefore, not necessarily representative of the entire user base, the survey
                    contains a great deal of revealing information about those who did respond.
                Before reviewing the data, it is worth taking note of the following milestones in
                    the project’s life during the testing period:
                
                    8 September 2010: official launch of the Transcription Desk and first wave
                        of publicity
                    27 December 2010: New York Times article
                        featuring Transcribe Bentham published online
                            
                    
                    28 December 2010: New York Times article
                        published in print
                    1 February 2011: first broadcast of Deutsche Welle
                            World radio featureTo listen to the Deutsche Welle World
                            radio feature, visit here: http://www.dw-world.de/popups/popup_single_mediaplayer/0,,14808024_start_0_end_0_type_audio_struct_3126_contentId_6424149,00.html.
                            Dr Causer and Dr Wallace were interviewed for Austrian ORF Radio’s
                                Create Your World series, leading up to
                            the Ars Electronica festival. This can listened to here (in German):
                                http://oe1.orf.at/programm/280040. Dr Causer was also
                            interviewed in Linz by ORF Radio’s Matrix programme, which was
                            broadcast on 29 January 2012 (http://oe1.orf.at/programm/294290).
                    
                    1 and 2 February 2011: each registered user received an invitation to take
                        part in the Transcribe Bentham user
                        survey
                    8 March 2011: end of testing period
                
                As will be seen, the publication of the article in the New
                        York Times (NYT) had a vital and
                    enduring impact upon Transcribe Bentham, and it is
                    thus helpful to consider the testing period as having had two distinct parts:
                    Period One, or the pre-NYT period, covers 8
                    September to 26 December 2010 (110 days); and Period Two, the post-NYT period, encompasses 27 December 2010 to 8 March
                    2011 (72 days).
                
                    Site Visits
                    During the six months as a whole, the Transcription Desk received 15,354
                        visits from 7,441 unique visitors, or an average of 84 visits per day (see
                        Figure 7).Visits from Transcribe Bentham
                            staff offices were discounted from these figures. As of 3 August 2012,
                            the site has received 34,372 visits from 14,008 unique visitors.
                        Period One saw 5,199 visits, while in Period Two, there were 10,155. It is
                        clear, then, that traffic to the site during the shorter Period Two was much
                        greater than the longer Period One, but this is far from the full story.
                    
                        Visits to the Transcription Desk, 8 September 2010 to 8 March
                            2011
                        
                    
                    Following the publicity surrounding the launch of the Transcription Desk,
                        there were 1,115 visits to the site during the first week, though things
                        settled down soon afterwards when, during the remainder of Period One the
                        site subsequently received an average of forty visits per day. Indeed, in
                        November and December the number of daily visits rarely rose above thirty,
                        on occasion reached sixty, but dropped as low as seven during mid-to-late
                        December. Traffic to the Transcription Desk had essentially flatlined,
                        though the volunteers then taking part had transcribed 350 manuscripts by
                        the time Period One ended.
                    Then came the NYT article. From eleven visits on
                        26 December, traffic rocketed to 1,140 visits on 27 December, with a further
                        1,411 the following day. Remarkably, thirty per cent of all visits during
                        the testing period to the Transcription Desk came between 27 December 2010
                        and 4 January 2011. The NYT article also had
                        the effect of increasing the regular level of traffic to the site, to an
                        average of 141 visits per day. The number of visits did not regularly drop
                        below 100 until 19 January, and from then to 8 March the site rarely
                        received fewer than sixty per day. In short, the publicity derived from the
                            NYT article provided a level of traffic and
                        an audience of potential volunteers which it is hard to see how we would
                        have otherwise reached.From 9 March to 3 August 2012, the site has
                            received a mean average of 66 visits per day.
                    
                    The Transcription Desk has been visited by users from ninety-one countries
                        (Figure 8); most visits over the six months were from the United States,
                        with the UK in second place.As of 3 August 2012, the Transcription
                            Desk has been accessed by visitors from 115 countries. This again
                        reflects the NYT's impact and lack of
                        comparable British press coverage during Period Two, as during Period One
                        there were more than double the number of visits from Britain as there were
                        from the United States (Table 1).
                    
                        Google Analytics map showing from where the Transcription Desk was
                            accessed, 8 Sept 2010 to 8 March 2010
                        
                    
                    
                        Countries from which the Transcription Desk was Most Accessed, 8 Sept
                            2010 to 8 March 2010
                        
                            Country
                            No. of visits
                        
                        
                            United States
                            7,668
                        
                        
                            United Kingdom
                            7,668
                        
                        
                            Canada
                            757
                        
                        
                            Germany
                            246
                        
                        
                            Australia
                            198
                        
                        
                            Netherlands
                            148
                        
                        
                            France
                            125
                        
                        
                            New Zealand
                            92
                        
                        
                            Belgium
                            86
                        
                        
                            Italy
                            71
                        
                    
                
                
                    Volunteer Registrations
                    Figure 9 shows the number of registered volunteers, the number of manuscripts
                        transcribed, and the number of transcripts signed off as complete. During
                        Period One, twenty-three accounts were registered on average each week,
                        though this dropped to eight per week during the weeks ending 26 November to
                        23 December 2010. Publication of the NYT
                        article saw the volunteer base more than treble from 350 at the end of
                        Period One, to 1,087 when the statistics were next recorded on 7 January
                        2011. However, after this flurry of activity, the weekly average of newly
                        registered users dropped to twelve, lower even than during Period One.
                        Indeed, from the week ending 18 February to 8 March, week-on-week growth of
                        the overall user base dropped to less than one per cent, with an average of
                        five new registrations per week.This pattern has continued since the
                            end of the testing period. From 9 March to 3 August 2012, 487 new users
                            have registered an account, at an average of seven new registrants per
                            week. Apart from the periods 25 March to 1 April 2011, 9 to 16 September
                            2011, and 5 to 11 May 2012, week-on-week growth of the user base remains
                            at less than 1 %.
                    
                    
                        User accounts registered, manuscripts transcribed, and manuscripts
                            locked, 8 September 2010 – 8 March 2011
                        
                    
                
                
                    How Were Volunteers Recruited?
                    Perhaps unsurprisingly given the project’s nature, most respondents came to
                        hear of Transcribe Bentham through online
                        media, with the NYT article – which was
                        published online as well as in print – being the single most commonly cited
                        source (Figure 10). Our approaches to the British media were largely in
                        vain, while the American press – including the Boston
                            Globe, the Chronicle of Higher
                            Education, as well as the NYT –
                        reported on the progress of the project much more enthusiastically. We did
                        not send out a press release in the United States or in Europe; the
                        journalists who reported on Transcribe Bentham
                        in the press and on the radio approached us for information, and in this
                        regard, the blogosphere seems to have been an important means of attracting
                        media attention. Other than sending out additional press releases in the UK,
                        it is unclear what more we could have done to promote the project to the
                        British media; it is also worth noting that historically, the Bentham
                        Project has had trouble gaining media attention for Bentham studies. That
                        said, the British press were not entirely unreceptive: an article on
                        academic crowdsourcing, which included a report on Transcribe Bentham, appeared after the testing period, in the
                        11 September 2011 edition of The Sunday Times 
                        , while another small piece appeared in the
                        November 2010 edition of Wired for the iPad. It
                        appears that it was traditional media in the United States – albeit their
                        web presence – which was the most important recruiter of volunteers. 
                    Google Adwords was a failure for us as a recruitment strategy. Our advert was
                        displayed 648,995 times, resulting in 452 clicks, but sent no visitors to
                        the Transcription Desk. The team’s lack of experience in using Adwords may
                        account for this failure; regardless, it was considered too costly an
                        experiment to persevere. Social media such as Twitter and Facebook, while
                        raising awareness of Transcribe Bentham, also
                        appears to have had little impact in driving traffic directly to the site,
                        despite staff using them on a routine basis for publicity, communicating
                        with volunteers, and issuing notifications.Of the 15,354 visits to the
                            Transcription Desk between 8 September 2010 and 8 March 2011, the top
                            five referring sites were: the Transcribe Bentham
                            project blog (9,556, or 62% of all visits); Facebook (468, or
                            3%), Windows Live Mail (383, or 2.5%); Twitter (136, or 0.9%); and the
                                ArchivesNext blog (91, or 0.6%). That
                            most of the referrals were via the project blog emphasises that this was
                            the main entry point for visitors. There is a corresponding dramatic
                            increase in referral traffic from the project blog at the time of
                            publication of the NYT article, which
                            carried a link to the blog rather than the Transcription Desk. From 9
                            March 2011 to 3 August 2012, Facebook’s influence grew and drove around
                            20% of the traffic to the Transcription Desk during this period. Only 8%
                            of referrals from Facebook, however, were from new users, which suggests
                            that regular volunteers may have used Facebook as an entry point to the
                            site. Twitter, in particular, appears to have been more a means
                        by which technology-savvy users have followed Transcribe Bentham's progress, rather than acting as a
                        recruitment method. Nevertheless, social media has helped to integrate the
                        community to an extent, by providing a platform for editors to share results
                        and keep volunteers and other parties informed.
                    Time and budget constraints impacted upon the success of the publicity
                        campaign. We spent around £800 of our budget, though the campaign cost more
                        overall, as we used additional funds acquired through a UCL Public
                        Engagement bursary and other sources. With more funds we might have been
                        able to try different strategies, and a commercial advert in a history
                        magazine might have been possible. It also took time for the press release,
                        distributed at the launch of the Desk in September, to yield results.
                        Project staff liaised with journalists soon after the launch but, owing to
                        the production process, stories often did not appear for some time after.
                            Wired published its piece in November while
                            The New York Times article appeared on
                        December 27th – unfortunately when project staff were on holiday and unable
                        fully to capitalise on the publicity or deal with enquiries immediately –
                        some months after the launch. Thus, the user base only started to grow, and
                        regular participants emerge, as the project’s funded testing period moved
                        into its final three months. 
                    
                        Means by which survey respondents first became aware of Transcribe Bentham
                        
                        
                    
                    92 respondents.
                
                
                    Who Were the Volunteers?
                    Analysis of user survey responses and user profile pages suggests that most
                        of those interested in taking part in Transcribe
                            Bentham were educated professionals (Figure 11). Ninety-seven
                        per cent of survey respondents had been educated to at least undergraduate
                        level, and almost a quarter achieved a doctorate. Almost two-thirds of
                        survey respondents were female,There were 94 responses to a question
                            asking What gender are you?. 54 (57%) said female, 36
                            (38%) said male, and 4 (4%) responded would rather not
                            say. whereas, for example, those taking part in Galaxy Zoo were overwhelmingly male 
                        .As of 3 August 2012, of the eight
                            volunteers transcribing on a regular basis, seven are female.
                    
                    Over a third of respondents were either academics or higher education
                        students of varying levels, while those working in the arts, editing, and IT
                        also registered with the project (Table 2). Almost a tenth of respondents
                        were retirees and – from information gleaned from their user profiles – it
                        appears that at least two of the most active transcribers were retired,
                        while the most prolific volunteer had taken a year out from study. None of
                        the regular volunteers were university students, and nor were any school
                        pupils or teachers; the outreach strategy to London schools thus failed to
                        generate sustained participation. Only one school responded to the letter
                        and, while the Raines Foundation School showed enthusiasm at their visit to
                        the Bentham Project, there was no sustained activity on the site. With an
                        enhanced publicity campaign and more time, we would have been able to expand
                        our outreach to schools by targeting independent schools, which may have had
                        more resources available to dedicate to such a project.
                    
                        Education of Transcribe Bentham user
                            survey respondents
                        
                    
                    92 respondents.
                    
                        Occupations of Transcribe Bentham user
                            survey respondents
                        
                            Sector
                            No. of respondents (percentage)
                        
                        
                            Academia
                            14 (17)
                        
                        
                            Administration
                            5 (6)
                        
                        
                            Arts
                            8 (10)
                        
                        
                            Civil servant
                            3 (4)
                        
                        
                            Editing/publishing
                            8 (10)
                        
                        
                            Engineering
                            2 (2)
                        
                        
                            Finance
                            3 (4)
                        
                        
                            IT
                            4 (5)
                        
                        
                            Librarian
                            1 (1)
                        
                        
                            Project management
                            1 (1)
                        
                        
                            Psychiatrist
                            1 (1)
                        
                        
                            Researcher
                            3 (4)
                        
                        
                            Retail
                            1 (1)
                        
                        
                            Retired
                            7 (9)
                        
                        
                            Student
                            15 (18)
                        
                        
                            Teacher
                            1 (1)
                        
                        
                            Transcriber
                            2 (2)
                        
                        
                            Unemployed
                            3 (4)
                        
                        
                            
                                Total
                            
                            
                                82 (100)
                            
                        
                    
                    Holley found that while the age of crowdsourcing volunteers varies
                            widely, the most active were mainly a mixture of retired people
                            and young dynamic high achieving professionals with full-time jobs
                        . Our results generally agree, though our survey
                        results would suggest that Transcribe Bentham
                        volunteers were, generally speaking, perhaps a little older. Most
                        respondents were at least forty-one years of age and, notably, a fifth were
                        over sixty. Where it is possible to glean information, the most regular
                        transcribers appear to be in these upper age brackets. These results
                        emphasise, at least for a project like Transcribe
                            Bentham, the importance of recruiting users with plenty of
                        disposable free time, and those associated with academic and/or professional
                        backgrounds. Our publicity outreach to these audiences was, therefore,
                        worthwhile. 
                    
                        Age Profile of Transcribe Bentham User Survey Respondents
                        
                    
                    Only a minority of respondents had worked with manuscripts, or had any
                        specialised training in reading historical handwriting, prior to taking part
                        in Transcribe Bentham.There were 85
                            responses to a question asking Have you had any palaeography
                                training, or have you transcribed manuscripts before taking part in
                                    Transcribe Bentham? 28 (33%)
                            said yes, and 57 (67%) said no. There is thus
                        little sense that Transcribe Bentham, in spite
                        of publicity efforts to engage that circle, tapped into a pool of
                        experienced and/or trained historical transcribers. However, a handful of
                        respondents did have some prior experience, and they included a medievalist,
                        a historical editor, and one particularly experienced user who had
                        previously transcribed 25,000 documents dealing with the Canadian
                        government’s relationship with Aboriginal Canadians. 
                
                
                    What Was Produced?
                    Assuming that all 7,441 unique visitors to the Transcription Desk (as
                        recorded by Google Analytics) were indeed individuals, then only a maximum
                        of six per cent of those who visited the site were moved to register an
                        account. Yet the volume of work done by relatively few was formidable
                        indeed. 439 manuscripts were transcribed during Period One at an average
                        rate of twenty-three per week, though only one volunteer then submitted work
                        on a consistent basis. Even after the enthusiasm of September and October
                        gave way, an average of eighteen manuscripts per week were transcribed
                        during November and December, though admittedly parts of the latter month
                        were very quiet.
                    
                        Transcribe Bentham really began to fulfil its
                        potential in Period Two as media attention paid dividends, though sadly just
                        as the funding period was coming to a close. 187 manuscripts were
                        transcribed between 27 December 2010 and 7 January 2011 alone, an increase
                        of 43% on the end-of-Period One total. During Period Two, seven volunteers
                        transcribed substantial amounts of material on a regular basis, producing an
                        average of fifty-seven transcripts produced each week until 8
                            March.This mean average for Period 2 is distorted somewhat by the
                            elevated rate of transcription between 27 December 2010 and 7 January
                            2011. The median average for Period 2 is 43.
                    
                    Over the testing period as a whole, volunteers transcribed an average of
                        thirty-five manuscripts each weekThe median average for the testing
                            period was 27, and the modal average was 32. As of 27 January 2012, the
                            overall mean average rate of transcription remains at 35 per
                            week.; if this rate was to be maintained then 1,820 transcripts
                        would be produced in twelve months. Taking the complexity of the task into
                        consideration, the volume of work carried out by Transcribe Bentham volunteers is quite remarkable (Table 3).
                        Some manuscripts are only a few words long, while others can be up to two
                        thousand words in length, and we estimate that the average manuscript is
                        around 500 words long (plus mark-up). Transcribe
                            Bentham volunteers transcribed over 500,000 words (plus mark-up)
                        during the six-month testing periodOn the same estimate, as of 3
                            August 2012, around 2 million words have been transcribed, plus mark-up.
                            It is thus estimated that the 40,000 folios of material which were
                            untranscribed at the start of the project contain around 30 million
                            words. From 9 March 2011 to 3 August 2012, the mean average was 41
                            transcripts per week, though from 31 December 2011 to 3 August 2012 the
                            rate was 51 transcripts per week.
                    
                    
                        Number of Manuscripts Transcribed, 8 September 2010 – 8 March
                            2011
                        
                            Month
                            Total manuscripts transcribed
                            Average no. of manuscripts transcribed per week
                        
                        
                            8 Sept to 24 Sept 2010
                            68
                            23
                        
                        
                            25 Sept to 29 Oct 2010
                            149
                            30
                        
                        
                            30 Oct to 26 Nov 2010
                            95
                            24
                        
                        
                            27 Nov to 23 Dec 2010
                            49
                            12
                        
                        
                            24 Dec 2010 to 28 Jan 2011
                            334
                            84
                        
                        
                            29 Jan to 25 Feb 2011
                            168
                            42
                        
                        
                            26 Feb to 8 March 2011
                            68
                            n/a
                        
                    
                    At the end of Period One, 53% of all transcripts were judged to be complete,
                        but this dropped to 42% early in Period Two as large numbers of new users
                        began to transcribe and grappled with Bentham’s handwriting and style, and
                        the transcription interface.For more on the Transcribe Bentham moderation process, see . The proportion of completed
                        transcripts remained around this level until late January, when an
                            Incomplete Folios category was made available to provide
                        volunteers with the option of working on transcripts requiring improvement.
                        By 8 March, 55% of transcripts were completed and locked.Incomplete
                            Folios category, http://www.transcribe-bentham.da.ulcc.ac.uk/td/Category:Incomplete_Folios.
                            As of 3 August 2012, the proportion of completed transcripts has risen
                            to 94%. This is mainly due to the increased proficiency of regular
                            transcribers, as well as project staff working through incomplete
                            manuscripts following the testing period.
                    
                    
                        Super Transcribers
                        Of the 1,207 registered volunteers, 259 (21% of the overall user base)
                            transcribed manuscripts during the testing period (Table 4).As of
                                3 August 2012, of the 1,726 registered volunteers, 311 (18%) have
                                carried out any transcription. Most worked on only one
                            manuscript; this is not to say that they transcribed it to completion – although many did so – but that
                            they transcribed at least some part of it.
                        
                            Number of Manuscripts Transcribed by Volunteers
                            
                                No. of manuscripts transcribed
                                No. of volunteers (percentage)
                            
                            
                                1
                                163 (63)
                            
                            
                                2 to 5
                                74 (28)
                            
                            
                                6 to 9
                                7 (3)
                            
                            
                                6 to 9
                                7 (3)
                            
                            
                                10 to 19
                                7 (3)
                            
                            
                                20 to 30
                                1 (<)
                            
                            
                                63 +
                                7 (3)
                            
                            
                                
                                    Totals
                                
                                
                                    259 (100)
                                
                            
                        
                        A smaller number of volunteers contributed, however, the majority of the
                            work. Fifteen volunteers transcribed between six and thirty manuscripts
                            each, but only a further seven could be described as active on a regular
                            basis, and thus analogous to Holley’s super volunteers,
                            individuals which she found to comprise the highly-motivated backbone –
                            usually around ten per cent – of a crowdsourcing project’s user base,
                            and who contribute the majority of the labour . Johan Oomen and Lora Aroyo also note that despite an explosion of
                                user-generated content on the Web, only a small portion of people
                                contribute most of it. They estimate likewise that only ten per
                            cent of online users generate content, and that a mere one per cent of
                            these generators actively and consistently contribute the majority of
                                the user-generated content
                            .
                        The seven volunteers shown in Table 5 comprise a mere 0.6 per cent of all
                            registered Transcribe Bentham users – and
                            three per cent of those who did transcribe – yet these super
                                transcribers had, by 8 March 2011, between them worked on 709
                            (or 70%) of all of the 1,009 transcribed manuscripts.
                        
                            
                                Super Transcribers and Their Work
                            
                                
                                No. of manuscripts transcribed
                                Percent of total transcribed (1,009)
                            
                            
                                Volunteer A
                                80
                                7.9
                            
                            
                                Volunteer B
                                71
                                7
                            
                            
                                Volunteer C
                                280
                                27.8
                            
                            
                                Volunteer D
                                67
                                6.6
                            
                            
                                Volunteer E
                                66
                                6.5
                            
                            
                                Volunteer F
                                82
                                8.1
                            
                            
                                Volunteer G
                                63
                                6.2
                            
                            
                                
                                    Totals
                                
                                
                                    709
                                
                                
                                    70.1
                                
                            
                        
                        All usernames have been anonymised.
                        Only Volunteer C had been with the project since around launch time,
                            having begun taking part on 22 September 2010, and she worked on a
                            staggering 28% of all transcribed manuscripts.As of 3 August 2012,
                                Volunteer E has transcribed over 1,142 manuscripts, comprising
                                around 28% of the total 4,014 transcripts. Volunteer D has, as of
                                the same date, produced 709 transcripts (17%). Despite losing all
                                but three of the then super transcribers at the end of the
                                testing period, as of 3 August 2012, Transcribe
                                    Bentham now has eight volunteers transcribing on a
                                regular basis. One user began transcribing in mid-September 2011,
                                and has already transcribed 934 (23%) of the total, while another
                                has produced 285 (7%) transcripts since 11 November 2011. All
                            of the other early volunteers during Period One had either not returned
                            to the project or transcribed only on an intermittent basis. The
                            remaining six super transcribers were all recruited as a result of the
                                NYT  article and, as far as we can
                            tell, were all based in North America. 
                        Holley found that super volunteers can come to regard working on a
                            project as a full-time job . While this is an
                            exaggeration in the case of Transcribe
                                Bentham, it is certainly the case that super transcribers
                            spent significant amounts of time working on manuscripts.There
                                were 43 responses to a question asking How long, on average, do
                                    you think you spend on Transcribe
                                        Bentham each week? 32 (75%) spent up to 2 hours
                                on the site per week, another 6 (14%) spent up to 6 hours, 2 (5%)
                                spent up to 8 hours, and another 3 (7%) spent over 8 hours per week
                                on the site. Unsurprsingly, the super-transcribers spent the most
                                time per week transcribing. It is also clear that the super
                            transcribers care a great deal about Transcribe
                                Bentham, and they follow with huge interest announcements,
                            improvements, and other developments related to the project. There is an
                            evident feeling of responsibility on their part at being entrusted with
                            the material, and they take great pains to ensure their work is
                            accurately transcribed and encoded; indeed, submissions by super
                            transcribers generally require minimal editorial intervention. They have
                            also made a number of helpful suggestions which have been implemented,
                            such as providing samples of Bentham’s handwriting and creating a page
                            to list partially-transcribed manuscripts.
                        
                            Transcribe Bentham did, therefore, recruit
                            an active, though small, user community engaged in heavyweight peer
                            production as well as a crowd of one-time users. 
                    
                
                
                    Sustaining Motivation
                    As Romeo and Blaser note, [u]nderstanding the motivations of online volunteers is an important
                            way to inspire and sustain participation
                        . Those responding to our survey reported that
                        they were mostly motivated to take part by a general interest in history and
                        philosophy, in crowdsourcing and the technology behind the project, and in
                        Bentham himself (Figure 13). A significant number cited contributing to the
                        greater good by opening up Bentham’s writings to a wider audience as a
                        motivation, and several even found transcription fun! Though our survey
                        sample is relatively small, similar findings by others examining participant
                        motivations suggest that the results are sound. Peter Organisciak found that
                        primary motivational factors included subject matter, ease of participation,
                        and a sense of making a meaningful contribution, while the top five NLA text
                        correctors cited their enjoyment of the task, interest in the material,
                        recording Australian history for posterity, and providing a service to
                            the community as their main motivations for taking part 
                        .
                    
                        Transcribe Bentham consciously implemented
                        means to encourage volunteers through friendly competition, or what Romeo
                        and Blaser describe as game like
                            mechanics
                        . The Benthamometer illustrated the
                        project’s overall progress, and the points, multi-tiered ranking system, and
                        leaderboard provided a visible recognition of work and progress. Other
                        crowdsourcing projects have considered such features to be important, and it
                        was thus surprising that Transcribe Bentham
                        volunteers regarded competition and recognition to be of such
                        low importance. Organisciak likewise found points systems, achievements, and
                        leaderboards to be of secondary importance to volunteers .
                    However, this finding comes with a significant caveat: the most active super
                        transcriber was indeed partly motivated by both competition and recognition,
                        and it is clear that projects must be flexible enough to meet the
                        motivational needs of a variety of volunteers.
                            Organisciak notes that points systems are
                            best suited to serve
                                the more dedicated contributors, giving them something to show for
                                their dedication and something still to strive for.
                        Perhaps others were subconsciously competitive, as another volunteer noted
                        that I’m usually a very noncompetitive
                            person but […] became inspired to do more when I find I’m losing my
                                position” [on the leaderboard] – it’s ridiculous! but quite
                            fun.Perhaps competition might be encouraged in the future
                            by promoting short term goals, such as getting a set of manuscripts
                            transcribed by a certain date.
                    
                    
                        Survey respondents’ motivations for taking part in Transcribe Bentham
                        
                        
                    
                    43 respondents.
                    Many respondents found the intellectual challenge and puzzle-solving aspect
                        of transcription enjoyable and highly rewarding, with several comparing
                        deciphering Bentham’s handwriting to solving a crossword or sudoku. Two
                        transcribers were excited by working on manuscripts which may not have been
                        looked at since Bentham wrote them, while contributing to the accessibility
                        of the digital collection and the production of the Collected Works was also a factor for some.All volunteers
                            who have transcribed manuscripts will be acknowledged in the relevant
                            published volumes of the Collected
                            Works. One volunteer notably described Transcribe Bentham as a literary form of
                            archaeology: Instead of using a
                            brush to uncover an object, you get to uncover historical information by
                            reading and transcribing it. It leaves his legacy available for all to
                            access.
                    
                    This is an important point, and supports Holley’s suggestion that volunteers
                        are more likely to take part in projects run by non-profit making
                        organisations, as opposed to those run by commercial companies . When volunteers submit transcripts to Transcribe Bentham, they agree to the following
                        disclaimer: You are contributing
                            to an Open Access initiative. For the purpose of UK legislation,
                            copyright for all materials within Transcribe
                                Bentham: Transcription Desk, including this transcription,
                            resides with UCL (University College London). If you do not want your
                            writing to be edited and redistributed at will, then do not submit it
                            here.
                    
                    Overwhelmingly, survey respondents had no problem with this, which speaks to
                        the mutual trust and respect between a project and its volunteers which is
                        vital for success. Users recognised that UCL had made freely available
                        priceless manuscript material, a transcription interface and instructions,
                        and that their work was a transcript of Bentham’s writing rather than
                        original intellectual content. Such approval did, however, come with the
                        proviso that the submitted transcripts would not be commercially exploited,
                        and would remain accessible to all in the future; the free availability and
                        long-term preservation of the transcripts in UCL’s digital repository
                        certainly meets these requirements. 
                    The vast majority of those who visited the Transcription Desk did not become
                        active users, and it is thus just as important to understand what dissuaded
                        people from participating as it is to understand what encouraged them
                        (Figure 14). Some were daunted by the task, or felt that their contributions
                        might not be of sufficient standard to be deemed worthy. For example, one
                        respondent noted that he had been unable to read Bentham’s handwriting
                            with enough clarity to be happy recording my guesses in an important
                            academic project, while another confess[ed] to being a bit
                            intimidated […] fear of failure? This is a shame, as any
                        contribution to Transcribe Bentham is
                        beneficial to the project; perhaps in the future the project team could
                        provide more reassurance to volunteers that all efforts are valuable.
                        Another respondent decided that she could not take part because I need a
                            paying transcription position; Transcribe
                            Bentham is in no position to offer remuneration, and – as
                        discussed above – it was considered that offering money for participation
                        would be contrary to both the project’s collaborative principles and spirit.
                             discovered financial reward to
                            be a primary motivator in those projects which offer
                            remuneration.
                    
                    It is notable that no survey respondents mentioned the importance of feedback
                        from project staff or prompt responses to submissions. However, we have
                        discovered through correspondence and observation that volunteers greatly
                        appreciate notifications as to whether or not their submissions have been
                        accepted, as well as responses to email requests for further information.
                        Indeed, volunteer enthusiasm can noticeably fall away when feedback and
                        acknowledgement are not given, and we may have lost potential long-term
                        contributors during the December break when staff were away. This suggests
                        that project staff must devote time to answering queries from users and to
                        maintaining social media features in order to facilitate interaction,
                        otherwise the project can appear dormant, and volunteers may lose interest
                        or feel disconnected and exploited.
                    The single most important dissuading factor, however, for those who responded
                        to the survey, was time, or rather the lack of it, in which to transcribe
                        and encode, or learn how to do so. Reading and deciphering the manuscripts
                        was found to be the main challenge: as one respondent replied, [t]he real
                            difficulty is in reading [Bentham’s] handwriting. Indeed, over half
                        of respondents found that deciphering Bentham’s hand took longer than
                        encoding. Though text-encoding was an additional complication to the
                        process, encouragingly few survey respondents found it prohibitively
                            difficult.There were 44 responses to a question asking Have you
                                found it easy to encode your transcripts?. 13 (30%) said
                                yes, 27 (28%) said yes, once I got used to it, and 4
                            (9%) said no.  However, this comes with the significant
                        qualification that almost two-thirds of respondents found that it took some
                        time to get used to the encoding process, and that a significant proportion
                        thought they spent as much time encoding as they did deciphering Bentham’s
                            handwriting.There were 43 responses to a question asking Do you
                                think you spend more time transcribing the manuscripts, or encoding
                                your transcripts? 24 (56%) said transcribing, 2 (5%) said
                                encoding, and 17 (40%) said an equal amount of time on
                                both.
                    
                    Indeed, most free-text responses noted that encoding (and the extensive
                        instructions on how to do so) were daunting to beginners, but that the
                        process became reasonably straightforward with practice.This result is
                            most likely skewed, as those who were put off by the encoding in the
                            first place were unlikely to complete the survey, or even to have been
                            aware of it. Several respondents were not so sure: one believed
                        there was [t]oo much markup expected, another that encoding was
                            unnecessarily complicated, and one – who, unsurprisingly, is not
                        a regular transcriber – found encoding a hopeless nightmare and the
                        transcription process a horror. To many, text encoding was simply a
                        time-consuming complication and almost certainly dissuaded participation. As
                        one respondent put it, The transcription
                            process has been a little more complicated than I anticipated. I thought
                            I would be able to type away but I have to learn a little more before I
                            get started, so I’m not wasting anyone elses [sic] time.
                    
                    Some proved very able at text-encoding, to the point where almost half of
                        survey respondents were confident enough to type at least some tags manually
                        rather than use the toolbar. However, the negative views of encoding are
                        very real concerns which must be addressed when improving and refining the
                        transcription tool.There were 44 responses to a question asking Do
                                you use the toolbar to encode your transcripts, or do you type the
                                tags manually? 20 (45%) said they used the toolbar, 4 (9%) typed
                            them, and 20 (45%) did both. Indeed, the majority of survey
                        respondents were unfamiliar with the principles and practice of text
                        encoding before taking part in Transcribe
                            Bentham, though with a few exceptions: some were aware of the
                        basics through editing Wikipedia, writing HTML,
                        or using early word processors. One volunteer in particular noted, that
                            I’m part of the wiki generation -- we have encoding encoded into our
                            blood.There were 84 responses to a question asking Were you
                                familiar with the principles of text encoding prior to taking part
                                in Transcribe Bentham? 35 (42%)
                            respondents said yes, and 49 (58%) said no. While
                        crowdsourcing projects should not underestimate the IT proficiency of their
                        volunteers, or their ability to learn new skills, the task at hand should be
                        made as simple as possible.
                    As such, we made the transcription and encoding process, and the
                        instructions, as user-friendly as we could given our requirements and our
                        short time-frame. However, these survey responses and the project’s
                        inability to retain all but a few long-term volunteers suggests that the
                        task appeared too complex and time-consuming for many prospective
                        volunteers. Though we can offer guidance and assistance to those attempting
                        to decipher Bentham’s handwriting, evidently, simplification of the
                        transcription process and instructions would improve user recruitment and
                        retention. For example, the introduction of a What-You-See-Is-What-You-Get
                        interface, as an alternative to the transcription toolbar, with encoding
                        occurring under the hood, would prove an attractive option for many
                        volunteers. They would then be able simply to concentrate on transcription
                        without having to digest lengthy instructions .
                    
                        Factors which dissuaded survey respondents' participation in Transcribe Bentham
                        
                        
                    
                    There were 36 responses to a question asking If you do not consider
                            yourself a regular user of Transcribe
                                Bentham, or you have signed up but not transcribed, could
                            you let us know what has put you off or dissuaded you from
                            transcribing?
                
                
                    User Interaction and Community Cohesion
                    Fostering a sense of community would, we hoped, stimulate participation by
                        encouraging users to strive to achieve common goals. Our community building
                        strategies, however, appear to have had limited success. For example, only
                        one pre-existing transcriber attended the public outreach events held in May
                        2011. This transcriber did appreciate the opportunity to meet project staff
                        and experience face-to-face interaction. Of course, the volunteers who live
                        outside of the UK were inhibited from attending these events and thus were
                        unable to integrate physically with the community. In terms of fusing the
                            Transcribe Bentham community together
                        therefore, this particular programme of public events was ineffective.
                    Furthermore, despite the project having integrated social media facilities
                        into the Transcription Desk, there is minimal evidence of interaction
                        between Transcribe Bentham users. We are only
                        aware of a handful of occasions on which users have communicated publicly
                        with each other via their user page, a transcript, the discussion forum, or
                        the project’s Facebook page. While users may have exchanged private messages
                        or emails, the survey results suggest otherwise: only one respondent
                        reported that she had contacted another via their user page, two had done so
                        via the discussion forum, and another via Twitter.
                    This is surprising, as it was anticipated that users would demand such social
                        functionality. Indeed, the North American Bird
                            Phenology Project's survey respondents specifically requested a
                        discussion forum to communicate amongst themselves, and the NLA was met with
                        requests from text correctors to provide a facility by which users could
                        contact each other 
                        . Many of the major crowdsourcing
                        projects have discussion forums in which volunteers are active to one degree
                        or another.For example, see the NLA’s Trove Forum (Digitised Newspapers sub-section) http://trove.nla.gov.au/forum/forumdisplay.php?3-Digitised-newspapers-and-more,
                            accessed 13 April 2011, or Galaxy Zoo
                            forum, http://www.galaxyzooforum.org/, accessed 13 April
                            2011. These are certainly busier than the Transcribe Bentham forum which – rather than being a space for
                        volunteers – became merely another avenue by which users contact project
                        staff or in which project announcements are made. Perhaps a larger volunteer
                        community is required for the forum to be used to a greater extent.
                    Moreover, by the end of the testing period, seventy-eight per cent of survey
                        respondents stated that they had not added any information about themselves
                        to their user profiles.Several registered users filled in their social
                            profile page in great detail, but did not transcribe anything;
                            conversely, most super-transcribers have added little or no information
                            to their profiles. A cursory look through registered users’ pages
                        – even those belonging to super transcribers – reinforces the impression
                        that volunteers are not particularly interested in social media facilities,
                        or perhaps even being part of an online community per
                            se, as hardly any contain any information beyond a name and, in
                        a few cases, a photograph or avatar. Survey responses suggest why this may
                        be the case. One respondent had added minimal information because I don’t
                            know enough about the community […] to want to make my information
                            available to others. Others were concerned that such information
                            seems unnecessary, that they were [n]ot sure how this would be
                            helpful, thought personal information would be more interesting
                            and useful to the T[ranscribe]B[entham] organization than to individual
                            contributors, or didn’t see the feature as important. Two further
                        respondents expressed doubts about the wisdom of putting too much
                            personal profile info on public sites, which may be a significant
                        issue for future crowdsourcing projects seeking to create a community.
                        Furthermore, while there have been technical issues with the site’s social
                        features, transcribers do not appear too concerned about these problems as
                        we have received no enquiries about their non-functionality.
                    On the other hand, some wanted to know more about their fellow volunteers.
                        One believed that it is important for each person involved in the project
                            to at least let us know their educational background and philosophy. It
                            encourages discussion. Another thought that it is only possible
                            to create an online community if people are willing to say something
                            about themselves. However, they were in a definite minority, with
                        most seemingly uninterested in, or unaware of, the site’s social media
                        capabilities.
                    Transcribers have proven wholly good-natured in going about their work: there
                        have been a couple of easily-resolved but unintended revisions of others’
                        work, but certainly no evidence of edit warring, repeated reversions,
                        or arguments. There is certainly none of the overt territoriality exhibited
                        in the tagging of text in one NLA newspaper, when an anonymous user
                        requested a registered text corrector to please refrain from
                            appropriating and/or inserting any [text] correction or tag
                        concerning a particular historical figure, whom the anonymous user appeared
                        to believe belonged to him or her.
                            The Mercury (Hobart), 2 February 1872, http://trove.nla.gov.au/ndp/del/article/8921624, accessed 6
                            April 2011.
                    
                    That said, there is no evidence that Transcribe
                            Bentham's volunteers have collaborated directly upon
                        manuscripts; rather, they participate in what might be termed unconscious
                        collaboration, with volunteers sometimes adding another layer of work onto
                        what went before. As one respondent to the survey suggested, it [s]eems
                            to me the whole system is a collaboration, since we’re encouraged to
                            submit unfinished transcriptions & others can work on them. Maybe a
                            serial collaboration. Two respondents were unaware that direct
                        collaboration was possible, while another did not feel secure enough with
                            coding to muck up someone else’s work, and presumably worked instead
                        on unedited folios. 
                    Indeed, three-quarters of edited manuscripts were worked upon by only one
                        volunteer, while relatively few manuscripts were transcribed by three or
                        more. Those manuscripts transcribed by multiple volunteers were generally
                        begun with by one or more new users and otherwise abandoned, and
                        later completed by a more experienced transcriber. This all suggests that
                        volunteers appeared to prefer starting transcripts from scratch, and to work
                        alone (Table 6), with communication and acknowledgement from staff being of
                        much greater importance than collaboration with other users. This might
                        appear counter-intuitive, as dabbling with partially-completed transcripts
                        could allow volunteers to get used to the project and transcription process,
                        and be less daunting than starting a transcript from scratch. The advent of
                        the incomplete folios category in mid-January 2011 did see regular
                        volunteers finishing partially-complete transcripts, though this option has
                        not been popular with new volunteers, who seem to prefer to start with an
                        untranscribed manuscript. Indeed, we have regularly received complaints from
                        volunteers about being unable easily to distinguish between untranscribed,
                        partially transcribed, and completed transcripts. Perhaps registration acts
                        as a barrier to those who might wish to tweak a little bit of encoding or
                        transcription here and there.
                    
                        How Many Volunteers Transcribed Each Manuscript?
                        
                            No. of transcribers
                            No. of manuscripts (percentage)
                        
                        
                            1
                            753 (74.6)
                        
                        
                            2
                            256 (25.4)
                        
                        
                            2
                            753 (74.6)
                        
                        
                            3
                            64 (6.3)
                        
                        
                            4
                            16 (1.6)
                        
                        
                            5
                            5 (0.5)
                        
                        
                            6 or more
                            3 (0.3)
                        
                        
                            
                                Total
                            
                            
                                1009 (100)
                            
                        
                    
                
            

                4. Conclusion
                Through the intensive publicity campaign discussed above, the Transcribe Bentham team has successfully promoted its
                    project, and crowdsourcing and manuscript transcription more generally, to a
                    wide audience. Our findings may offer suggestions to those who plan to build
                    volunteer communities for their own projects, and specifically for those looking
                    to crowdsource more complex tasks like manuscript transcription rather than
                    simple data entry or OCR correction. Some of our conclusions are derived from
                    our volunteer survey; though the sample was relatively small, its findings are
                    reinforced by analysis of volunteer transcriber profiles, statistical data from
                    Google Analytics, and general observation of volunteer behaviour. Furthermore,
                    that the survey results also fit into the broader narrative of discussions of
                    crowdsourcing participants’ characteristics and motivations, also suggests that
                    our findings are sound.
                We found that Transcribe Bentham volunteers were
                    mostly well educated, often associated with academia or had a professional
                    background, and had a prior interest in history and philosophy; many of the
                    crowd also had an interest in digital humanities and were IT literate, but few
                    were associated with schools. This highlights the importance of targeting the
                    correct audience for the task at hand, in this instance, transcribing historical
                    material. Most of the transcribers were recruited through online media,
                    particularly the article in the New York Times,
                    which emphasises the importance of securing the attention of a major news
                    organisation with both national and international circulation. Our press release
                    was certainly worthwhile, therefore, though unfortunately the British press
                    displayed a disappointing lack of interest in the story.
                        , a Sunday Times
                        article on academic crowdsourcing – featuring Transcribe Bentham – caused an increase in traffic to the
                        Transcription Desk, and recruitment of several new regular transcribers.
                        Sadly, the Times pay-wall prevented more
                        widespread dissemination of the article.
                
                The crowd of users were generally engaged in lightweight peer production. Most
                    contributed only once to the site and were most likely put off from further
                    participation, our results suggest, by a lack of time, which, unfortunately,
                    there is little we can do to solve. However, this was exacerbated by the
                    complexity and difficulties involved in transcribing or encoding. The processes
                    involved in such an endeavour need to be simplified as far as possible to ensure
                    increased and ongoing volunteer recruitment and retention, and to make the most
                    of their available time. Indeed, wasting the time of users is perhaps the worst
                    sin any crowdsourcing project can make.
                Most of the Transcribe Bentham crowd failed to
                    interact with each other, to use the social features of the site, or to respond
                    to the stimulation we hoped would be provided by the Benthamometer and the
                    leaderboard. Improved social features might facilitate interaction, though the
                    survey results and observation of the site suggest they might not be that
                    important to some volunteers. Direct collaboration – if thought desirable –
                    could be further facilitated by improving the interface’s functionality, or by
                    providing further instruction. Respondents to the survey suggested that we
                    provide a way for the inexperienced to request help from other users – an
                    experienced users’ contact list, for example. Giving experienced and motivated
                    volunteers moderator status may be one way in which crowdsourcing projects could
                    improve community cohesiveness, and is something we would like to explore in the
                    future.
                Unfortunately, owing to Transcribe Bentham's short
                    time-frame due to the limited funding budget, the project was unable properly to
                    benefit from many of its recruitment strategies; the impact of international
                    press attention was only starting to be felt as the six-month testing period was
                    ending. Too heavy reliance upon the media for publicising a time-limited project
                    is a risk, as the timing of media attention is to a large extent beyond a
                    project’s control owing to changing media deadlines and priorities. If a piece
                    comes out too soon, a project may not yet be available to the public and the
                    attention cannot be capitalized upon; too late, and volunteers brought to the
                    project as a result may be alienated if a cessation of funding causes the end of
                    user support.
                
                    Transcribe Bentham, for example, was gaining
                    momentum just as it was obliged to scale back owing to the nature of the AHRC
                    grant; editors were unable to provide the detailed feedback to volunteers as
                    they had done previously. As the entire project is built on mutual trust between
                    project staff and the transcribers, we felt duty-bound to inform volunteers that
                    the fully-staffed testing period would end on 8 March 2011. Several volunteers
                    who joined the project as a consequence of the NYT
                    publicity were hugely disappointed to learn of this only three months after they
                    had first become aware of the project’s existence, and had invested considerable
                    time and effort in taking part. A number, quite understandably, stopped taking
                    part altogether. Our crowd of 1,207 users was not transformed, therefore, into a
                    cohesive and active community.Three of the original seven
                            super-transcribers continue to transcribe regularly, joined by
                        three recruited after publication of [Kinchen 2011]. Another new super
                        transcriber began taking part after finding that the Dickens Journals Online (http://www.djo.org.uk/) project was oversubscribed, and when the
                            DJO team provided suggestions of other
                        crowdsourcing projects in which to take part. Finally, an eighth regular
                        participant began transcribing in mid-November 2011. These results
                    suggest that projects requiring a volunteer community must plan their publicity
                    strategies effectively and, if they have only a short fully-staffed and
                    fully-funded live testing period, well in advance and, where possible, in
                    conversation with interested media. Advanced planning might not be possible, of
                    course, if, like Transcribe Bentham, the
                    fully-staffed development stage is relatively brief, or the project is funded
                    through a scheme issued at short notice.See note 5.
                
                Though it was a little disappointing that we failed to transform most of our
                    crowd into regular volunteers, this is not necessarily a disadvantage for a
                    community-based project. Various crowdsourcing projects have found that only a
                    minority of users carry out most of the work, and so it proved with Transcribe Bentham; a small but remarkably active core
                    of super transcribers became engaged in heavyweight peer production, providing a
                    large quantity of transcripts. Community projects engaged in similar work must,
                    however, be prepared and have the means to support this core group. Our super
                    transcribers appreciated communication with and advice from staff, occasionally
                    interacted with other users on the Transcription Desk and via social media,
                    though few have populated their social profiles. One super transcriber attended
                    the public outreach events held in May and evidently appreciated the opportunity
                    to meet project staff in person, and at least one other responded positively to
                    the multi-tiered progress system. This suggests, perhaps, that
                        team-building features and strategies, in spite of their lack of
                    appeal to some, should not be dispensed with completely. 
                
                    Transcribe Bentham's volunteers produced 1,009
                    transcripts – or an estimated 250,000 to 750,000 words, plus mark-up – during
                    the six-month testing period. On the face of it, this pales in comparison with
                    the over 650,000 pages of ships’ logs transcribed by Old
                        Weather volunteers, the 36.5 million lines of OCR text corrected by
                    volunteers involved in the NLA digitised newspaper collection, or the tens of
                    millions of index entries keyed-in for Ancestry.com’s World
                        Archives Project. Yet, transcribing Bentham is more demanding than
                    the often mechanical and repetitive tasks involved in other projects, and
                    arguably lacks the more immediate popular and media appeal of citizen science
                    and genealogy.
                         note that despite the risk that entering weather
                        observations for Old Weather might be considered dry” or
                            repetitive after a short time, volunteers latched onto and
                        became engrossed in the human stories contained within the logs. Entering
                        weather details from the logs as part of the Old
                            Weather project, became, for some volunteers, a means to
                            follow the stories of vessels and people through to the end. On
                        11 April 2011, an episode of the BBC popular science programme, Bang Goes the Theory, examined the rise of
                            Citizen Science and paid particular attention to the Zooniverse projects.
                
                Building a volunteer community to carry out complex tasks can be beneficial and
                    rewarding to humanities scholars, particularly at a time when they are under
                    pressure to ensure that their work has impact. Nevertheless crowdsourcing does
                    not necessarily render research projects more economical. Aside from potential
                    significant short-term costs in digitisation, creating and testing a
                    transcription tool, and promoting the endeavour, some long-term investment will
                    also be required. Time and money will need to be spent on interacting with
                    volunteers, maintaining and developing the transcription interface in response
                    to volunteer needs, continual promotion of the project, and checking and
                    offering feedback on submitted work. The experience of running Transcribe Bentham suggests that it is only over time
                    that building a volunteer community pays off; though Transcribe Bentham by no means enjoys mass participation, those
                    taking part currently produce transcripts at the same rate as had the Bentham
                    Project employed a full-time transcriber . Transcribe Bentham has also raised awareness of the
                    Bentham Project and engaged the public with its research to a greater extent
                    than it has ever done before; volunteer community-based initiatives thus have
                    the potential to enhance the profile and broaden the scope of research
                    projects.
                
                    Transcribe Bentham's experience, then, demonstrates
                    that there is an audience of potential volunteers who are willing and able to
                    engage in more demanding crowdsourced tasks, such as transcribing complex
                    manuscripts. With a sustained and targeted publicity programme aimed
                    particularly at educated retirees, students, and the relatively computer
                    literate, an intuitive transcription tool, a task made as straightforward as
                    possible, and staff committed to providing feedback and stimulating interaction,
                    crowdsourcing the transcription of manuscripts – even those as challenging as
                    Bentham’s – can be a successful and rewarding venture for volunteers and
                    researchers alike. 
            

                Acknowledgements
                We would like to thank our Transcribe Bentham
                    colleagues: Philip Schofield, Justin Tonra, Richard Davis and his team, Martin
                    Moyle, Tony Slade, and Melissa Terras; and to all of the volunteer transcribers
                    who have generously given their time and effort, ensuring Transcribe Bentham's ongoing success. We are grateful to Oliver
                    Harris, Michael Quinn, Melissa Terras, Justin Tonra and Catherine Pease-Watkin
                    for reading earlier drafts of this paper, and offering many very helpful
                    comments. We would also like to thank our three anonymous reviewers, whose
                    comments and suggestions have been invaluable in finalising the article.
            

                Funding
                This work was supported by the Arts and Humanities Research Council’s Digital
                    Equipment and Database Enhancement for Impact (DEDEFI) scheme, under which
                        Transcribe Bentham was established. Please
                    visit http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/FundedResearch/Pages/ResearchDetail.aspx?id=149682
                    for further details.
            
