Title:  Some principles for making collaborative scholarly editions in
                    digital form
Volume:  011
Issue:  2
Date:  22 May 2017
Abstract:  
                
                Textual Communities is a new system for managing and
                    performing all aspects of an online collaborative scholarly editing project. It
                    permits mounting of document images and offers page-by-page transcription and
                    display, with the facility for project leaders to recruit and manage
                    transcribers and other contributors, allocating and reviewing transcription work
                    as it is done. Most distinctively, Textual Communities is built on a
                    comprehensive model of scholarly editing, enabling both document
                    (page-by-page) and work (intellectual structure, or entity) views
                    of the texts edited. Accordingly, multiple texts of a single work, or part of a
                    work (an entity) may be extracted and compared, using an embedded installation
                    of CollateX. While completely conformant with Text Encoding Initiative
                    guidelines, Textual Communities goes beyond TEI and XML in its ability to handle
                    multiple overlapping hierarchies within texts. This paper will outline the
                    thinking behind the development of Textual Communities, and show examples of its
                    use by several major projects.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction: scholarly editions in the digital age
                While one may dispute how revolutionary scholarly editions in digital form
                    may be as compared to their print counterparts , we can agree that the onset of digital
                    methods has considerably broadened the ways in which editions may be made and
                    distributed. WeAlthough I am the sole author of this paper, at several
                        points I speak of we. Many people have contributed to the thinking
                        behind this paper, and to the Textual Communities system which seeks to
                        implement that thinking. To name a few: the discussion of text, document and
                        work is deeply indebted to many discussions over many years with Peter
                        Shillingsburg, Paul Eggert, Hans Walter Gabler, David Parker and Barbara
                        Bordalejo, among others (see, for example, ; ; ; ; and particularly the collection of essays in
                            .This does not mean that any of these
                        scholars agree with the definitions I offer: the best I can hope for, is
                        that I have learned enough from them that they might disagree with me less
                        vehemently now than they would have a few years ago. Here, I means
                            I: those scholars are not responsible for my opinions. However,
                        the creation of Textual Communities has been fully collaborative. The main
                        implementation at Saskatchewan since 2010 has been the responsibility of
                        Xiaohan Zhang, with some parts written by myself and Erin Szigaly.
                        Throughout, we have consulted with Zeth Green (Birmingham) and Troy
                        Griffitts (Münster), who have contributed key insights and questions. The
                        major projects using Textual Communities, named in footnote 17, have been an
                        invaluable testing ground for Textual Communities. I am embarrassed for
                        their long suffering over the last years, and grateful for their patience,
                        support and encouragement. Finally, this article has benefitted
                        significantly from the comments of many readers on a draft version posted on
                        GoogleDocs in May 2015. I have indicated each place where I introduced a
                        change suggested by one of these readers, and acknowledged the person. I
                        also thank Torsten Schassan for instigating the discussion, and for his many
                        corrections.can now contemplate editions made by wide collaborations
                    of editors, transcribers, indexers, commentators and annotators, all working
                    across the internet. We are now accustomed to seeing editions providing multiple
                    interfaces, with distribution ranging from strictly-controlled paid-for access
                    to access open to anyone with an internet connection.
                These possibilities require us to ask new questions. In terms of the edition as
                    product, as something made: how can we most usefully characterize the
                    fundamental intellectual components of a scholarly edition in the digital
                    landscape? In this article, I consider this question in terms familiar to
                    scholarly editors: the concepts of document, text and work. In terms of the
                    edition as a process, as something we make and use: who are we? how may
                    we relate to each other, both as creators and as readers? Indeed, digital
                    methods open up a yet more radical possibility: that readers may become
                    creators, as the edition becomes an ever-open field of interaction, with readers
                    contributing to its continuing remaking. In what follows, I express these two
                    perspectives as axes.
                This is not simply a matter of describing editions and how they may be made. We
                    have choices, more than ever, in the digital age, as to where we locate our
                    edition against these axes. An edition can be severely limited, or richly
                    substantive, both in terms of what it contains and who may use it and how they
                    may use it. In the latter part of the article, I describe an editorial
                    environment, Textual Communities, designed with these axes in mind. It
                    goes without saying that Textual Communities, like the editions it might make,
                    is subject to never-ending transmutation. 
            

                The axes of scholarly editions
                Every scholarly edition may be placed on two axes, representing (as it were) the
                    longitude and latitude of editing. The first axis is along the familiar
                    continuum of document/text/work: is the edition devoted to a particular document
                    (as for a modern genetic edition of an authorial manuscript)? Or is it oriented
                    towards presentation of a work found in many documents (as for an edition of the
                    Greek New Testament, or a medieval work found in many manuscripts)? The second
                    axis is along the range of relationships between the editor and the editions’
                    audience. Is the edition made by a specialist scholar and intended for a narrow
                    and specialist audience, not to be read but to be used as a resource for further
                    scholarly work? Or is it made by a non-specialist and intended for the broadest
                    possible audience, to be read rather than studied? Does its design and
                    implementation permit its endless re-use, so that readers may in turn become
                    editors, or other editors may take it and reforge it for their own purposes and
                    audiences? Note too that as in geographical coordinates, the place of an edition
                    on one axis is independent of its place on the other axis. An edition intended
                    for the general reader may be based on all the documents, or on just one; an
                    edition intended for a specialist reader may also be based on all the documents,
                    or on just one. An edition based on a single document, or on many, might be
                    designed to permit other editors to take and repurpose what is made in ways
                    unforeseen by its original makers.

                
                
                    The document/work/text axis
                    
                

                

                
                    The editor/audience axis
                    
                


                There is no novelty about these two axes. Editions made long before the advent of
                    digital methods may be referenced along these axes. However, digital methods
                    have widened the range of choices along each axis, and also altered the balance
                    between these choices, as they favour one choice over another. For example:
                    digital imaging has made it possible to make full-colour facsimiles for a very
                    low cost (as little as a few cents a page) and to distribute them over the
                    internet to any one with an internet connection and a computer, at no cost to
                    the reader. The emergence of successful methods for encoding a document
                    page-by-page combined with the availability of high-quality digital images has
                    favoured the making of a particular kind of edition, oriented towards the
                    document rather than the work. Along the other axis: the editorial decision
                    about the audience of the edition has been complicated by the emergence of
                    funding agencies as the primary sponsors of editions, and by the emergence of
                    centres substantially funded by these same agencies as the primary place of
                    making editions. In these circumstances, the primary motivation of an edition is
                    not to reach an audience, whether narrow or broad, but to satisfy the funder.
                    This has also led to the emergence of specialists in computer methods as leaders
                    in the making of editions, rather than specialists in (for example) the texts
                    themselves.
                One of the most influential commentators on scholarly editing in the digital age,
                    Jerome McGann, has frequently cited William Morris’s observation that (in
                    McGann’s wording) you can’t have art
                        without resistance in the material.So quoted by McGann . For the source of the Morris citation,
                        and the relationship of McGann’s formulation to Morris’s words, see . Noviskie traces the quotation to Sparling
                        1924. There is danger in failing to resist: in editing, as in art, to
                    do what is easiest may not be to do what is best. Following the scenario
                    sketched in the last paragraph, we have seen the making of numerous digital
                        documentary editions
                    , typically created with considerable funding and
                    support from a digital humanities centre 
                    . The coincidence of cheap digital images, powerful
                    encoding, and significant funding has resulted in several remarkable editions.
                    However, there is a danger of imbalance, if many editions are made in a narrow
                    band along the document/text/work axis, and for an ill-defined audience.
                    Resistance in the materials entails not doing what is easiest. In scholarly
                    editing terms: resistance means deciding where on the document/text/work
                    continuum your edition should be located, not simply placing it where the
                    technology makes it easiest, and identifying what audience you wish to serve,
                    not simply satisfying your funder and your own inclinations.
            

                Documents, texts and communicative acts
                Accordingly, the first task of any editor is to know what is meant by the terms
                    document, text and work, and how the edition may be located with reference to
                    these terms. Over the last decades, several scholars (notably Peter
                    Shillingsburg, Paul Eggert and Hans Gabler; see footnote 1) have debated the
                    valency of these terms, and I have summarized their arguments and presented my
                    own definitions in two articles , . In summary: a document is the
                    material object upon which marks are inscribed: a manuscript, a book, a clay
                    shard. A text is the communicative linguistic act which the reader
                    deduces as present in the document, represented by these marks. A
                        work is a set of texts which are hypothesized as related, in
                    terms of the communicative acts which they present.Compare the well-known
                        FRBR (Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records) Group 1 entities:
                            work, expression, manifestation, item
                        ; . Work as I
                        define it maps broadly to FRBR work (but might in different
                        circumstances map to expression or manifestation); a document maps to an
                        item. There is no equivalent in FRBR to text as I explain it. The
                        system here presented extends, rather than replaces, FRBR. Particularly,
                        this system enables works (and hence texts) to be seen as structured
                        objects, readily susceptible to fine-grained manipulation, in ways that FRBR
                        does not. Thus: the Hengwrt manuscript is a document preserved in the
                    National Library of Wales, comprising some 248 folios bound into 32 quires. This
                    manuscript contains a text which we recognize as an instance of Geoffrey
                    Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales. Further, we know
                    another eighty three manuscripts and four print editions dating from before 1500
                    containing texts of the Tales, and (of course) many
                    editions, adaptations and translations dating from after 1500. We speak of the
                        work as all these together. In our common thought, we conceive the
                    work as something beyond all these physical documents: as the creative act
                    conceived and executed by Geoffrey Chaucer in the last decades of the fourteenth
                    century.
                These definitions have many implications. First: there is a clear division
                    between document and text. The text is not simply the marks in the document. It
                    is the communicative act that I, the reader, identify as represented by those
                    marks. The difference may seem slight. It is critical. When we record the text
                    of the document, we are not simply saying: that mark is an i, this next
                    mark is a t; we have it. We see first a set of potentially
                    meaningful marks in the document. We hypothesize: these marks may represent a
                    communicative act. This discussion of the stages of recognition of the
                        text as a communicative act is indebted to the description by Barbara
                        Bordalejo of the encoding system in the Prue Shaw edition of the Commedia,
                        thus: in this article, I
                                use the phrase the text of the document to refer to the
                                sequence of marks present in the document, independently of whether
                                these represent a complete, meaningful text. That is: the reader
                                sees a sequence of letters, occurring in various places in relation
                                to each other (perhaps between the lines or within the margins) and
                                carrying various markings (perhaps underdottings or strikethroughs).
                                These make up what I here refer to as the text of the
                                document. They
                    are not (say) marks left by grubs crawling under the bark of a tree . Someone made these marks to communicate something.
                    We then identify the language and writing system to which these marks belong. We
                    identify these marks as letters, composing the word it. As we examine the
                    marks, the communicative act takes shape in our minds: the words resolve into
                    sentences, into verse lines, paragraphs, as part of something we know as the
                    General Prologue of the Canterbury Tales. This
                    communicative act has a double aspect. One aspect is the disposition of the
                    marks in the document: exactly where on the page they appear; the combination of
                    strokes which compose each letter. The other aspect is that of the components of
                    the communicative act: for prose, as constituted by a sequence of sentences
                    within paragraphs; for verse, as lines within stanzas. It is not simply a
                    sequence of words: it is structured, capable of division and labeling.
                Normally, these processes of recognition happen so quickly, so instinctively,
                    that they do not appear like thought at all. We see a text on a page and we read
                    it. We think the marks on the page are the text, and hence that recording the
                    text is a mechanical act of transposing those marks from one medium (the page)
                    to another (now, usually, an electronic file in a computer). Accordingly one
                    sees statements implying (or indeed asserting) that a transcription can somehow
                    not be interpretive, and hence aspire to some kind of objective
                    status. As an example: in a discussion on the Text Encoding Initiative list in
                    February 2014, several participants routinely described transcription of the
                    communicative act, in terms of paragraphs, sentences, identification of names
                    and places within the text, as interpretive (or interpretative),
                    while recording exactly where the text appears on the document page was
                    described as non-interpretive. The Text Encoding Initiative even has
                    distinct elements for the two types of transcription: interpretive
                    transcripts are held in <text> elements;
                        non-interpretive transcripts are held in
                        <sourceDoc> elements.For example: an email by James
                        Cummings to the TEI-L discussion on 5 February 2014 which speaks of encoding
                            both the interpretative
                                <text> view and non-interpretative
                                <sourceDoc> view (http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.text.tei.general/16892). Compare
                        the prioritization of document-based editing over other kinds of
                        editing argued by Hans Gabler , while noting that
                        Gabler has always argued consistently that editors must also present the
                        work (e.g., , .
                    This distinction led Barbara Bordalejo to ask tartly in the course of that
                    discussion: are you suggesting there are transcriptions that are not
                        interpretive? How do you distinguish them?
            

                Encoding text as document and as communicative act
                In the definition of text here offered, all is interpretation: there is no such
                    thing as a non-interpretive transcript. Further, this definition
                    stipulates that text has two aspects: it is both marks upon paper (corresponding
                    to TEI <sourceDoc>) and it is the components of a
                    communicative act (corresponding to TEI <text>). Both aspects
                    may be expressed as hierarchies. The document hierarchy consists of the book,
                    divided into quires, divided into pages, divided into writing spaces: columns,
                    lines, margins. The components of the communicative act may also be expressed as
                    chapters divided into paragraphs divided into sentences, or poems divided into
                    stanzas divided into lines. The two hierarchies are completely independent of
                    each other. The General Prologue may be written across several quires, or
                    contained in only one; it may spread across as few as six folios, or as many as
                    sixteen. Of course, the hierarchies overlap. Paragraphs continue across page
                    breaks, lines of verse across line breaks. In the world of documents, this is no
                    problem. The text of the communicative act runs across quires, pages, line
                    breaks in an orderly and straight-forward manner. We are so used to this that we
                    do not notice it. We skip from page to page, across footnotes, past catchwords,
                    page numbers, running heads. Sometimes, the two hierarchies coincide. The book
                    opens a new story, a new chapter opens on a new page, a new section a new
                    volume, before once more the hierarchies diverge, and each runs their separate
                    course, to the end of the book and the end of the story. The codex, whether in
                    scroll, manuscript or print form, is superbly fitted to carry the text of
                    communicative acts. A New Testament gospel might fit neatly in a single small
                    codex; the whole New Testament in a larger one, or split across several codices.
                    This overlapping, this sliding of one hierarchy across another, this disposition
                    of this printing across many volumes in one instance, or in just one in another
                    instance, is so common that an editor might note it briefly, and move on.
                But while it is straightforward to represent a communicative act in a document,
                    it is not at all straightforward to represent both the components of a
                    communicative act and of a document in a single electronic representation – and
                    particularly not in a single electronic representation which conforms to the
                    norms of the Text Encoding Initiative, the gold standard of encoding for
                    humanities texts. The XML (eXtensible Markup
                        Language) specification requires that content objects within an XML
                    document conform to a single hierarchy. Accordingly, it is a simple matter to
                    represent either the document hierarchy (books, quires, pages, lines) or the
                    communicative act components hierarchy (poem, stanzas, lines; story, chapters,
                    paragraphs). But it is not at all simple to represent both hierarchies in a
                    single XML document. Among many contributions to the discussion of
                        overlapping hierarchies in mark-up languages: see the original statement of
                            the OHCO thesis in De Rose et al.  and
                        its restatement and complication in Renear et al. . See too footnote 15. Over the twenty years of encoding of texts
                    of primary sources using the TEI guidelines, scholars have used various devices
                    to circumvent this problem. In the P3 version of the guidelines, the
                    chapter on encoding of primary sources suggests that one should represent the
                    communicative act component hierarchy exactly and fully, by identifying each
                    part of the communicative act (each paragraph, each verse line) with a discrete
                    segment of the TEI document (thus, a <p> or
                        <l> element), and then nesting the segments within other
                    segments, so that <p> elements are contained within
                        <div> elements, just as paragraphs are contained within
                        chapters.The author, while not formally a member of the workgroup
                            (TR9) on Manuscripts and codicology which was charged with
                        drafting the chapter on representation of primary sources in the P3
                        guidelines (first published in 1994), wrote most of the draft of what became
                        Chapter 18 Transcription of Primary Sources in
                        those guidelines (see http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/GL/P3/index.htm). This chapter
                        persisted in revised form into the P4 version, first published in
                        2002, before finally being replaced by Chapter 11 of the first P5
                        version in 2007. XML (like its predecessor, SGML) is optimized for
                    representing a single ordered hierarchy of content objects: but it does
                    also have a means of recording other information about the encoded text, in the
                    form of empty elements, otherwise known as milestones.
                    Accordingly, in a TEI document one might record the communicative act hierarchy
                    as the primary hierarchy, and then represent the document hierarchy as a
                    sequence of milestone elements: <pb/> and
                        <lb/> elements for pages and lines. In this ordering, the
                        <pb/> and <lb/> elements, unlike the
                        <div> and <p> elements, hold no
                    content: they state where page breaks and line ends are relative to the text of
                    the communicative act within the document. The result is that the components of
                    the communicative act are represented completely, and one may readily use all
                    the tools available in the XML community, optimized for dealing with hierarchies
                    of content objects, to manipulate the document. However, the material document
                    which holds the text is represented far less adequately. One might record the
                    larger features of the document – the number of pages within it, the number of
                    lines within each page – and record too exactly the page and line breaks that
                    occur within the text. But it will be difficult to represent more complex
                    phenomena, such as a single page which contains multiple writing spaces, each
                    containing text in a complex relation with texts in other writing spaces.
                    Further processing of the document according to this second hierarchy is
                    complex, and often impractical.
                The P3 fundamental logic – that one identifies the components of the
                    communicative act (sometimes referred to as intellectual or
                        logical structure) as the primary hierarchy of its XML
                    representation, and record document features as milestone elements – is used in
                    countless TEI-based encodings of primary textual materials, including several
                    scholarly editions in digital form (such as those made by myself or in which I
                    was involved, e.g.  and .
                    This logic prioritizes representation of the components of the communicative act
                    over the physical document, and so is well-suited to situations where the
                    disposition of the text in the document is either straight-forward, as in many
                    medieval manuscripts or printed books, so that it may be adequately captured
                    through sequences of page and line-breaks alone, or is perceived as relatively
                    unimportant. However, there is an important class of documents where the
                    disposition of the text on the page is both complex and significant. This
                    applies particularly to authorial manuscripts, where authorial revision is
                    expressed through multiple acts of writing within a page, from which editors
                    must construct a text or texts by decryption of the sequence of revisions
                    embedded in these multiple writings. In these cases, the P3 system is
                    inadequate. Further, continuing from the last decades of the last century,
                    scholarly editors have become increasingly interested in the material
                        text, following the ground-breaking writings of Donald McKenzie  and Jerome McGann , and
                    continuing through many others.To name a few: ;
                            ; and a whole European Society for Textual
                        Scholarship conference on Textual Scholarship and the
                            Material Book: Comparative Approaches in London in 2006. The
                        emergence of the document as the locus of scholarly attention now has a
                        name: material philology. See too , and
                        Matthew K. Driscoll The Words on the Page,
                        distilling talks given by him around 2005-2007 and available at http://www.driscoll.dk/docs/words.html. Thus, it became
                    increasingly important to many scholars to represent as exactly as possible the
                    document page and the text upon it, with a fullness and precision which the P3
                    system could not achieve. In response to this need, the TEI convened a working
                    group to prepare encodings for the making of documents where representation of
                    the document was paramount. This resulted in a new Section 11.2.2, first issued
                    in version 2.0.0 of the P5 Guidelines in December 2011. This section
                    introduced a new high-level <sourceDoc> element, specifically
                    to carry the embedded transcription described in this section. This
                        embedded transcription is described as one in which words and
                        other written traces are encoded as subcomponents of elements representing
                        the physical surfaces carrying them rather than independently of them.
                    The examples and the accompanying documentation make very clear exactly what is
                    meant by this: that the marks upon the page are interpreted as words completely
                    independent of any sense of their being part of a communicative act. Thus, the
                    letters and words of the page are placed within the page hierarchy, in a series
                    of elements which may be nested within one another: the page as
                        <surface>, which might contain a
                        <zonee> (a column, a writing area), itself containing
                        <line> and <sege> elements, which
                    might contain the words themselves. There is no place here at all for recording
                    information about the text as a structured communicative act. Instead, the
                    Guidelines suggest that information about the text as communicative act should
                    be recorded in a separate <texte> element, parallel to the
                        <sourceDoc> elements. In theory, this is a better
                    solution than the rather makeshift procedure adopted by P3. In practice, it is
                    extremely difficult to maintain two distinct transcriptions, and to maintain the
                    complex sets of links between the two.I know of only one substantial
                        project that attempts this parallel encoding: the Goethe Faust project, .
                The Shelley-Godwin archive shows the power of document-based encoding . A feature of this new encoding is that it provides
                    for explicit statement of the revisions within each document page and their
                    sequence. One can see (for example) exactly what Mary Shelley wrote, and what
                    Percy Shelley wrote. One can read the transcription in parallel to each page
                    facsimile, with each element of the transcription mirrored in transcript and
                    page: a considerable technical feat. However, what is excellent for these
                    materials – a classic instance of genetic texts, through which one may
                    see the authors (in this case) forging the text a phrase at a time – may not be
                    appropriate for other editions. While the TEI guidelines recommend that a
                    parallel encoding of the text-as-structured-communicative-act be made alongside
                    the encoding of the text-as-document, in practice editions may not follow this
                    advice, and indeed the Shelley-Godwin archive does not do this.The
                        Shelley-Godwin archive creators were fully aware of the arguments for
                        encoding both document and text, and canvas these in , while confessing themselves unable to
                        implement satisfactory encoding of both aspects. The result is that
                    while one can see precisely the changes within each page, the failure to encode
                    the components of the communicative act within each document makes it extremely
                    difficult to see the changes between one document and another. Indeed, the rigid
                    segmentation of the document into pages makes it impossible to record a change
                    which spans across a page boundary. For example: one finds on fol 5v of Fair
                    Copy Notebook C1. c. 58 and on fol 73r of Draft Notebook B. c. 57 versions of
                    the end of chapter 22. But to locate these passages one is reduced to using the
                    search engine to discover parallel texts: not a very efficient procedure. 
            

                Representation of both work and document: the DET system
                This defect brings us to the third element of the document/text/work triumvirate:
                    the work. The definition of work given above – that a work is a set of texts
                    which are hypothesized as organically related, in terms of the communicative
                    acts which they present – depends on identification of an instance of the
                    communicative act and its components in any one document (e.g. this is the
                    General Prologue in the Hengwrt manuscript) and then identification of other
                    instances of related communicative acts in other documents (this is the General
                    Prologue in the Ellesmere manuscript, in the Caxton printings, in the Riverside
                    Chaucer). Because we identify the components of the communicative act in any one
                    document, we can compare its instantiation in that document with its
                    instantiation in any other. If we reduce our notion of text to simply words in
                    documents, we have no means of asserting relations between documents apart from
                    the happenstance of some words recurring in different documents (as I was able
                    to use the Shelley/Godwin archive search engine to discover that folios in
                    different notebooks had similar words to the end of Chapter 22 in various print
                    editions). This is unsatisfactory, to put it mildly. It provides no means of
                    linking translations, or radical rewritings. We can assert (to give an extreme
                    example) that the many hundred manuscripts of the medieval Visio
                        Pauli are related, through many recensions in many languages, many of
                    which have not a single word in common, because they share structure, subject,
                    theme, motifs and details, and because we can trace the historical growth of the
                    tradition across time and space and from document to document.For the
                        complexities of the Visio Pauli tradition see . I can assert that both the Sion and the
                    Merthyr manuscripts contain versions of the Canterbury Tales,
                    even though there is not one line of the Tales in common to both (Sion holds the
                    sequence Clerk’s Tale-Summoner’s Tale, Merthyr has part of the Nun’s Priest’s
                    Tale and link), as surely as Darwin can assert that two multi-segmented
                    organisms are both barnacles, even though they have not a single segment in
                    common. Darwin can assert this by showing that both organisms descend from an
                    ancestor which had both sets of segments. I can show that both manuscripts
                    descend from other manuscripts which had both sets of tales.
                According to these definitions, then, a fundamental requirement of scholarly
                    editing is that both aspects of a text are recognized: both the text as marks
                    upon a document, and the text as structured communicative act. To put it at its
                    simplest: we need to be able to say that the words Whan that Auerill with his
                        shoures sote are found in a particular space on the first folio of the
                    Hengwrt manuscript, Peniarth 392D in the National Library of Wales, and that
                    these words are also the first line of the General Prologue of the works we know
                    as Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales. Over the last years, with
                    the help of many people, I have been developing a formal system for describing
                    documents, texts and works to enable just this. In essence: we need a scheme for
                    labeling all three elements, that will allow us to identify every part of each
                    element, in every document, text and work, and assert too how they relate to
                    each other. I was aware, at an early stage, of the work of the Canonical
                        Text Services (CTS) group, and studied their system closely while devising
                        the system here devised . Briefly, this system
                        is highly compatible with CTS, in that every CTS reference may also be
                        expressed with no loss of information. However, the reverse is not true.
                        This system includes completely hierarchical information for both document
                        and communicative act, permitting full specification of both document space
                        (a line within a page within a volume) and communicative act component (a
                        word within a sentence within a paragraph within a chapter) to a degree that
                        CTS does not enable. Further, CTS does not use the key/value pair
                        architecture, nor does it specify the naming authority. It is in essence a
                        labelling scheme, with some hierarchical elements, and relies on external
                        index files to correlate (for example) text segments with the manuscripts in
                        which they appear. For example:
                        https://github.com/homermultitext/hmt-archive/blob/master/cite/collections/scholiainventory.csv
                        includes the line
                        "urn:cite:hmt:scholia.379","urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:1.6","6th main
                        scholia of Iliad
                        1","urn:cite:hmt:chsimg.VA012RN-0013@0.57311951,0.24827982,0.22451317,0.04644495","urn:cite:hmt:msA.12r".
                        It appears that this links the 6th main scholia of Iliad 1 with the
                        urn urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:1.6, and further with the
                        manuscript urn:cite:hmt:msA.12r, presumably page 12r of MsA. In
                        contrast, the system here described would yolk these statements together
                        into a single URL, such as
                            …/document=MsA/folio=12r/entity=Scholia/Book=1/n=6, from which
                        the full page and communicative act hierarchies could be deduced.

                We call this scheme documents, entities and texts (DET), using the term
                        entity to refer to the unique labels we give each component of a
                    communicative act. The term entity is used here in preference to
                            work for several reasons. Firstly, as the examples show, the term
                        entity may be applied to a structured object of a communicative act at any
                        level: a single line of Hamlet may be an entity; so too a
                        single scene, an act, and the whole play itself are also entities. Secondly,
                        the term work, hotly contested in textual scholarship , comes with many connotations which might not
                        be helpful in understanding the system here proposed: entity has the
                        advantage of neutrality. Entity is also familiar from FRBR, which is
                        built on the categorization of relationships among entities: distinct
                        intellectual objects, analogous to the distinct components into which an act
                        of communication may be structured. The labeling system we employ is
                    based on the Kahn/Wilensky architecture . Like
                    Kahn/Wilensky, we use the familiar uniform resource name (urn) notation
                    to hold each label. Following Kahn/Wilensky, we separate the label into two
                    parts: a naming authority, and the name given by that naming authority to the
                    object. Thus, in Kahn/Wilensky the handle berkeley.cs/csd-93-712 gives
                    the naming authority as berkeley.cs, and csd-93-712 is the name
                    given by that authority to a particular object. In full urn form, this is
                    expressed as:

                <URN:ASCII:ELIB-v.2.0:berkeley.cs/csd-93-712e>

                In our system, we adopt the use of / to separate the naming authority from
                    the name, and we further specify that the name must be composed of at least one
                    of the key words ‘entity’ and ‘document’ and of one or more key value pairs,
                    separated by the : delimiter.

                Applying this to a document:
                TC:USask:CTP2/document=Hengwrt – indicates that the naming authority
                    TC:USask:CTP2 has given this document the name Hengwrt
                …/document=Hengwrt:Folio=1r – indicates Folio 1r of the Hengwrt
                    manuscript
                …/document=Hengwrt:Folio=1r:line=2 – indicates line 2 of Folio 1r of
                    the Hengwrt manuscript 

                Applying this to an entity, that is to a named component of a communicative
                    act:
                TC:USask:CTP2/entity=Canterbury Tales – indicates that the naming
                    authority TC:USask:CTP2 has given this entity the name Canterbury
                    Tales
                
                    …/entity=Canterbury Tales:Section=General Prologue – the General
                    Prologue of the Canterbury Tales 
                …/entity=Canterbury Tales:Section=General Prologue:line=1 – line 1
                    of the General Prologue of the Canterbury Tales 

                In full urn notation, the document would be:
                        <urn:DET:TC:USask:CTP2/document=Hengwrt>;
                the entity would be: <urn:DET:TC:USask:CTP2/entity=Canterbury
                        Tales>

                We have defined a text as a communicative act, which comprises both
                    document (the material upon which it is inscribed) and entity (the components
                    into which it might be divided). Accordingly, a text of any one communicative
                    act in any one document is the collocation of the entities and of the document
                    for that text. Thus, for the text of the Canterbury Tales in the Hengwrt
                    manuscript:
                TC:USask:CTP2/document=Hengwrt:entity=Canterbury Tales

                For the text of the first line of the General Prologue on the second line of
                    folio 1r of the Hengwrt Manuscript:

                …/document=Hengwrt:Folio=1r:line=2:entity=Canterbury
                        Tales:Section=GeneralPrologue:line=1

                The power of this system should be immediately apparent. We can, from this naming
                    alone, identify all manuscripts which contain the Canterbury
                        Tales; all manuscripts which contain the General Prologue; all
                    manuscripts which contain the first line of the General Prologue. Or, in
                    reverse: we can say, for any one manuscript, exactly what parts of the
                        Canterbury Tales it contains; we can say, for any page in any
                    manuscript, what lines of what part of the Tales it contains; we can say, for
                    any line or space in any page in any manuscript exactly what words of what part
                    of the Tales it contains. Note that the document and entity naming is completely
                    hierarchical: each successive object within the sequence of name/value pairs
                    must be contained within the preceding object. Line one is part of the General
                    Prologue, which is part of the Canterbury Tales; the second line
                    is on Folio 1r which is part of the Hengwrt manuscript. Note too that the system
                    can cope with prose and other texts where communicative acts span across lines
                    and pages. Paragraph 162 of the Parson’s Tale in the Corpus Christi 198
                    manuscript of the Tales begins on line 36 of folio 272r, and
                    continues on the first two lines of folio 272v. This can be represented as
                    follows:
                …/document=Corpus:Folio=272r:line=36:entity=Canterbury Tales:Section=Parson's Tale:Segment=162 
…/document=Corpus:Folio=272v:line=1:entity=Canterbury Tales:Section=Parson's Tale:Segment=162 
…/document=Corpus:Folio=272v:line=2:entity=Canterbury Tales:Section=Parson's Tale:Segment=162

            

                Implementing DET: Textual Communities
                Theory is one thing; implementation is another. The basic outline of this scheme
                    was prepared by myself, with advice and help from Federico Meschini and Zeth
                    Green, in 2008-2009, and presented first by myself and Green at a symposium on
                    Collaborative Scholarly Editing in Birmingham in 2009, and then by Meschini and
                    myself in a paper presented to the ADHO conference in London in 2010. Following
                    suggestions at a meeting of the InterEdition project in Pisa in 2009, we first
                    experimented with expressing this scheme in the form of an ontology. This was
                    successful, as proof of concept: we could indeed connect documents, entities and
                    texts via RDF classes and properties. A description of the RDF ontology
                        prepared in 2010, and an implementation of it, are available at http://www.textualcommunities.usask.ca/web/textual-community/wiki/-/wiki/Main/Historical+Documents
                    This helped persuade us that the concept was fundamentally sound. However,
                    implementation of even a basic working prototype would take considerable effort
                    and resources. In late 2010 I moved from the University of Birmingham, UK, to
                    the University of Saskatchewan, Canada, and a considerable motive was the
                    prospect of adequate funding to create a real editing system, based on these
                    concepts. Such a system was needed also to support my own editorial work,
                    particularly on Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales.
                With funding initially from the University of Saskatchewan (2010-2011), then from
                    the Canada Foundation for Innovation (2011-2014) and now from the Canadian
                    Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (2014-), we have made a
                    collaborative editing environment, Textual
                        Communities, built on the documents, entities and texts definitions
                    here explained. A full technical description of the components of the Textual
                    Communities environment is beyond the scope of this article. In brief:

                
                    Although the DET system is designed to support full hierarchies for both
                        document and communicative act, and has no difficulties with overlapping
                        hierarchies, we based the system on TEI encodings which cannot support
                        overlapping hierarchies. Partly, this was because we had many thousands of
                        pages of transcription already in TEI encoding. Also, we knew from years of
                        experience that use of the P3 primary text model, encoding the communicative
                        act hierarchy as the main hierarchy and recording the document hierarchy
                        through milestones, could yield useful results.

                    Our first intent was to work through RDF, and so create an RDF repository
                        of materials accessible via SPARQL and other RDF tools. Very quickly, we
                        realized that the RDF tools then available could not support our aim of a
                        large real-time editing environment. (This may change as new RDF tools are
                        developed.) The tools were immature and did not scale well, and we had
                        significant performance issues even with small amounts of text. Hence, we
                        moved to use of a relational database for back-end storage of all data.
                        Decades of development have made relational databases robust, responsive and
                        fast, with a multitude of tools for management and for web server
                        interfaces. We are currently moving from a relational database to a MongoDB
                        system. JSON (Javascript Object Notation) has become our central internal
                        representation of data, and the optimization of MongoDB for JSON objects
                        maps well to our data.As part of the move to MongoDB and JSON storage,
                            Zeth Green, Xiaohan Zhang and myself reviewed how the document and
                            entity hierarchies relate to the text formed from the collocation of the
                            two hierarchies. We realized that it was possible, using a JSON-based
                            architecture, to support not just two hierarchies for any text, but any
                            number of hierarchies, thereby avoiding any difficulties with
                            overlapping hierarchies. As of November 2016, we are still developing
                            this new architecture. Recent articles by computer scientists
                            demonstrate increasing awareness of the need to move beyond a
                                document paradigm, with its reliance on hierarchical content
                            models, to systems which will natively support the multiply overlapping
                            information schemes we find in actual texts and their physical
                            instances: thus  and, especially, . At present and for the near future,
                            however, XML in the TEI implementation remains crucial to our work, both
                            because it keeps us close to a wide community of scholars working with
                            digital editions and because of its sophisticated validation
                            facilities.
                    

                    The core of our implementation of the DET scheme with a database backend
                        is the use of the TEI <refsDcl> element to map any TEI
                        document to a DET scheme. Here is a fragment from a refsDcl declaration for
                        the Canterbury Tales project:  <cRefPattern
                            matchPattern="urn:det:TC:USask:CTP2/entity=(.+)"
                            replacementPattern="#xpath(//body/div[@n='$1'])"></cRefPattern>
                           

                    Here, the replacementPattern attribute declares that every top
                        level <div> element within the document is to be mapped
                        to an entity. The entity will be given the name of the ‘n’ attribute, thus
                            <div n="General Prologue"> is associated with the
                        entity name General Prologue. The matchPattern attribute declares
                        exactly what entity this ‘n’ attribute will be associated with: here, the
                        entity itself. Taken together, the system now understands that when it sees
                            <div n="General Prologue"> as a top level
                            <div>, it associates that <div>
                        and its contents with the entity urn:det:TC:USask:CTP2/entity=Canterbury
                            Tales. In essence: these refsDcl expressions are used to slice the
                        whole document into entity and document chunks, to associate each chunk with
                        a document and entity name, and hence each chunk of text in the document is
                        linked to its document and entity and this information stored in the
                            database.This paragraph describes the procedure used for
                            designating document and entity parts in the first version of the
                            Textual Community system. In the second version, we drastically
                            simplified this: now, any TE/XML element with an n attribute
                            becomes an element in either the document or entity
                        hierarchy.

                

                Through this system, we have now been able to store some 40,000 pages of
                    manuscript transcription and images in the Textual Communities implementation at
                    the University of Saskatchewan: see www.textualcommunities.usask.ca
                    (particularly, for the Canterbury Tales project, see http://www.textualcommunities.usask.ca/web/canterbury-tales/viewer).
                    This is now being used routinely by editors and transcribers in six substantial
                        projects.The six projects are: at the University of Saskatchewan, the
                        Canterbury Tales Project (with KUL, Belgium), led by myself and Barbara
                        Bordalejo of KUL, 30,000 pages and 30 active transcribers; the John Donne
                        Digital Prose Project, led by Brent Nelson, 1800 pages and 25 active
                        transcribers; the Recipes Project, led by Lisa Smith, 1500 pages and 30
                        active transcribers; the Incantation Magic Project, led by Frank Klaassen,
                        400 pages and 10 active transcribers; at the University of Birmingham, UK,
                        the Estoria de Espanna project, 3500 pages and 20 active transcribers; at
                        City University New York, the Teseida Project, led by Bill Coleman and
                        Edvige Agostinelli, 600 pages and four transcribers. Numerous other projects
                        are also using the Textual Communities system, although it has not been
                        publically launched. We are currently testing and refining the system
                    before full public launch.

                In its current form, Textual Communities does not (and cannot) go as far as we
                    want towards a full representation of both aspects of the text, as document and
                    as communicative act. This limitation arises from our use of the TEI as the base
                    form for text representation. While the structure of each communicative act can
                    be fully represented in XML, and hence in Textual Communities, the ability of a
                    single XML document to represent only one primary hierarchy means that because
                    our documents in Textual Communities choose to make the structure of the
                    communicative act the primary hierarchy, then we are limited in our
                    representation of the document hierarchy. We use (as do most TEI projects
                    representing documents) sequences of the omnipresent <pb/>,
                        <cb/> and <lb/> elements to represent
                    the document hierarchy, and for the great majority of our documents and our
                    purposes, this gives satisfactory results.This use of
                            <pb/>, <cb/> and
                            <lb/> cannot cope with instances where the flow of
                        lines on a page is disrupted by, for example, multi-line marginalia or
                        annotations. We could use <milestone/> elements to mark
                        out such instances. Note that the limitation is not in the DET
                    scheme, and indeed the current move of Textual Communities to a JSON-based
                    architecture will also remove this limitation within the system
                    backend.The problem then will lie only in the XML structures we are
                    currently using in the editorial and display interfaces. However, despite this,
                    Textual Communities goes further than any other online collaborative editing
                    environment known to me in its support for both the document and structured
                    communicative act aspects of the text. Everyone of the more than thirty editing
                    systems listed by Ben Brumfield at http://tinyurl.com/TranscriptionToolGDoc is either very limited in
                    its support for recording communicative act components, or supports page-based
                    transcription only.Brumfield does not mention two powerful systems for the
                        creation of fully TEI-compliant XML documents in collaborative environments:
                        TextGrid (www.textgrid.de/en/) and eLaborate
                        (www.elaborate.huygens.knaw.nl/login). Both will support the making of the
                        same complex TEI-XML documents as Textual Communities, but neither offers
                        the same native support for both page-based and text-based
                        transcription as does Textual Communities. Support for transcription by
                        page, the best way to apportion transcription of full manuscripts among
                        transcribers, is particularly crucial, and fully supported by Textual
                        Communities.
            

                The second axis of scholarly editions: editors and readers
                The definitions of document, text and work here offered, as the foundation of the
                    DET system, are valid for any text of any period, and might have been offered by
                    any scholar at any period. Documents vary in form, from inscription on stone to
                    computer file, but these definitions and these relations hold, no matter what
                    the medium. The digital age and the stringent mandates of computing systems
                    require that they be defined more precisely than before: but if the concepts are
                    valid, they were valid long before the invention of the computer. As earlier
                    remarked, the advent of digital methods has favoured the making of some kinds of
                    edition over others, but the fundamentals have not changed. However, this is not
                    the case for the second axis of scholarly editions: the range of relationships
                    between the makers of editions and their audiences. This has not just altered
                    the balance between one kind of edition and another. It has created many more
                    kinds of relationship between editor, edition and audience, enabling radically
                    new kinds of edition.

                It is now fundamental to the web that every reader may be a writer. The rise of
                    social media means that communication across the web happens in every direction:
                    now, routinely, every newspaper article on the web comes with a comments
                    section, often more interesting than the article itself (though, mostly, not).
                    The rise of crowd-sourcing leverages individual activity into collective
                    movements: crowd-sourcing has produced remarkable results in areas as diverse as
                    investigating the expense claims of politicians to transcription of museum
                    labels. There have been several ventures into the use of crowd-sourcing for
                    editorial purposes, notably the Transcribe Bentham and Easter 1916 projects ;  .
                    Crowdsourcing raises the possibility of editions which are not made by a single
                    editor, or even a group of editors, but by many people who may have no formal
                    relationship with each other, and indeed nothing in common except a shared
                    interest in a particular text. Further along the editor/audience axis, the ways
                    in which an edition may be distributed to its readers and used by them are also
                    vastly changed. While many readers may want just to read a text, others may wish
                    to take the text of a document, add information to it, alter it, enrich it,
                    correct it, combine it with other texts, and then republish it. Others in turn
                    might take up this republished text and alter it still further, in a
                    never-ending chain.

                It has to be said that the scholarly editing community, up to now, has been very
                    slow in responding to these new potentials. With respect to crowdsourcing: the
                    Bentham and Easter 1916 enterprises are not crowdsourced editions.
                    Rather, the framework of each edition, the flow of work, and all significant
                    decisions concerning transcription systems and the distribution of the product
                    of the editions are made by a small group of academic editors, as has always
                    been the case for scholarly editions. Any reader is invited to contribute
                    transcriptions, and the Easter 1916 system allows readers to go further, and
                    contribute their own documents. But the reader’s role is strictly limited, and
                    the Bentham project even prevents the reader changing a transcript he or she has
                    made after it has been locked by an editorial supervisor. T-Pen and other
                    systems do offer much more freedom to the editor, but at the cost of a very
                    limited encoding of the structure of communicative acts. Further, almost all
                    scholarly editing digital projects severely restrict how their output might be
                    used. The Jane Austen Fiction Manuscripts project  has a whole page bristling with restrictions: the site and everything on it
                    is protected by copyright, no derivative works are allowed, the editor asserts
                    her moral right to be recognized
                        as author and editor of aspects of this work (it is not explained
                    what aspects mean), individual, non-commercial use is permitted,
                    but All other use is prohibited
                        without the express written consent of the editor. Any requests to use the
                        work in a way not covered by this permission should be directed to the
                        editor. Indeed, most projects, while not going so far as the Jane
                    Austen project, do invoke the non-commercial clause of the Creative
                    Commons license. The effect of the non-commercial restriction, as many
                    have observed , is not just to restrict the
                    republication of online materials by commercial publishers: it is actually to
                    make it nearly impossible for anyone, commercial or non-commercial, individual
                    or corporate, to republish those materials on the web. The problem is the
                    ambiguity of what is commercial, what is non-commercial, in the
                    web. If you publish your edition in a university website, which also sells
                    university services, then it might be deemed commercial. If you publish it in
                    your own website and this happens to provide links to other sites which sell
                    anything, or even just belong to a commercial entity, then it might be deemed
                    commercial – even if you and your edition did not create those links. For these
                    reasons, many people will not touch any materials covered by the
                        non-commercial license, in any circumstances. Indeed, among the many
                    online digital materials which have been created by humanities scholars very few
                    are both free of the non-commercial restriction, and actually made readily
                    available for free re-use and re-publication. 
            

                Editions by everyone, for everyone
                Full realization of the possibilities of readerly involvement in the making and
                    use of editions depends on the materials being available for re-use and
                    re-publication without restriction. This applies at both ends of the edition
                    spectrum. One cannot reasonably expect that people who contribute transcriptions
                    and other materials to an edition will be willing to do so if they cannot make
                    use of their own transcriptions — or indeed, if they see that the editors are
                    limiting the ways the transcriber’s work may be used, for the benefit of the
                    editors. And of course, if you cannot be sure that you can freely distribute
                    your own work on materials derived from an edition, then you will likely look
                    elsewhere. For this reason, Textual Communities mandates that any materials
                    created on the site must be made available under the Creative Commons
                    Share-Alike Attribution licence (CC SA-BY); all software created by the project
                    is also available as open source at
                        https://github.com/DigitalResearchCentre.This sentence provoked a
                        lively discussion in the Google Docs forum on the draft. Three commentators,
                        Andrew Dunning, Hugh Cayless and Laurent Romary, questioned the need for the
                        ‘SA’ condition. The nub of the problem is the expression of the ‘SA’
                        condition in Creative Commons and other ‘copyleft’ licenses, which insists
                        that all further share-alike be under the same terms as the granting terms.
                        This leads to a problem when a site wishes to mix together materials
                        licencsed under different share-alike flavours: this cannot be done. Thus,
                        although SA is conceived as a guarantee of continued open access, in
                        practice it has become a very real restriction, inhibiting the free re-use
                        we seek . Accordingly, many recent open-access
                        sites have dropped the SA requirement, and Textual Communities is likely to
                        follow this lead. The attribution requirement mandates that
                    anyone who worked on the creation of the materials must be acknowledged, at
                    every point along the publication chain. The share-alike requirement
                    mandates that the materials, no matter how altered, must be made available under
                    the same terms as they came to the user. This does not prevent a commercial
                    publisher taking the materials, altering them, and then making them available as
                    part of a paid-for publication: just that somehow, the publisher must make those
                    altered materials available, for free (for example, by deposit on a public
                    webserver). Further, Textual Communities provides an open API (Application
                    Programmer’s Interface) that makes it possibly for anyone with reasonable
                    computer skills to extract any texts from editions within the Textual
                    Communities system in just a few lines of code (see http://www.textualcommunities.usask.ca/web/textual-community/wiki/-/wiki/Main/The+API+Basics).

                However, requiring that materials be made freely available is pointless if those
                    materials cannot be made in the first place. Some two decades into the digital
                    revolution, and people routinely send emails, create Word documents,
                    spreadsheets and Facebook pages. But paradoxically, it is no easier (and indeed,
                    arguably much harder) to create a scholarly edition than it was two decades ago.
                    It is certainly harder if one takes the TEI advice, to create two transcriptions
                    corresponding to the two aspects of text as document and text as structured
                    communicative act and link them together. Even in cases where one is not going
                    to make two parallel transcripts: the renowned complexity of the TEI guidelines,
                    and the webs of software and hardware needed to turn a TEI document into an
                    online publication continue to require that anyone who wants to make a scholarly
                    edition in digital form must both master a range of special skills and have
                    access to considerable technical resources. The effect has been to limit
                    drastically the number of people who can make scholarly editions in digital
                    form: in effect, to relatively few people typically at a few digital humanities
                    centres. Hence, a key aim of Textual Communities is to make it possible for
                    scholars to make digital editions without having to master more of the TEI than
                    is necessary for their particular task, and with no need for specialized
                    technical support. Further (perhaps over-ambitiously) we would like it to be
                    possible for an edition made with this system to be placed anywhere along the
                    range of relationships between the makers of editions and their readers. This
                    means that as well as make it as easy as we can to use, we need to support all
                    this range. Thus, in Textual Communities one can create a community where
                    everyone is an editor, everyone can freely change what everyone else does, and
                    everyone can take whatever is done and use it in any way they wish. Or, an
                    editor can allow only the people he or she invites to collaborate in making the
                    edition, and can insist that every page published on the edition must be
                    approved by an editor before publication.

                In order to support this range of roles, and to encourage community building and
                    partnerships, Textual Communities is based on social media software,
                    specifically on the LifeRay implementation of the Open Social software suite,
                    itself used by Google as a foundation of its Google
                        Plus social network.The second version of Textual Communities
                        has abandoned the LifeRay environment here described: in practice, LifeRay
                        has considerable difficulties, not least its vulnerability to spam
                            bots, which routinely dump spam within LifeRay documents.
                    This allows every community within Textual Communities to have its own Wiki,
                    Blog, Bulletin Board and Chat facility. The screenshot below shows how Textual
                    Communities appears to a user within the Canterbury Tales community:
                

                
                    The Canterbury Tales community within Textual Communities: access contents
                        by page
                    
                

                At the top of the screen, the Wiki, Blog and Bulletin Board
                    links take the reader to the wiki, etc., for this community. To the right, we
                    see an image above of the manuscript page; below that, the transcription of this
                    page, in the last version saved by the transcriber. Notice that the Compare
                        with tool allows the transcriber to compare different revisions of the
                    transcription. This system does not attempt to hide the XML: we think it helpful
                    for the editor and transcribers to see exactly what encoding is being applied to
                    the document. Nor have we had any difficulty with transcribers at any level,
                    including undergraduates, understanding and using the XML we use in these page
                    transcripts (observe that, as a fully-compliant TEI implementation, any valid
                    XML may occur within the transcripts). Note too the use of explicit
                        <lb/> elements at the beginning of every manuscript line
                    to structure the document. The buttons at the base permit the transcriber to
                    preview the document, showing it without the XML and formatted for ease of
                    reading, to save the transcript, and carry out various other editorial
                    activities (including, Link Pages, which allows the editor to connect
                    text which flows across the page boundaries).

                At the left of the screen, you can see the table of contents, showing the
                    document page by page. This table of contents is generated directly by Textual
                    Communities from the XML, following the schema for document elements set out in
                    the <refsDcl> element. If you click on the By Item
                    tab, the table of contents changes:
                

                
                    The Canterbury Tales community within Textual Communities: access contents
                        by entity
                    
                

                Now, for the document Hg, we can access its contents by entity: that is, by the
                    components of the communicative act. Thus, it first contains the General
                    Prologue, which itself contains a sequence of line entities: first the initial
                    rubric (IRE) and then the first and following lines. Again, the
                    information about the entities is generated directly by Textual Communities from
                    the XML, following the schema set out for the textual entities in the
                        <refsDcl> element. Finally, the Collations
                    interface allows the reader to see the collation of the text in all the
                    documents.

                

                
                    The collation of the eighth line of the General Prologue
                    
                

                The collation here is built on the CollateX system, here extended by the addition
                    of regularization and other facilities for adjusting the collation.

            

                Conclusion
                Textual Communities, like any computing system, is in constant development. We
                    have not yet announced it publically, and will not do so until we are fully
                    satisfied as to its robustness and usability. We are also aware that the demands
                    of comparatively few users (six major communities, some one hundred and fifty
                    active transcribers and editors) already place considerable strain on the
                    current installation, on a virtual server at the University of Saskatchewan. We
                    are both translating the system to the MongoDB backend and moving it to the
                    Compute Canada cloud (one of the first Digital Humanities projects to be hosted
                    on this service, hitherto devoted to hard science data). However, it is
                    not at all our aim that the whole world, or at even a significant part of the
                    whole scholarly editing community, should use Textual Communities. We are more
                    concerned that the concepts behind Textual Communities should be promulgated.
                    Firstly, we argue that scholars understand the reasoning behind the
                    text/documents/entities division, with its insistence on the double aspect of
                    the communicative act present in any textual document. Secondly, we argue that
                    it should be possible for any textual scholar to make an edition, with a minimum
                    of specialist computing and encoding knowledge and technical support. This
                    requires that computing systems need to respond to the needs of scholars, rather
                    than scholars restrict their editions to what computer systems can support.
                    Thirdly, scholarly editing, perhaps more than any other area of the humanities,
                    is uniquely positioned to profit from the social web. Scholars and readers may
                    engage together in understanding documents, the texts they contain, and the
                    complex histories of works which they compose. If we are able to move our
                    discipline a small way in those directions, we will have done well.
            
