Title:  Computational Linguistics and Classical Lexicography
Volume:  003
Issue:  1
Date:  26 February 2009
Abstract:  
            Manual lexicography has produced extraordinary results for Greek and Latin, but it
               cannot in the immediate future provide for all texts the same level of coverage
               available for the most heavily studied materials. As we build a cyberinfrastructure
               for Classics in the future, we must explore the role that automatic methods can play
               within it. Using technologies inherited from the disciplines of computational
               linguistics and computer science, we can create a complement to these traditional
               reference works - a dynamic lexicon that presents statistical information about a
               word’s usage in context, including information about its sense distribution within
               various authors, genres and eras, and syntactic information as well.
         
Full Body Text: 

            
               
                  ...Great advances have been made in the sciences on which lexicography depends.
                     Minute research in manuscript authorities has largely restored the texts of the
                     classical writers, and even their orthography. Philology has traced the growth
                     and history of thousands of words, and revealed meanings and shades of meaning
                     which were long unknown. Syntax has been subjected to a profounder analysis.
                     The history of ancient nations, the private life of the citizens, the thoughts
                     and beliefs of their writers have been closely scrutinized in the light of
                     accumulating information. Thus the student of to-day may justly demand of his
                     Dictionary far more than the scholarship of thirty years ago could furnish.
               
               Advertisement for the Lewis & Short Latin Dictionary,
                  March 1, 1879.
            
         

            
            The scholarship of thirty years
                  ago that Lewis and Short here distance themselves from is Andrews' 1850
                  Latin-English lexicon, itself largely a
               translation of Freund’s German Wörterbuch published
               only a decade before. As we design a cyberinfrastructure to support Classical Studies
               in the future, we will soon cross a similar milestone: the Oxford
                  Latin Dictionary (1968-1982) has begun the slow process of becoming thirty
               years old (several of the earlier fascicles have already done so) and by 2012 the
               eclipse will be complete. Founded on the same lexicographic principles that produced
               the juggernaut Oxford English Dictionary, the OLD is a
               testament to the extraordinary results that rigorous manual labor can provide. It
               has, along with the Thesaurus Linguae Latinae, provided
               extremely thorough coverage for the texts of the Golden and Silver Age in Latin
               literature and has driven modern scholarship for the past thirty years.
            Manual methods, however, cannot in the immediate future provide for all texts the
               same level of coverage available for the most heavily studied materials, and as we
               think toward Classics in the next ten years, we must think not only of desiderata,
               but also of the means that would get us there. Like Lewis and Short, we can also say
               that great advances have been made over the past thirty years in the sciences
               underlying lexicography; but the sciences that we group in that statement
               include not only the traditional fields of paleography, philology, syntax and
               history, but computational linguistics and computer science as well.
            Lexicographers have long used computers as an aid in dictionary production, but the
               recent rise of statistical language processing now lets us do far more: instead of
               using computers to simply expedite our largely manual labor, we can now use them to
               uncover knowledge that would otherwise lie hidden in expanses of text. Digital
               methods also let us deal well with scale. For instance, while the OLD
               focused on a canon of Classical authors that ends around the second century CE, Latin
               continued to be a productive language for the ensuing two millennia, with prolific
               writers in the Middle Ages, Renaissance and beyond. The Index Thomisticus  alone contains 10.6 million words attributed to Thomas
               Aquinas and related authors, which is by itself larger than the entire corpus of
               extant classical Latin.The Biblioteca Teubneriana BTL-1 collection, for
                  instance, contains 6.6 million words, covering Latin literature up to the second
                  century CE. For a recent overview of the Index Thomisticus, including the corpus
                  size and composition, see Busa (2004). Many
               handcrafted lexica exist for this period, from the scale of individual authors (cf.
               Ludwig Schütz’ 1895 Thomas-Lexikon) to entire periods
               (e.g., J. F. Niermeyer’s 1976 Mediae Latinitatis Lexikon
                  Minus), but we can still do more: we can create a dynamic lexicon that can
               change and grow when fed with new texts, and that can present much more information
               about a word than reference works bound by the conventions of the printed page.
            In deciding how we want to design a cyberinfrastructure for Classics over the next
               ten years, there is an important question that lurks between where are we now?
               and where do we want to be?: where are our colleagues already? Computational
               linguistics and natural language processing generally perform best in high-resource
               languages — languages like English, on which computational research has been focusing
               for over sixty years, and for which expensive resources (such as treebanks,
               ontologies and large, curated corpora) have long been developed. Many of the tools we
               would want in the future are founded on technologies that already exist for English
               and other languages; our task in designing a cyberinfrastructure may simply be to
               transfer and customize them for Classical Studies. Classics has arguably the most
               well-curated collection of texts in the world, and the uses its scholars demand from
               that collection are unique. In the following I will document the technologies
               available to us in creating a new kind of reference work for the future — one that
               complements the traditional lexicography exemplified by the OLD and the
                  TLL and lets scholars interact with their texts in new and exciting
               ways.
         

            Where are we now?
            In answering this question, I am mainly concerned with two issues: the production of
               reference works (i.e., the act of lexicography) and the use that scholars make of
               them.
            All of the reference works available in Classics are the products of manual labor, in
               which highly skilled individuals find examples of a word in context, cluster those
               examples into distinguishable senses, and label those senses with a word or
               phrase in another language (like English) or in the source language (as with the
                  TLL). In the past thirty years, computers have allowed this process
               to be significantly expedited, even in such simple ways as textual searching. Rather
               than relying on a vast network of volunteer readers to read through scores of books
               and write down apt sentences as they come across them (as with the
                  OED), we can simply search our electronic corpora, find all examples
               of a word in context, and winnow through them sequentially to find those that most
               clearly illuminate the meaning of any given sense. This approach has been exploited
               most recently by the Greek Lexicon ProjectSee http://people.pwf.cam.ac.uk/blf10/GLP/Greek_Lexicon_Project.htm. 
               at the University of Cambridge, which has been developing a New Greek
                  Lexicon since 1998 using a large database of electronically compiled slips
               (with a target completion date of 2010). Here the act of lexicography is still very
               manual, as each dictionary sense is still heavily curated, but the tedious job of
               citation collection is not.
            We can contrast this computer-assisted lexicography with a new variety — which we
               might more properly call computational lexicography — that has emerged with
               the COBUILD project  of the late 1980s. The
                  COBUILD English Language Dictionary (1987) is a learner’s dictionary
               centered around a word’s use in context, and is created from an analysis of an
               evolving English textual corpus (the Bank of English, on which current editions of
               the COBUILD dictionary are based, was officially launched in 1991 and now includes
               524 million wordsSee http://www.collins.co.uk/books.aspx?group=153. ). This corpus
               evidence allows lexicographers to include frequency information as part of a word’s
               entry (helping learners concentrate on common words) and also to include sentences
               from the corpus that demonstrate a word’s common collocations — the words and phrases
               that it frequently appears with. By keeping the underlying corpus up to date, the
               editors are also able to add new headwords as they appear in the language, and common
               multi-word expressions and idioms (such as bear fruit) can also be
               uncovered as well.
            This corpus-based approach has since been augmented in two dimensions. On the one
               hand, dictionaries and lexicographic resources are being built on larger and larger
               textual collections: the German elexiko project , for instance, is built on a modern German corpus of 1.3 billion words, and we can
               expect much larger projects in the future as the web is exploited as a
                  corpus.In 2006, for example, Google released the first version of its Web 1T
                  5-gram corpus  — a collection of n-grams (n=1-5) and
                  their frequencies calculated from 1 trillion words of text on the web. At
               the same time, researchers are also subjecting their corpora to more complex
               automatic processes to extract more knowledge from them. While word frequency and
               collocation analysis is fundamentally a task of simple counting, projects such as
               Kilgarriff’s Sketch Engine  also enable lexicographers
               to induce information about a word’s grammatical behavior as well.
            In their ability to include statistical information about a word’s actual use, these
               contemporary projects are exploiting advances in computational linguistics that have
               been made over the past thirty years. Before turning, however, to how we can adapt
               these technologies in the creation of a new and complementary reference work, we must
               first address the use of such lexica.
            Like the OED, Classical lexica generally include a list of citations
               under each headword, providing testimony by real authors for each sense. Of
               necessity, these citations are usually only exemplary selections, though the
                  TLL provides comprehensive listings by Classical authors for many of
               its lemmata. These citations essentially function as an index into the textual
               collection. If I am interested in the places in Classical literature where the verb
                  libero means to acquit, I can consult the
                  OLD and then turn to the source texts it cites: Cic.
               Ver. 1.72, Plin. Nat. 6.90, etc. For a more comprehensive
               (but not exhaustive) comparison, I can consult the TLL.
            This is what we might consider a manual form of lemmatized searching. The
               Perseus Digital Library See http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/.  and the Thesaurus Linguae
                  GraecaeSee http://www.tlg.uci.edu/.  both provide a form of lemmatized
               searching for their respective texts, but it is a fuzzier variety than that presented
               here: a user can search for a word form such as edo (to
               eat) and simultaneously search the texts for all of its various inflections,
               but ambiguity is rampant - a lemmatized search for edo would also search
               for est, which is also an inflection of the far more common
                  sum (to be). The search results are thus significantly
               diluted by a large number of false positives.
            The advantage of the Perseus and TLG lemmatized search is that it gives scholars the
               opportunity to find all the instances of a given word form or lemma in the textual
               collections they each contain. The TLL may be built on a comprehensive
               collection of 10 million slips containing all of Latin literature up to 200 CE and
               selections beyond, but that complete collection can only be found housed in their
               archives; what we have in print and on CD-ROM is still only a sample. The
                  TLL, however, is impeccable in precision, while the Perseus and TLG
               results are dirty. What we need is a resource to combine the best of both.
         

            Where do we want to be?
            The OLD and TLL are not likely to become obsolete anytime
               soon; as the products of highly skilled editors and over a century of labor, the
               sense distinctions within them are highly precise and well substantiated. What we can
               provide in the near future, however, is a complement to these resources, one that
               presents statistics about a word’s actual usage in texts — and not only in texts from
               the Classical period, but from any era for which we have electronic corpora. Heavily
               curated reference works provide great detail for a small set of texts; our complement
               is to provide lesser detail for all texts.
            In order to accomplish this, we need to consider the role that automatic methods can
               play within our emerging cyberinfrastructure. I distinguish cyberinfrastructure from
               the vast corpora that exist for modern languages not only in the structure imposed
               upon the texts that comprise it, but also in the very composition of those texts:
               while modern reference corpora are typically of little interest in themselves (as
               mainly newswire), Classical texts have been the focus of scholars’ attention for
               millennia. The meaning of the word child in a single sentence from the
                  Wall Street Journal is hardly a research question worth asking,
               except for the newspaper’s significance in being representative of the language at
               large; but this same question when asked of Vergil’s fourth Eclogue has
               been at the center of scholarly debate since the time of the emperor
                  Constantine.See  for an overview
                  of puer in Ec. IV. We need to provide traditional
               scholars with the apparatus necessary to facilitate their own textual research. This
               will be true of a cyberinfrastructure for any historical culture, and for any future
               structure that develops for modern scholarly corpora as well.
            We therefore must concentrate on two problems. First, how much can we automatically
               learn from a large textual collection using machine learning techniques that thrive
               on large corpora? And second, how can the vast labor already invested in handcrafted
               lexica help those techniques to learn?
            What we can learn from such a corpus is actually quite significant. With a large
               bilingual corpus, we can induce a word sense inventory to establish a baseline for
               how frequently certain definitions of a word are manifested in actual use; we can
               also use the context surrounding each word to establish which particular definition
               is meant in any given instance. With the help of a treebank (a handcrafted collection
               of syntactically parsed sentences), we can train an automatic parser to parse the
               sentences in a monolingual corpus and extract information about a word’s
               subcategorization frames (the common syntactic arguments it appears with — for
               instance, that the verb dono (to give) requires a subject, direct object
               and indirect object), and selectional preferences (e.g., that the subject of the verb
                  amo (to love) is typically animate). With clustering techniques, we
               can establish the semantic similarity between two words based on their appearance in
               similar contexts.
            If we leverage all of these techniques to create a lexicon for both Latin and Greek,
               the lexical entries in each reference work could include the following:
            
               a list of possible senses, weighted according to their probability;
               a list of instances of each sense in the source texts;
               a list of common subcategorization frames, weighted according to their
                  probability; and
               a list of selectional preferences, weighted according to their
                  probability.
            
            In creating a lexicon with these features, we are exploring two strengths of
               automated methods: they can analyze not only very large bodies of data but also
               provide customized analysis for particular texts or collections. We can thus not only
               identify patterns in one hundred and fifty million words of later Latin but also
               compare which senses of which words appear in the one hundred and fifty thousand
               words of Thucydides. Figure 1 presents a mock-up of what a
               dictionary entry could look like in such a dynamic reference work. The first section
                  (Translation equivalents) presents items 1 and 2 from
               the list, and is reminiscent of traditional lexica for classical languages: a list of
               possible definitions is provided along with examples of use. The main difference
               between a dynamic lexicon and those print lexica, however, lies in the scope of the
               examples: while print lexica select one or several highly illustrative examples of
               usage from a source text, we are in a position to present far more. 
                  Mock-up of a sample entry in a dynamic lexicon
                  
                  Mock-up of a sample entry in a dynamic lexicon.
               
            
         

            How do we get there?
            We have already begun work on a dynamic lexicon like that shown in Figure 1
               . Our approach is to use already established methods in
               natural language processing; as such, our methodology involves the application of
               three core technologies:
            
               identifying word senses from parallel texts;
               locating the correct sense for a word using contextual information; and
               parsing a text to extract important syntactic information.
            
            Each of these technologies has a long history of development both within the Perseus
               Project and in the natural language processing community at large. In the following I
               will detail how we can leverage them all to uncover large-scale usage patterns in a
               text.
            
               Word Sense Induction
               Our work on building a Latin sense inventory from a small collection of parallel
                  texts in our digital library is based on that of Brown et
                     al. 1991 and Gale et al. 1992, who suggest
                  that one way of objectively detecting the real senses of any given word is to
                  analyze its translations: if a word is translated as two semantically distinct
                  terms in another language, we have prima facie evidence that there is
                  a real sense distinction. So, for example, the Greek word archê may
                  be translated in one context as beginning and in another as
                     empire, corresponding respectively to LSJ definitions I.1 and
                  II.2.
               Finding all of the translation equivalents for any given word then becomes a task
                  of aligning the source text with its translations, at the level of individual
                  words. The Perseus Digital Library contains at least one English translation for
                  most of its Latin and Greek prose and poetry source texts. Many of these
                  translations are encoded under the same canonical citation scheme as their source,
                  but must further be aligned at the sentence and word level before individual word
                  translation probabilities can be calculated. The workflow for this process is
                  shown in Figure 2.
               
               
                  Alignment workflow
                  
                  Alignment workflow.
               
               Since the XML files of both the source text and its translations are marked up
                  with the same reference points, chapter 1, section 1
                  of Tacitus' Annales is automatically aligned with its English
                  translation (step 1). This results (for Latin at least) in aligned chunks of text
                  that are 217 words long. These chunks are then aligned on a sentence level in step
                  2 using Moore’s Bilingual Sentence Aligner , which
                  aligns sentences that are 1-1 translations of each other with a very high
                  precision (98.5% for a corpus of 10,000 English-Hindi sentence pairs ).
               In step 3, we then align these 1-1 sentences using GIZA++ . Prior to alignment, all of the tokens in the source text and translation are
                  lemmatized, where each word is replaced with all of the lemmas from which it can
                  be inflected (for example, the Latin word est is replaced with
                     sum1 edo1 and the English word is is replaced with
                     be). This word alignment is performed in both directions in order
                  to discover multi-word expressions (MWEs) in the source language. 
               
                  Sample word alignment from GIZA++
                  
                  Sample word alignment from GIZA++.
               
               
                  Figure 3 shows the result of this word alignment (here
                  with English as the source language). The original, pre-lemmatized Latin is
                     salvum tu me esse cupisti (Cicero, Pro Plancio,
                  chapter 33). The original English is you wished me to be safe. As a
                  result of the lemmatization process, many source words are mapped to multiple
                  words in the target — most often to lemmas which share a common inflection. For
                  instance, during lemmatization, the Latin word esse is replaced with
                  the two lemmas from which it can be derived — sum1 (to
                     be) and edo1 (to eat). If the word alignment
                  process maps the source word be to both of these lemmas in a given
                  sentence (as in Figure 3), the translation probability
                  is divided evenly between them.
               From these alignments we can calculate overall translation probabilities, which we
                  currently present as an ordered list, as in Figure 4.
               
               
                  Sense inventory for oratio induced from parallel texts
                  
                  Sense inventory for oratio induced from parallel texts.
               
               The weighted list of translation equivalents we identify using this technique can
                  provide the foundation for our further lexical work. In the example above, we have
                  induced from our collection of parallel texts that the headword
                     oratio is primarily used with two senses: speech and
                     prayer. 
               The granularity of the definitions in such a dynamic lexicon cannot approach that
                  of human labor: the Lewis and Short Latin Dictionary, for instance,
                  enumerates fourteen subsenses in varying degrees of granularity, from
                     speech to formal language to the power of oratory and
                  beyond. Our approach, however, does have two clear advantages which complement
                  those of traditional lexica: first, this method allows us to include statistics
                  about actual word usage in the corpus we derive it from. The use of
                     oratio to signify prayer is not common in classical
                  Latin, but since the corpus we induced this inventory from is largely composed of
                  the Vulgate of Jerome, we are also able to mine this use of the word
                  and include it in this list as well. Since the lexicon is dynamic, we can generate
                  a sense inventory for an entire corpus or any part of it — so that if we were
                  interested, for instance, in the use of oratio only until the second
                  century CE, we can exclude the texts of Jerome from our analysis. And since we can
                  run our word alignment at any time, we are always in a position to update the
                  lexicon with the addition of new texts.
               
                  Sense inventory for the multi-word expression res publica
                     induced from parallel texts
                  
                  Sense inventory for the multi-word expression res publica induced from
                     parallel texts.
               
               Second, our word alignment also maps multi-word expressions, so we can include
                  significant collocations in our lexicon as well. This allows us to provide
                  translation equivalents for idioms and common phrases such as res
                     publica (republic) or gratias ago (to
                     give thanks). 
            
            
               Word Sense Disambiguation
               Approaches to word sense disambiguation generally come in three varieties: 
               
                  knowledge-based methods (Lesk 1986, Banerjee and Pedersen 2002), which rely on
                     existing reference works with a clear structure such as dictionaries and
                     Wordnets ; 
                  supervised corpus methods , which train a
                     classifier on a human-annotated sense corpus such as Semcor  or any of the SENSEVAL competition corpora ; and 
                  unsupervised corpus methods, which train classifiers on raw,
                     unannotated text, either a monolingual corpus  or
                     parallel texts (Brown et al. 1991, Tufis et al. 2004). 
               
               Corpus methods (especially supervised methods) generally perform best in the
                  SENSEVAL competitions — at SENSEVAL-3, the best system achieved an accuracy of
                  72.9% in the English lexical sample task and 65.1% in the English all-words
                     task.At the time of writing, the SEMEVAL-1/SENSEVAL-4
                     (2007) competition is currently underway. Manually annotated corpora,
                  however, are generally cost-prohibitive to create, and this is especially
                  exacerbated with sense-tagged corpora, for which the human inter-annotator
                  agreement is often low.
               Since the Perseus Digital Library contains two large monolingual corpora (the
                  canon of Greek and Latin classical texts) and sizable parallel corpora as well, we
                  have investigated using parallel texts for word sense disambiguation. This method
                  uses the same techniques we used to create a sense inventory to disambiguate words
                  in context. After we have a list of possible translation equivalents for a word,
                  we can use the surrounding Latin or Greek context as an indicator for which sense
                  is meant in texts where we have no corresponding translation. There are several
                  techniques available for deciding which sense is most appropriate given the
                  context, and several different measures for what definition of context is
                  most appropriate itself. One technique that we have experimented with is a naive
                  Bayesian classifier (following Gale et al. 1992),
                  with context defined as a sentence-level bag of words (all of the words in the
                  sentence containing the word to be disambiguated contribute equally to its
                  disambiguation). 
               Bayesian classification is most commonly found in spam filtering. A filtering
                  program can decide whether or not any given email message is spam by looking at
                  the words that comprise it and comparing it to other messages that are already
                  known to be spam — some words generally only appear in spam messages (e.g.,
                     viagra, refinance, opt-out,
                     shocking), while others only appear in non-spam messages
                     (archê, subcategorization), and some appear equally
                  in both (and, your). By counting each word and the class
                  (spam/not spam) it appears in, we can assign it a probability that it falls into
                  one class or the other.
               We can also use this principle to disambiguate word senses by building a
                  classifier for every sense and training it on sentences where we do know the
                  correct sense for a word. Just as a spam filter is trained by a user explicitly
                  labeling a message as spam, this classifier can be trained simply by the presence
                  of an aligned translation. 
               For instance, the Latin word spiritus has several senses, including
                     spirit and wind. In our texts, when
                     spiritus is translated as wind, it is accompanied by
                  words like mons (mountain), ala (wing) or
                     ventus (wind). When it is translated as spirit, its
                  context has (more naturally) a religious tone, including words such as
                     sanctus (holy) and omnipotens (all-powerful). If we
                  are confronted with an instance of spiritus in a sentence for which
                  we have no translation, we can disambiguate it as either spirit or
                     wind by looking at its context in the original Latin.
               
                   Latin contextual probabilities where spiritus =
                        wind. 
                  
                     Latin context word
                     English translation
                     Probability of accompanying spiritus =
                           wind
                     
                  
                  
                     Mons
                     Mountain
                     98.3%
                  
                  
                     Commotio
                     Commotion
                     98.3%
                  
                  
                     Ventus
                     Wind
                     95.2%
                  
                  
                     Ala
                     Wing
                     95.2%
                  
               
               
                   Latin contextual probabilities where spiritus =
                        spirit. 
                  
                     Latin context word
                     English translation
                     Probability of accompanying spiritus =
                           spirit
                     
                  
                  
                     Sanctus
                     Holy
                     99.9%
                  
                  
                     Testis
                     Witness
                     99.9%
                  
                  
                     Vivifico
                     Make alive
                     99.9%
                  
                  
                     Omnipotens
                     All-powerful
                     99.9%
                  
               
               Word sense disambiguation will be most helpful for the construction of a lexicon
                  when we are attempting to determine the sense for words in context for the large
                  body of later Latin literature for which there exists no English translation. By
                  training a classifier on texts for which we do have translations, we will be able
                  to determine the sense in texts for which we don’t: if the context of
                     spiritus in a late Latin text includes words such as
                     mons and ala, we can use the probabilities we induced
                  from parallel texts to know with some degree of certainty that it refers to
                     wind rather than spirit. This will enable us to
                  include these later texts in our statistics on a word’s usage, and link these
                  passages to the definition as well.
            
            
               Parsing
               Two of the features we would like to incorporate into a dynamic lexicon are based
                  on a word’s role in syntax: subcategorization and selectional preference. A verb’s
                  subcategorization frame is the set of possible combinations of surface syntactic
                  arguments it can appear with. In linear, unlabeled phrase structure grammars,
                  these frames take the form of, for example, NP PP (requiring a direct
                  object + prepositional phrase, as in I gave a book to John) or
                     NP NP (requiring two objects, as in I gave John a
                     book). In a labeled dependency grammar, we can express a verb’s
                  subcategorization as a combination of syntactic roles (e.g., OBJ OBJ).
               A predicate’s selectional preference specifies the type of argument it generally
                  appears with. The verb to eat, for example, typically requires its
                  object to be a thing that can be eaten and its subject to have animacy, unless
                  used metaphorically. Selectional preference, however, can also be much more
                  detailed, reflecting not only a word class (such as animate or
                     human), but also individual words themselves. For instance, the
                  kind of arguments used with the Latin verb libero (to free) are very
                  different in Cicero and Jerome: Cicero, as an orator of the republic, commonly
                  uses it to speak of liberation from periculum (danger),
                     metus (fear), cura (care) and aes
                     alienum (debt); Jerome, on the other hand, uses it to speak of
                  liberation from a very different set of things, such as manus
                     Aegyptorum (the hand of the Egyptians), os leonis (the
                  mouth of the lion), and mors (death).See  for a summary of this work. These are
                  syntactic qualities since each of these arguments bears a direct syntactic
                  relation to their head as much as they hold a semantic place within the underlying
                  argument structure.
               In order to extract this kind of subcategorization and selectional information
                  from unstructured text, we first need to impose syntactic order on it. One option
                  for imposing this kind of order is through manual annotation, but this option is
                  not feasible here due to the sheer volume of data involved — even the more
                  resourceful of such endeavors (such as the Penn Treebank  or the Prague Dependency Treebank ) take years to
                  complete.
               A second, more practical option is to assign syntactic structure to a sentence
                  using automatic methods. Great progress has been made in recent years in the area
                  of syntactic parsing, both for phrase structure grammars (Charniak 2000, Collins
                     1999) and dependency grammars (Nivre et al.
                     2006, McDonald et al. 2005), with
                  labeled dependency parsing achieving an accuracy rate approaching 90% for English
                  (a high resource, fixed word order language) and 80% for Czech (a relatively free
                  word order language like Latin and Greek). Automatic parsing generally requires
                  the presence of a treebank — a large collection of manually annotated sentences —
                  and a treebank’s size directly correlates with parsing accuracy: the larger the
                  treebank, the better the automatic analysis.
               We are currently in the process of creating a treebank for Latin, and have just
                  begun work on a one-million-word treebank of Ancient Greek. Now in version 1.5,
                  the Latin Dependency TreebankSee http://nlp.perseus.tufts.edu/syntax/treebank/.  is composed of
                  excerpts from eight texts, including Caesar, Cicero, Jerome, Ovid, Petronius,
                  Propertius, Sallust and Vergil. Each sentence in the treebank has been manually
                  annotated so that every word is assigned a syntactic relation, along with the
                  lemma from which it is inflected and its morphological code (a composite of nine
                  different morphological features: part of speech, person, number, tense, mood,
                  voice, gender, case and degree). Based predominantly on the guidelines used for
                  the Prague Dependency Treebank, our annotation style is also influenced by the
                  Latin grammar of Pinkster (1990), and is founded
                  on the principles of dependency grammar . Dependency
                  grammars differ from phrase-structure grammars in that they forego non-terminal
                  phrasal categories and link words themselves to their immediate heads. This is an
                  especially appropriate manner of representation for languages with a free word
                  order (such as Latin and Czech), where the linear order of constituents is broken
                  up with elements of other constituents. A dependency grammar representation, for
                  example, of ista meam norit gloria canitiem
                  Propertius I.8.46 — that glory would know my old
                     age — would look like the following:
               
                  Dependency grammar representation of ista meam norit
                        gloria canitiem (that glory would know my old age)
                  
                  Dependency grammar representation of ista meam
                        norit gloria canitiem (that glory would know my old
                     age).
               
               While this treebank is still in its infancy, we can still use it to  train a
                  parser to parse the volumes of unstructured Latin in our collection.  Our treebank
                  is still too small to achieve state-of-the-art results in parsing but we can still
                  induce valuable lexical information from its output by using a large corpus and
                  simple  hypothesis testing techniques to outweigh the noise of the
                  occasional error . The key to improving this
                  parsing accuracy is to increase the size of the annotated treebank: the better the
                  parser, the more accurate the syntactic information we can extract from our
                  corpus.
            
         

            Beyond the lexicon
            These technologies, borrowed from computational linguistics, will give us the
               grounding to create a new kind of lexicon, one that presents information about a
               word’s actual usage. This lexicon resembles its more traditional print counterparts
               in that it is a work designed to be browsed: one looks up an individual headword and
               then reads its lexical entry. The technologies that will build this reference work,
               however, do so by processing a large Greek and Latin textual corpus. The results of
               this automatic processing go far beyond the construction of a single lexicon. 
            I noted earlier that all scholarly dictionaries include a list of citations
               illustrating a word’s exemplary use. As Figure 1 shows,
               each entry in this new, dynamic lexicon ultimately ends with a list of canonical
               citations to fixed passages in the text. These citations are again a natural index to
               a corpus, but since they are based in an electronic medium, they provide the
               foundation for truly advanced methods of textual searching — going beyond a search
               for individual word form (as in typical search engines) to word sense. 
            
               Searching by word sense
               
                  Mock-up of a service to search Latin texts by English word sense
                  
                  Mock-up of a service to search Latin texts by English word
                     sense.
               
               The ability to search a Latin or Greek text by an English translation equivalent
                  is a close approximation to real cross-language information retrieval. Consider
                  scholars researching Roman slavery: they could compare all passages where any
                  number of Latin slave words appear, but this would lead to separate
                  searches for servus, serva, ancilla, famulus, famula, minister, ministra,
                     puer, puella etc. (and all of their inflections), plus many other
                  less-common words. By searching for word sense, however, a scholar can simply
                  search for slave and automatically be presented with all of the
                  passages for which this translation equivalent applies. Figure 7 presents a mock-up of what such a service could look like.
               Searching by word sense also allows us to investigate problems of changing
                  orthography — both across authors and time: as Latin passes through the Middle
                  Ages, for instance, the spelling of words changes dramatically even while meaning
                  remains the same. So, for example, the diphthong ae is often reduced
                  to e, and prevocalic ti is changed to ci.
                  Even within a given time frame, spelling can vary, especially from poetry to
                  prose. By allowing users to search for a sense rather than a specific word form,
                  we can return all passages containing saeculum, saeclum, seculum and
                     seclum — all valid forms for era. Additionally, we
                  can automate this process to discover common words with multiple orthographic
                  variations, and include these in our dynamic lexicon as well.
            
            
               Searching by selectional preference
               The ability to search by a predicate’s selectional preference is also a step
                  toward semantic searching — the ability to search a text based on what it
                     means. In building the lexicon, we automatically assign an argument
                  structure to all of the verbs. Once this structure is in place, it can stay
                  attached to our texts and thereby be searchable in the future, allowing us to
                  search a text for the subjects and direct objects of any verb. Our scholar
                  researching Roman slavery can use this information to search not only for passages
                  where any slave has been freed (i.e., when any Latin variant of the English
                  translation slave is the direct object of the active form of the verb
                     libero), but also who was doing the freeing (who in such instances
                  is the subject of that verb). This is a powerful resource that can give us much
                  more information about a text than simple search engines currently allow.
            
         

            Conclusion
            Manual lexicography has produced fantastic results for Classical languages, but as we
               design a cyberinfrastructure for Classics in the future, our aim must be to build a
               scaffolding that is essentially enabling: it must not only make historical languages
               more accessible on a functional level, but intellectually as well; it must give
               students the resources they need to understand a text while also providing scholars
               the tools to interact with it in whatever ways they see fit. In this a dynamic
               lexicon fills a gap left by traditional reference works. By creating a lexicon
               directly from a corpus of texts and then situating it within that corpus itself, we
               can let the two interact in ways that traditional lexica cannot. 
            Even driven by the scholarship of the past thirty years, however, a dynamic lexicon
               cannot yet compete with the fine sense distinctions that traditional dictionaries
               make, and in this the two works are complementary. Classics, however, is only one
               field among many concerned with the technologies underlying lexicography, and by
               relying on the techniques of other disciplines like computational linguistics and
               computer science, we can count on the future progress of disciplines far outside our
               own. 
         
