Title:  Technology, Collaboration, and Undergraduate Research
Volume:  003
Issue:  1
Date:  26 February 2009
Abstract:  
            In this article, two professors of Classics present their experiences in
               incorporating into their professional activity a model of undergraduate research that
               reflects Ross Scaife’s ideals of collaborative, open scholarship, informed by
               traditional values, and taking advantage of advances in digital humanities
         
Full Body Text: 
Technology, Collaboration, and Undergraduate Research

            Introduction
            We write this essay in memory of our friend and colleague Ross Scaife. Since Classics
               is what we, the authors, know best, and since Ross Scaife’s contribution to Classics
               is incalculable, we are focusing on Classics as a sub-discipline of the humanities.
               We hope that others may find our observations, limited as they necessarily are to our
               own experience, interesting, useful, or provocative.
            To survive and prosper, colleges and universities have to sell themselves to
               prospective students (or at least to prospective parents) as nurturing environments,
               where students and faculty work hand-in-hand, ideally on important-seeming and
               photogenic tasks. When undergraduate research gets pitched on websites,
               mass-mailed DVDs, and glossy brochures, it invariably takes that form of chemical
               glassware or a string quartet. Students and teachers in the field of Classics,
               however, when they appear in such promotional materials, are usually shown in the
               context of advertising an institution’s dedication to teaching, because in the
               context of teaching it is okay to show the middle-aged professor gesturing at
               a blackboard covered with scrawled notes.
            And as Gregory Crane has also described in the introdction to this issue, this
               picture is not a misleading accident of the demands of superficial marketing but is
               too often an accurate reflection of an unfortunate truth.The topic of
                  undergraduate research, and in particular undergraduate research in the
                  humanities, is the topic of enthusiastic study and ongoing publication. For some
                  recent discussions whose scope is perhaps broader than the present subjective
                  account, see, among others: , , , , , , , .
            
            Faculty in Classics have not, in our experience as students and teachers, been very
               interested in fostering the collection of activities that now go under the general
               term undergraduate research. Classics faculty have traditionally claimed to
               inspire the life of the mind, to teach critical and subtle thinking, and to exercise
               students’ intellects through close reading, rigorous philogy, and stimulating
               discussion, and often these claims are entirely justified. But it would be
               disingenuous to assert that the most insightful reading, the parsing of the most
               complex syntax, or the most lively conversation is similar in kind or effect to a
               public performance of Ravel’s String Quartet: II - Assez - Très
                  Rythme, which in the hands of well-trained undergraduates can send shivers
               down the spines of an audience, or similar in kind and effect to undergraduates
               working in a laboratory that is engaged in developing new therapies to cure diseases.
               We can make comparisons, but they are more metaphors than analogues. The ’cellist or
               the biochemist, to choose only two examples, can have an immediate and concrete
               effect on the larger world around them during their undergraduate years, while young
               students of Classics too frequently do not, and can not, at least not without some
               creative thinking on the part of their instructors.
            Undergraduate research in the Classics, as traditionally practiced, is a diluted
               version of professional scholarship in the field as it developed during the second
               half of the 20th century — and as it came to be seen by the turn of the 21st century
               as an absolute touchstone for appropriate professional activity. We teachers send our
               students forth to read scholarship and produce argumentative essays, carefully and
               selectively annotated with citations to primary and secondary sources. Ideally, the
               primary sources served our students as evidence, and the citations to secondary
               sources provided armor against charges of plagiarism. We call this a diluted
               version of professional scholarship for two reasons. A given undergraduate student —
               let’s say that she is taking her first course in Roman History, a survey course in a
               subject of tremendous complexity based on literally centuries of cumulative
               scholarship in multiple disciplines from epigraphy and numismatics to textual
               criticism and literary theory — is unlikely in the course of a semester or quarter to
               be able to develop and advance an idea or interpretation that has never before been
               produced by a professional scholar in the centuries long history of research in
               ancient history. For this reason, no responsible teacher of Classics would insist on
               originality (in this sense of a new and unique idea or interpretation, as opposed to
               an idea or interpretation that is one’s own and expresses one’s personal intellectual
               effort) in papers assigned in an introductory survey. (A professional scholar in the
               field, by contrast, must demonstrate an original thesis, in the sense of an idea or
               interpretation that is not only his or her own but is also new and unique, as the
               first condition of publication.) Taking advantage of the kinds of papers that we can
               responsibly expect our undergraduate students in Classics to write is the subject of
               the first section of this paper, An Audience of More Than One….
            The second way in which undergraduate research in Classics tends to deserve the
               appellation diluted is in its approach to citation of sources. Undergraduates
               cite sources for two reasons: first, because their teacher insisted that they consult
               a certain number of sources, as an exercise in learning to do research, and
               second, to prove that they did not plagiarize any of the sentences that they have
               strung together to form an argument. But citation is not a pre-digital
               anti-plagiarism technology, or at least it should not be in a wholesome intellectual
               environment. Citation is a pre-digital equivalent to the hyperlink, a way of
               continuing an ongoing conversation in print, a pathway back from the author’s current
               words, to previous comments on the topic at hand. This idea, in our experience, is
               often completely unfamiliar to undergraduates, even now that that they are subjected
               to rigorous formal indoctrination against the evils of plagiarism. In the second
               section of this paper, When All the Sources are Online, we explore some
               possibilities for educating our students in a more positive understanding of
               citation, and we will suggest a mode of scholarship that can make plagiarism less of
               a temptation for the student and therefore less of a concern for the teacher. When
               done with insight and method, citation generates the only kind of research that
               carries conviction: research based on a clearly defined data set whose parameters are
               unambiguously described, thus opening the way to complementary and, in the best of
               circumstances truly collaborative, extension of the results.
            The traditional mode of Classical scholarship — deep and wide reading yielding new
               insights which are expressed through rigorous argument — is extremely difficult and
               has in the past not lent itself to collaboration, especially collaboration between
               young scholars and their teachers. But there are modes of humanist scholarship that
               do lend themselves to this collaboration, especially when the environment of
               scholarship is flexible enough to accommodate that collaboration and value it. In the
               third part of this paper, From Each According…, we discuss one
               category of work — collation and indexing of primary-source material — that has a
               long tradition as a respected pursuit in Classics and is appropriate for
               undergraduates. As Gregory Crane asserts in the Introduction, the value of this kind
               of work has multiplied in the face of technologically mediated scholarship, as our
               discipline rebuilds itself from the ground up.
            In the final section of this paper, Shaking the Foundations, we
               describe at least one way in which undergraduate researchers in Classics are now,
               thanks to the mediation of technology, in a position to help re-build the discipline
               of classical philology on a more sound footing, undertaking projects similar to those
               done in earlier centuries by figures who are now hailed as giants of Classical
               scholarship. The late 19th and early 20th centuries saw the publication of
               authoritative editions of the major Greek and Latin authors. This period can be seen
               to have culminated with the publication in 1931 of the editio maior of
                  T. W. Allen’s Homeri Ilias, in three
               volumes, the work of 44 years. Allen’s monumental edition collects in its critical
               apparatus variant readings from dozens of the most important Byzantine and medieval
               manuscripts, and hundreds of papyrus witnesses to the text of the Homeric poem. The
               kind of work that Allen brought forth remains the essential foundation of Classics,
               now and into the future. Nevertheless, his effort necessarily was defined and limited
               by the state of technology in his day. Therefore, to extend and amplify Allen’s
               results, beginning in the winter of 2007, two teams of scholars, university faculty
               supervising undergraduates, undertook to use his work on the Iliad as the basis for an entirely new approach to a critical edition of
               Homeric poetry. In the process, these undergraduate researchers became experts in
               Homeric text-criticism and pushed forward the boundaries of our understanding of that
               field and of the poetry it concerns.
         

            An Audience of More Than One…
            A traditional writing assignment in an undergraduate Classics course is an essay in
               which the student-author argues a thesis with supporting evidence from primary and
               secondary sources. Such assignments are opportunities for teaching students to
               articulate their thoughts and use sources appropriately. Properly understood, an
               essay written for such an assignment constitutes a moment in a conversation, in which
               the student interprets primary sources, understood through the lens of previous
               scholarship, and makes a statement to the teacher and sometimes to fellow students as
               well.
            Responsible teachers judge their students’ essays according to the criteria of
               accuracy, clarity, appropriate scope, and significance. Originality in the sense of
                  something never before thought or expressed in the history of previous
                  scholarship in Classics is generally not a criterion, because few
               undergraduates (and not just they!), however bright, can come up with a new and
               unique thesis concerning Sophocles’ tragedy Oedipus
                  Tyrannos, Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey, the career of Alexander the Great, the end of the
               Roman Republic, or any of the other much-studied and much-discussed topics likely to
               be covered in undergraduate courses in Classics. In the absence of this kind of
               intellectual originality, undergraduate essays are poor candidates for traditional
                  publication.For two recent explorations of challenges and possibilities in
                  undergraduate research and writing, see ; 
               
            
            And secondary scholarship in Classics often presents inappropriate models for
               students. For example, this very interesting article would be of interest to students
               studying Greek or Roman religion: H. S. Versnel, The Festival for Bona Dea and the Thesmophoria
               . But in 25 very closely argued pages, Versnel refers to
               38 works of 20th century scholarship, while including only 16 citations to ancient
               evidence (and these include several citations to the same passage). Are we to assume
               that our knowledge of both the Greek rites of the Thesmophorion and the Roman
               festival of the Bona Dea stands on a mere handful of primary sources? Of course not,
               and the author adds a footnote at the end telling us that the article in Greece &
               Rome is a highly abridged prepublication of a chapter in a then-forthcoming
               book, which refers to the ample evidence
                  and argumentation
               . But as a publication to be read by students
               — and why else publish it? — the author’s choices in abridgment are regrettable; the
               current prepublication emphasizes secondary scholarship over primary sources to an
               overwhelming extent.
            Secondary scholarship in Classics aimed at a general readership is notorious for
               failing to give citations to the actual evidence behind its assertions. Paul
                  Carteledge has written a 29-page chapter on Greek religious festivals that
               spends eight pages talking about the history of the Olympic Games, including a chart
               listing athletic events and in what year they were added to the Olympic festival,
               without ever citing an ancient source for this information (by the way, the source is
               Pausanias 5.8) . Cartledge based his version of
                  the Olympic Register, we suppose, on a century-old article: J. P. Mahaffy,
                     On the Authenticity of the Olympian Register, . This particular problem of history and its sources has
                  been ameliorated by the publication, in 2007 of Paul Christesen, Olympic Victor Lists and Ancient Greek History, . We would argue that non-specialist readers
               are those readers most in need of access to the fundamental sources, if for no other
               reason than that they are least likely to have other, better documented, resources at
               hand.
            This is a problem, but it holds an opportunity. Undergraduate students, even those in
               the earliest stages of their exposure to the ancient world, can undertake the
               too-often ignored task of ascertaining and explaining the primary evidence underlying
               particular questions. A paper entitled What are the ancient sources for the
                  Olympic Register? would be within the ability of almost any student with
               guidance from a teacher and some dedicated librarians, especially one who has had at
               least one semester of Greek. Such an assignment would teach techniques of research,
               would expose the student to various modes of scholarship, and would be relatively
               straightforward to organize and write. The results would be useful and at least as
               worthy of publication as any number of specific arguments about the Olympic Register
               that may certainly stand on a similar list of sources, but which will not bother to
               cite them explicitly for the benefit of curious readers. As a publication, even a
               paper entitled Some ancient sources for the Olympic Register that defined the
               parameters of its data set would have recently been extremely helpful to one of the
               authors of the present paper, since Mahaffy’s 1881 article does not cite sources not
               immediately relevant to his argument (see note 3 above).
            We have experience enlisting undergraduates as authors of scholarship intended for
               true publication, essays intended to be read not as demonstration-pieces limited in
               interest by the context of a particular class but as pieces to inform the public and
               provide a wide audience with accurate and useful insights. The online encyclopedia
                  Dēmos: Classical Athenian Democracy, published by The Stoa, aims to
               bring the sources for our knowledge of Athenian government in the 5th and 4th
               centuries to the eyes of a general readership. For a more lengthy description
                  of this project, see . One of the editorial
               principles of the essays published in Dēmos is that every statement must be
               accompanied by a citation to primary source evidence. There is no claim to exhaustive
               converage of sources for a given statement, but at no point does the reader have to
               take the author’s words for granted. 
            As a further help to readers, Dēmos offers short essays about the evidence it cites.
               Take for example this statement and its cited evidence: 
                  In times of crisis, the Assembly was responsible
                     for voting to mobilize, and the first step seems to have been a vote that the
                     trierarchs (τριήραρχαι) get their ships ready
                     for sea .
                  Dem. 50.4
               
               Dem 50.4 will not convey much to most readers outside the discipline of
               classics or ancient history. Even if the citation is a hyperlink to an online text of
               that passage, as it is in Dēmos, and the reader follows the link, she will see this:
                  On the twenty-fourth day of the month Metageitnion
                  in the archonship of Molon, when an assembly had been held and tidings of many
                  serious events had been brought before you, you voted that the trierarchs (of whom
                  I was one) should launch their ships. It is not necessary for me to go into
                  details regarding the crisis which had at that time befallen the state; you of
                  yourselves know that Tenos had been seized by Alexander, and its people had been
                  reduced to slavery. In order to be an informed critic and analyst of any
               assertion with Dem. 50.4 as its evidence, a reader must have some
               understanding of the context of that passage. So Dēmos includes, beside its
               citations, links to short descriptive essays describing the nature of the sources.
               The one that accompanies this citation describes Demosthenes’ speech against
               Polyclēs; it begins: 
                  (Demosthenes, Against Polycles; see
                     also Oratory) Although this speech comes down to us under the name of
                     Demosthenes, it was almost certainly written by Apollodorus, who was suing
                     Polycles. Apollodorus is trying to recover some expenses that he, Apollodorus,
                     had incurred after his term of duty as trierarch (τριήραρχος), that is, after his service as a private citizen
                     responsible for outfitting a warship for service in the Athenian navy. Polycles
                     was the man who was supposed to take over the trierarchy after Apollodorus.
                     Hershal Pleasant, Demosthenes 50, 
                  
                This essay, which continues for four more paragraphs, was written by an
               undergraduate, a classics major in his third year at Furman University. The research
               involved consisted of his close reading of the speech, with an eye toward explaining
               the argument and the issues at stake. The essay links to another essay on Greek
               Oratory generally, which calls attention to the generic problems with these speeches
               as sources for history. As an assignment for an upper-level seminar on Greek Prose,
               this piece of writing served to focus the student’s reading of the speech, to
               exercise his command of written prose, and to demonstrate to his teacher his
               understanding of the complexities of a dispute over a triearchy. But the product of
               the assignment is a real publication intended to inform a wider audience. While no
               different in kind from any number of papers written by students, this work makes a
               real contribution to knowledge — if not the absolute amount of knowledge in the
               world, then at least the knowledge of a potentially large number of non-professionals
               interested in understanding Athenian democracy. 
            Of course, the example above falls under the much-maligned category of
                  popularizing scholarship, works aimed at bringing a topic to the
               less-informed masses. The malignity with which this kind of writing is often regarded
               in the professional community of Classicists seems to us to arise from the
               (supposedly) lighter demands it places on its authors. But this kind of writing has
               its own exacting demands — a perceptive synthesis, a broad knowledge of the general
               context and primary sources, and clear, concise expression free of jargon — and these
               demands align perfectly with those of most assignments given to undergraduate
               students. Opportunities for having students contribute the fruits of their research
               and writing to public forums abound these days — from Wikipedia, whose articles can
               often profit from educated intervention, to local web-based publications, which can
               be tightly controlled by their professional editors, and easily discoverable by the
               world at large, to ongoing, illustrious, and highly regarded web-based projects in
               collaborative scholarship such as the Suda Online, which has incorporated the work of
               scores of undergraduate translators, in addition to the millions of words of
               translation and commentary by professional scholars. 
            
         

            When All the Sources Are Online
            If teachers of Classics want to assign students research-based topics for their
               written work of the kind mentioned above, as opposed to, say, opinion pieces or
               creative writing, then by the terms of the assignment, the students’ analysis must be
               based on a defined data set of sources (whether primary or secondary or both). To
               complete the assignment, the student of course needs access to the relevant data, and
               therefore the teacher must always pay attention to the availability of sources in
               making such assignments. In today’s world of Classics, there are numerous and
               frequent limitations on the availability of the necessary data, whether primary or
               secondary. In our fields of Classics and ancient history, only a tiny number of
               college and university libraries even approach (and none actually achieves) the ideal
               of possessing and making available to their users the full collection in print form
               of ancient texts and modern scholarship, which is strongly international and
               multi-lingual in scope. The costs of acquiring, storing, and lending books and
               articles are too high and the physical problems of deterioration of printed materials
               too serious for any library to achieve such a goal. For discussions of online
                  sources, undergraduate researchers, history, and historiography, see Hanlon,
                  Christopher. 2005. History on the Cheap: Using the Online
                     Archive to Make Historicists out of Undergrads.
                   Willison, John, and Kerry O’Regan. 2007. Commonly known, commonly not known, totally unknown: a framework
                     for students becoming researchers. 
               
            
            Now, it is certainly not plausible for a college or university library to possess and
               make available anything near the totality of primary and secondary sources in our
               field to serve the needs of teachers in creating research-based assignments in
               Classics, given the limited time and scholarly expertise of undergraduate students.
               But the problem of the limitations on the accessibility of data remains pertinent
               nevertheless. No library, for example, can make available sufficient printed copies
               of even the most commonly available primary texts to allow a significant number of
               students to work on the same assignment individually. The recourse is, of course, to
               ask students to buy copies of books or articles themselves if they are not available
               freely online. This attempted and always partial solution to the problem of the
               limited accessibility of sources is itself becoming increasingly less feasible as the
               cost of books continues to rise and students continually experience severe financial
               pressures from the escalation of the expense of attending college or university in
               general.
            The issue of the accessibility of secondary sources in our field is much more
               pervasive, even if we confine ourselves to modern scholarship in English. Classics
               and ancient history scholars writing in English produce a large number of
               increasingly expensive books (scholarly volumes priced at a hundred dollars or more
               are now common, even the norm). These books are published not just in the United
               States but also in the United Kingdom, Australia, and indeed other non-English
               speaking countries (e.g. Denmark, Holland, and India), and this international
               dispersion of publishing can makes acquiring them a challenge sometimes even for
               those willing to pay the price. The situation regarding scholarly articles is much
               more complicated and expensive still. Scholars in our fields publish in a wide array
               of English-language journals published here and abroad. The costs of journals has
               soared in recent years, and few libraries subscribe to more than a very limited
               subset of those published around the world. Very few journals in our fields are
               available electronically, whether by paid subscription or without charge. Reading
               articles in scholarly journals can require travel to major libraries, use of
               inter-library loan services, or subscription to expensive electronic databases such
               as JSTOR (http://www.jstor.org/). In short,
               access to secondary scholarship is often constrained for reasons that are difficult
               to overcome. For this reason, it is very challenging to make these sources
               consistently available to students, especially in a group setting, for assignments
               that are usually due within relatively short intervals of time.
            The effect of these constraints on the accessibility of source data in our field is
               to limit the number and type of assignments that can be given to our students with
               any reasonable expectation that they will be able to complete the work in the time
               allowed. This fact in turn limits the intellectual goals that we as teachers can set
               for our students. When all the sources are online — the ideal that we envision
               through the use of electronic technology — is an idea that would change all this.
               Whether it will actually turn out to be possible to have absolutely all source data
               online in the future is not the point; rather, the issue is how research-based
               learning for undergraduates in Classics could change if the presently existing
               constraints on source data were eliminated as far as possible by making primary and
               secondary sources accessible to any student who has access to the Internet. 
            The first change would be that teachers would be able to make assignments based
               purely on the intellectual value of the work rather than limit their options to those
               assignments feasible with the limited print resources at hand. Secondly, it would be
               possible to teach students how to treat primary sources truly as primary,
               meaning to ground arguments and statements in the most foundational evidence extant,
               while always defining the parameters of the data set being used. Thirdly, students
               could be taught to examine the evidentiary basis of secondary sources. They would
               learn the crucial difference between secondary sources that fully and clearly ground
               their arguments and statements in primary source material and secondary sources that
               fail to do so. For the former, they could easily access the cited primary sources, so
               as to control the validity of the interpretation of the primary sources in the
               secondary source. Exercising this sort of control effectively would naturally require
               training by experienced teachers who are themselves committed to research-based
               learning, and it would no doubt take time to learn this skill. But at least the
               possibility would exist for students to take this major step toward gaining the
               intellectual power and independence that this approach would support.
            Admittedly, these sorts of assignments would be onerous work for students and
               teachers alike, and it is obviously not practical for everyone to track down every
               primary source for every argument and statement in every case, at least not in
               reasonable amounts of time. But the very possibility of examining primary sources
               because they are all available online would change the intellectual climate of
               undergraduate work. The very effort of examining primary sources and thinking about
               their possible meanings would bring home the reality that scholarship is always
               research, in the sense of finding, identifying, interpreting, and presenting
               evidence. Students could operate as scholars, whether through the process of
               verifying the plausibility of the presentation of evidence by others, or by
               presenting arguments and interpretations that are in one way or another original, in
               all the various senses of that word. In this context, secondary sources that
               concentrated on making clear presentations of primary evidence would become
               especially valuable to students because they would model the behavior for this
               approach.
            When all the sources are online, then we as teachers of Classics can more effectively
               engage our undergraduate students as collaborators in research, whether in the
               collection of, for example, themed primary source collections, or in the
               interpretation of the countless issues in Classics and ancient history that still
               await effective investigation based on careful analysis of well-chosen and clearly
               defined data sets rather than impressionistic assertions. When all the sources are
               online, the way students and teachers do their work together will change
               dramatically, and for the better.
            Another but related point for the near-term future: a concerted and visible effort to
               put all sources online might have a salutary effect on curbing one of the most
               frustrating and careless habits of secondary scholarship in our field, one whose
               unthinking arrogance places onerous and completely unnecessary hurdles in front of
               students and faculty at the great majority of colleges and universities in their
               attempts to pursue research-based learning that emphasizes identifying primary
               sources at the most basic level possible, a research method that requires being able
               to see the full source of a cited excerpt of text so that its context can be
               evaluated. That habit is the practice of listing excerpts from lost (i.e., no
               longer directly preserved) ancient works (so-called fragments) and evidence about
               them or their authors (so-called testimonia) by the arbitrary numbers assigned the
               fragments and testimonia in modern works collecting the preserved remains of such
               lost texts. Giving arbitrary numbers to fragments, such as Fragment 1 of author
                  such-and-such, is tantamount to asserting that the fragments are somehow
               free-standing textual entities, when in fact they are for the great majority of cases
               simply quotations or paraphrases from other, still extant texts. (We leave aside
               fragments that are indeed fragmentary pieces, found in a partially preserved papyrus
               or in an inscription.)
            In truth, of course, the work to which a fragment originally belonged simply no
               longer exists. It is well and truly lost, unless by some near-miracle a previously
               unknown copy turns up in a manuscript buried in a library or recovered from a papyrus
               found in an archaeological excavation. A fragment of an ancient historian or
               comedian, for example, that is embedded in, say, the text of Athenaeus’
               extant work Sophists at Dinner is in reality only part of Athenaeus,
               not a free-standing text. Assigning a number to this excerpt in a modern collection
               of fragments does not alter that basic fact. To study the fragment in the spirit of
               research-based inquiry that we envision, it is always necessary to consider this bit
               of text in the context in the larger text of which it is a part. This being the case,
               it is astonishing and distressing that modern secondary scholarship in Classics still
               tends to refer to fragments only by their arbitrarily assigned fragment numbers and
               often neglects to give in addition the reference to the text to which the fragment in
               fact belongs, to the true source of the fragment. This habit makes it difficult to
               track down the true location of a fragment unless one is in the exceedingly fortunate
               position of personally owning or having immediate access through a major library to
               the modern collections of fragments in which the actual sources of the fragments are
               ultimately revealed.
            In scholarship on Greek ancient history, to describe the situation in our particular
               specialty, it remains standard practice to cite fragments from the works of lost
               ancient Greek historians by the numbers assigned to the fragments by Felix Jacoby in
               his monumental collection of the remains of fragmentary ancient Greek
                  historians,
               Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker
               . Therefore, a student or researcher reading a work of
               modern scholarship on an ancient Greek historical topic is extremely likely to
               encounter a reference to this collection
            Suppose, for instance, that a student in a course on freedom and tyranny in ancient
               Greece becomes interested in the colorful and controversial career of Dionysius I,
               the (in ancient Greek terminology) tyrant of Syracuse in Sicily in the
               classical era. There is controversy over his career concerning just how (in modern
               terms) tyrannical Dionysius I really was. To learn more in order to address
               the question of the nature of the rule of Dionysius I and having been in this case
               warned away from Wikipedia by her solicitous instructor, our enterprising student
               begins her inquiry by looking up his name in the standard one-volume print
               encyclopedia on ancient Greece and Rome commonly recommended by teachers and found in
               nearly every library in the land, the third edition of the Oxford Classical Dictionary
               . The student reads to the very end of the article on
               Dionysius I because her teacher has impressed on her the crucial need to try to find
               the sources on which encyclopedia articles are based. There, on p. 1526, the student
               finds a reference to *Timaeus (2) as a source for the career of the alleged
               tyrant. Being admirably industrious, the student is aware that the asterisk indicates
               a cross-reference to another article in the encyclopedia. Turning to the article on
               Timaeus (pp. 1526-1527), our researcher discovers that Timaeus was the most important western Greek
                  historian and that being a
                  conservative aristocrat, [Timaeus in his work Sicilian History] distorted not only
                  the historical picture of Agathocles [another tyrant], who had exiled him (fr.
                  124), but also of other tyrants, e.g. *Hieron (1) I and Dionysius I (frs. 29,
                  105). The article has nowhere explicitly said that Timaeus’ Sicilian History is a lost work, but our attentive student
               deduced this melancholy fact from the earlier comment in the article that Timaeus’
               history is known through 164 fragments, the
                  extensive use of it made by *Diodorus (3) (4-21 for the Sicilian passages), and
                  *Polybius (1)’s criticism in book 12.
            
            Where, then, the inquiring mind of our researcher wants to know, are the fragments to
               be found? Because her teacher has told her about the situation concerning the
               publication of fragmentary ancient Greek historians, she realizes that the notation 
                  FGrH 566
                at the beginning of the bibliography is the key to the mystery of the locations
               of the fragments. The fragment numbers cited in the article, she realizes, refer to
               Jacoby’s massive collection. If to verify the accuracy of the encyclopedia article
               she wants to know what Timaeus actually said in allegedly distorting the picture of
               Dionysius I, all she has to do is to read fragments nos. 29 and 105 under historian
               no. 566 in FGrH. The problem is that her library does
               not own a copy of this multi-volume reference work. Why they don’t own it is easy to
               understand: a quick glance at the web site of its publisher reveals that an
               institutional license for the CD-ROM version costs US$3,159.00.
            If she did by chance have access to FGrH, she could
               easily find out that Timaeus fr. 29 is actually a scholion (a later scholarly
               comment) on the tenth chapter of the second oration extant from the stylus of the
               fourth-century BCE Athenian politician Aeschines, while Timaeus fr. 105
               is from the second-century CE essayist and biographer Plutarch, in the collection of
               his essays known as the Moralia, at a location (717C)
               easily found through the canonical reference system applied to this collection.
               Finding a text of the scholion would remain challenging, as these scholarly comments
               are themselves available in hard-to-find scarce print editions. Finding the Plutarch
               passage would be relatively easy, however, as the Moralia are available in the commonly available and affordable Loeb
               Library (which conveniently includes an English translation along with the Greek
               original). Being able to find only one of the two primary sources that she needs
               might be frustrating to our motivated researcher, but it is a considerable
               improvement over not even knowing what the relevant primary sources are, which is the
               case when one is confronted with references such as 
                  FGrH 566 frs. 29 and 105.
            
            At the very least, scholars who subscribe to the value of the ideal of When all
                  the source are online would, we hope, never fail to cite the underlying
               primary source when they need to refer to a fragmentary text. To choose as an example
               a citation from a book written by one of our organizers, this is the way citation of
               fragmentary ancient Greek authors should be done: According to Ion of Chios (FGrH
                  392 fr. 14 = Plut. Kimon 16.8), Kimon inspired the
                     Athenians most of all by calling upon them neither to leave Hellas lame nor to
                     stand by and watch their own city lose its yoke-fellow
               
               . Thanks to this form of citation, in which the
               underlying primary source of a fragment is indicated, readers do not need access to
                  FGrH to learn that they can read the fragment of Ion
               of Chios in an easily found biography by Plutarch.
            When authors fail to cite the primary sources for fragmentary works and a researcher
               has no access to the referenced modern collection of fragments, the only alternative
               for finding the underlying primary source is to try to identify the fragments by
               choosing likely words to search for in the Thesaurus Linguae
                  Graecae database, which is a cumbersome and non-comprehensive option, even
               assuming that the researcher has access to the not-inexpensive TLG. If in all scholarly publications authors took the trouble of listing
               all primary sources for all fragments, in the spirit of When all sources are
                  online, then students and faculty, regardless of the state of their library,
               would have a much better chance of pursuing research-based study of fragments in
               which they were interested. Why? Because it is much more likely that their libraries
               would own copies of the basic texts from which many of the fragments come than that
               they would own extremely costly modern collections of fragments such as FGrH, or, to give another example lest it appear that FGrH is an outlier in price, the collection of fragmentary
               ancient Greek comedies, Poetae Comici Graeci, which
               costs US$2699.20.
            To conclude this section: a well-publicized effort to reach the time when all
                  sources are online might, to be blunt, help shame scholars into doing their
               utmost to include primary source citation to the greatest degree possible in all
               their works, whether in the publication itself or in some complementary medium, as,
               for example, on a web site meant to accompany the main publication (in the spirit of
               the supplementary special features frequently added to films on DVDs these
               days). With the ideal of when all sources are online as an inspiration, we
               might then hope to avoid situations such as the one in which a recently published
               book in our field was slammed in a review for its almost total failure to cite
               primary sources, thereby preventing the reviewer — and future readers, if there are
               any — from investigating its evidentiary validity (BMCR 2007.09.52). When all
                  sources are online can and should be a rallying cry of the kind that the
               founders of Perseus used twenty years ago when trying to garner external support for
               work that our discipline at that time condemned and ridiculed: Democratize access
                  to information! That is the goal of always thinking, When all the sources
                  are online.
            
         

            From Each According…
             Between 1889 and 1907, the Homeric scholar and editor T. W. Allen published a series
               of articles, each of which amounted to a list of Homeric manuscripts that he had
               found and identified in the various libraries of Italy: 
                  T. W. Allen, Notes upon Greek Manuscripts in Italian
                        Libraries,
                     The Classical Review 3, no. 1/2 (February 1889):
                     12-22.
                  T. W. Allen, Notes on Greek Mss. in Italian
                        Libraries,
                     The Classical Review 3, no. 6 (June 1889):
                     252-256.
                  T. W. Allen, Notes on Greek MSS. in Italian Libraries
                        (Continued),
                     The Classical Review 3, no. 8 (October 1889):
                     345-352.
                  T. W. Allen, Notes on Greek MSS. in Italian Libraries
                        (Continued),
                     The Classical Review 4, no. 3 (March 1890):
                     103-105.
                  T. W. Allen, Manuscripts of the Iliad in Rome,
                     The Classical Review 4, no. 7 (July 1890):
                     289-293.
                  T. W. Allen, Recent Italian Catalogues of Greek
                        MSS,
                     The Classical Review 10, no. 5 (June 1896):
                     234-237.
                  T. W. Allen, Aristarchus and the Modern Vulgate of
                        Homer,
                     The Classical Review 13, no. 9 (December 1899):
                     429-432.
                  T. W. Allen, New Homeric Papyri,
                     The Classical Review 14, no. 1 (February 1900):
                     14-18.
                  T. W. Allen, Characteristics of the Homeric
                        Vulgate,
                     The Classical Review 16, no. 1 (February 1902):
                     1-3.
                  T. W. Allen, New Homeric Papyri,
                     The Classical Review 18, no. 3 (April 1904):
                     147-150.
                  T. W. Allen, The Greek MSS. in the Ambrosian
                        Library,
                     The Classical Review 21, no. 3 (May 1907):
                     83-85
               
            
            This impressive list of publications from a most eminent scholar should alone be
               enough to justify the compiled index as a legitimate genre of publication, but there
               is no shortage of other examples, such as the invaluable (and ongoing) publication
               of: 
                  John F. Oates, Roger S. Bagnall, Sarah J.
                     Clackson, Alexandra A. O'Brien, Joshua D. Sosin, Terry G. Wilfong, and Klaas A.
                     Worp, Checklist of Greek, Latin, Demotic and Coptic
                        Papyri, Ostraca and Tablets
                  
                  
                Lists and indices are valuable contributions to scholarship, more valuable
               perhaps than many tightly woven arguments on matters of interpretation. As more
               resources become more widely available through open-access publication, and as
               end-use software applications become increasingly able to draw their data from
               diverse and distributed sources, lists and indices will play an ever more central
               role in the universe of knowledge. 
            This is a genre to which undergraduate researchers can easily contribute. All they
               need is guidance and access. Guidance should take the form of a professional scholar
               and teacher describing a need, since this is something an undergraduate will not be
               likely to identify alone. Access can come in many forms, from the more romantic and
               exotic, such as Allen’s decade-long sojourn among Italian libraries at the end of the
               19th century, to the more mundane, such as Oates, et
               al., combing journals and monograph series for newly published papyri and
               ostraka. We are certainly not alone in advocating in finding fruitful areas for
                  collaboration between students and faculty in the area of undergraduate research
                  in humanist areas: , ,
                     , .
            
            In the summer of 2007, as the team from the Biblioteca Nationale Marciana in Venice,
               the Center for Hellenic Studies in Washington, DC, and the British Library brought
               home new, high-resolution digital images of three Homeric manuscripts from the
               Library of St. Mark, a student in his third year of Greek at Furman University
               volunteered to produce indices based on this new access to these manuscripts. One of
               them, the Venetus A [Marcianus Graecus Z. 454 (= 822)] was already well documented;
               the other two, the Venetus B, much less so. Marcianus Graecus Z. 453 (= 821)]
                  and what T.W. Allen identified in his edition of the Iliad as U4 [Marcianus Graecus Z. 458 (= 841). James Lanier
               produced six indices, two for each manuscript. For each, one index consisted of a
               series of rows, each with two cells. One cell contained a citation to the line of the
                  Iliad, written as a CTS URN CTS URN: A
                     Canonical Text Services Universal Resource Name, a concise method of
                     identifying with precision a particular passage of a particular text; see
                  chs75.harvard.edu/diginc; the other column listed the manuscript’s id, the
               folio, and side: 
                  
                     urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:1.17 msA-12r
                     urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:1.18 msA-12r
                  
                The other index associated folio-sides of each manuscript with an image of
               that folio; so for Venetus A, folio 12 recto, there are four images, the full page in
               natural light and ultraviolet light, and two details: 
                  
                     VA012RN-0013 msA-12r
                     VA012RND-0892 msA-12r
                     VA012RUV-0893 msA-12r
                     VA012RUVD-0894 msA-12r
                  
                These indices not only contribute to the online publication of these images
                  (http://​chs.harvard.edu/​chs/​manuscript_images), but serve a variety of
               other scholarly purposes as well; for instance, from them, we can determine at which
               points the scribe skipped lines when moving from one folio to another [for example,
               on the Venetus B, Marcianus Graecus Z. 453 (=821), folio 140 recto ends with Iliad 10.530 and 140 verso begins with 10.532]. From here,
               it is not difficult to imagine countless other rigorous and challenging tasks,
               requiring knowledge of Greek but within the capabilities of smart undergraduate
               students, that might promote and enhance scholarship on these images. An index
               associating regions of each image to discrete passage of text — where, on a given
               image, can we find the notes to a particular line of the poem? On which folios, and
               where on the images thereof, are there diagrams? 
            Projects like this can promote a healthy collaboration between students and their
               teachers, and can be rewarding and exciting to students in direct proportion to the
               extent to which the value of such work is celebrated. If all scholarship is expected
               to take the form of an argument, then an accomplishment like Lanier’s becomes menial
               (but terribly difficult and time-consuming) drudgery. Seen in the context of
               traditionally honored work such as Allen’s catalogues of Homeric manuscripts in
               Italian libraries, and acknowledged as a vital contribution to the future of the
               discipline, projects like this can be thrilling.
         

            Shaking the Foundations
            The introductory page of the Homer Multitext Library site (http://chs.harvard.edu) describes the
               project thus: The Homer
                  Multitext project, the first of its kind in Homeric studies, seeks to present the
                  textual transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey in a historical framework. Such a framework is
                  needed to account for the full reality of a complex medium of oral performance
                  that underwent many changes over a long period of time. These changes, as
                  reflected in the many texts of Homer, need to be understood in their many
                  different historical contexts. The Homer Multitext provides ways to view these
                  contexts both synchronically and diachronically. The Homer Multitext
               Library (hereafer, HMT), in its fundamental set of data, stands one hundred and fifty
               years of philological scholarship on its head: While enormous effort on the part of
               classical philologists has been spent comparing manuscript variants in an
               effort to describe an original text, the HMT seeks out different texts of the
               Homeric poems and seeks to preserve, highlight, and understand their very points of
               difference.
            The scholarly background and philosophical foundation of the HMT is treated
                  elsewhere.See http://chs.harvard.edu, and the chapter in . We are interested in discussing one portion of the work of building
               this library. In 2006, Professor Case Dué of the University of Houston, one of the
               editors of the HMT, secured a grant to pay undergraduate research assistants to push
               forward work on the project. Dué secured the collaboration of colleagues at the
               College of the Holy Cross and Furman University, and set two teams of undergraduates
               to work on the texts of the Homeric Iliad.
            These undergraduates, the HMT Fellows, were assigned the task of preparing
               transcripts of the specific texts of five Byzantine and medieval manuscripts of the
                  Iliad. According to Allen’s sigla, these are: 
                  A (= Venetus 454, 10th c.)
                  B (= Venetus 453, 11th c.)
                  T (= British Museum, Burney 86, ad 1059)
                  E3 (= Escorialensis 291, 11th c.)
                  E4 (= Escorialensis 509, 11th c.)
                Since it was utterly impossible for the HMT Fellows to work from autopsy of
               the manuscripts themselves, they secured the so-called Editio Maior
                  (Greater Edition) of T.W. Allen’s Homeri
               Ilias.  This three volume critical edition of the
                  Iliad, in its critical apparatus, notes all
               significant manuscript variants, albeit in a highly compressed format. 
            The HMT Fellows divided the books of the Iliad between
               the two teams, and set to work. At Furman University, the students photocopied
               Allen’s edition and put the photocopies into a 3-ringed binder; they then interleaved
               each page of Allen with a lined page for notes. They then began with a close reading
               of Allen’s apparatus, looking for sigla referring to variants in any of the five
               manuscripts with which they were concerned. These references, when they found them,
               they marked using colored highlighting pens: pink for B, yellow for T, green for E3,
               blue for E4, orange for A.
            Where they found references in the apparatus the noted places where the text of a
               certain manuscript differs from Allen’s edited text, they noted the difference on the
               page of notes. The matter was not always straightforward. Allen’s apparatus will
               sometimes report a variant reading as being vulg., for vulgate, or as
               appearing in codd., for the (Byzantine and medieval) codices. Variants
               may appear as corrected text on a manuscript, and be recorded by Allen as B
                  corr.. The HMT Fellows had to master this cryptic discourse.
            The apparatus is compressed, and the compression is lossy at times. For
               example, for Book 1, line 93, Allen’s apparatus reads, in part, as follows: 93 ... οὔτὰρ A:
                     οὔτ’ ἄρ’ (ἂρ) vulg. In other words,
               Manuscript A has οὔτὰρ, while the medieval
                  vulgate has either οὐτ’ ἄρ’ or οὔτ’ ἂρ. Allen has lumped together a whole category of
               manuscripts, without differentiating which have οὐτ’
                  ἄρ’ and which have οὔτ’ ἂρ, because he
               does not think the difference is significant enough to preserve, given the economic
               realities he faced. But anyone interested in a serious study of variant texts among
               Byzantine and medieval manuscripts might well be very interested in where we see an
               acute accent and an apostrophe, and where we see a grave accent and no apostrophe.
               That data is lost, as far as we readers are concerned, although T.W. Allen had that
               information at his disposal. 
            So the HMT Fellows have been careful to characterize their work as producing
               facsimiles of A, B, T, E3, and E4 according to the apparatus of Allen’s editio maior.
               Their transcriptions will necessarily fall short of capturing perfectly the texts of
               the manuscripts, but should nevertheless serve well as the basis for initial
               comparisons, and as drafts for further revision, as future scholars gain access to
               the manuscripts or good images of them.
            Having marked the variants in the apparatus and written them down on the facing pages
               of notes, the HMT fellows entered those changes into their working-copies of the
                  Iliad. They began with five identical electronic
               texts of the Iliad, the text of Allen’s edition, taken
               from the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae and edited with a
               bare subset of the Text Encoding Initiative’s document type definition.  The Fellows edited each of these according to the
               variants found in Allen’s apparatus for one manuscript. Where the text of a
               manuscript was simply different from Allen’s, they made the change in that
               manuscript’s XML file with no comment or further markup. Where Allen noted correcting
               hands or other editorial intervention in the original manuscript, the Fellows added
               the text and markup, following the EpiDoc guidelines wherever possible . 
            We will present one example of their work, which should serve both to illustrate the
               importance of this approach to the Homeric texts and to highlight the depth and rigor
               of the scholarly contribution that these undergraduate research fellows are making.
               The example begins with Allen’s apparatus at the entry for Iliad 1.97. At this point in the poem, the seer Calchas is explaining to
               the Greeks why Apollo has afflicted them with a plague. He says that Apollo is angry
               over how the Greek king Agamemnon treated one of Apollo’s priests, specifically, that
               Agamemnon would not return the priest’s captured daughter, even in exchange for a
               generous ransom. Line 97, in Allen’s edited reads: 
                  
                     οὐδ’ ὅ γε πρὶν Δαναοῖσιν ἀεικέα λοιγὸν ἀπώσει
                  
                  [Apollo] will not drive off the loathsome pestilence from the Danaans
                     until…
                In the apparatus, however, we see this long, difficult note:
               97 οὕτως Ἀρίσταρχος· καὶ ἡ
                     Μασσαλιοτικὴ καὶ ἡ Ῥιανοῦ [καὶ σχεδὸν πᾶσαι add. Li T] τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει τρόπον·
                     ἕοικε οὖν ἡ ἑτέρα Ζηνοδότου εἶναι ἡ οὐδ’ ὅ γε πρὶν λοιμοῖο βαρείας χεῖρας
                     ἀφέξει S A T : hanc codd. (λιμοῖο
                  Ca2 O2 P3 Pal(2) R7 U6 Vi1: ἐφἔξει C
                  Vi6) Freed from any constraints of space, we may translate and expand the
               text and note thus:
            
                  [Apollo] will not drive off the loathsome
                     pestilence from the Danaans until… — a marginal note, or scholion, on
                  Manuscript A and another on Manuscript T both have this to say about
                  the line just quoted: The 2nd century BCE scholar Aristarchus has the line this
                  way, as just quoted, and so do both the version of the Iliad from Massalia and the edition made by the 2nd century BCE
                  scholar Rhianus (and almost all the others. This last phrase is added by a note
                  that appears on the manuscript Li and is echoed on the manuscript
                  T). And so it seems that the edition of Zenodotus is the different one,
                  because it has this line: [Apollo] will not lift
                     his heavy hand of plague until…: and this last version is what all the
                  medieval manuscripts have (with a certain number spelling the word for
                     plague differently, and a couple having a slightly different version of
                  the verb).
            In yet other words, there are two utterly different versions of
               this line floating around the ancient and medieval world. Both are Greek; both are
               poetry; both make sense. Marginal notes on various medieval manuscripts are our
               evidence for these two lines – notes that preserve the contents of editions and
               commentaries on Homer that date back to the library at Alexandria. 
            One version appeared, evidently, in the edition of Zenodotus, the earliest
               Alexandrian scholar of Homer, in the 3rd century BCE This same line appears in every
               medieval bound manuscript (that is what the abbreviation codd. means,
                  codices).
            Another version appeared in the editions of Aristarchus of Samothrace, the 2nd
               century BCE librarian of Alexandria who was the greatest ancient scholar of
                  Homer. This version also appeared in the city-edition of the Iliad from the city of Massalia, what is now Marseilles. And
               the edition of Rhianus (2nd century BCE) also contained this line. [Note: the actual
               scholion says, 
                  Δαναοῖσιν ἀεικέα λοιγὸν ἀπώσει.
               
               οὕως αἱ Ἀριστάρχου. The plural definite article
                  αἱ suggests that the two editions
                  (αἱ ἐκδόσεις) compiled by Aristarchus included
               this reading.]
            So, the 3rd century BCE editor of Homer and all the medieval manuscript witnesses say
               X, while two 2nd century BCE editors and a city edition say Y.
            Allen picks Y, relegating X to the rhetorical basement of his apparatus. The
               Homer Multitext Fellows were faced with no such choice. They restored the
               proper text into its place on each of the manuscripts they are transcribing; the
               scholiastic texts, which preserve the other valuable reading, will be transcribed
               independently, with comparison of this horizontal variant made accessible by
               means of end-user applications that draw on all of this data.
            The editors of the HMT are, of course, deeply interested in the precise contents of
               the ekdoseis, or editions, of Aristarchus, but they are specifically
               interested in how that scholar’s editions differ from the medieval vulgate, since
               such a drift of the language of the poem over a millennium supports the notion
               of an ongoing tradition of multiformity. T.W. Allen’s choice — a choice determined by
               the conventions of the traditional critical edition — obscures that difference. So,
               in their XML transcriptions of medieval manuscripts, the work of the HMT Fellows will
               highlight a problem in the history of the Homeric text, thus contributing a point of
               conversation and analysis to the ongoing study of the Iliad.
            The work of assembling transcriptions from Allen’s apparatus is a valuable start to
               reproducing specific manuscripts as XML files. The next step would be to remove the
               need to have Allen mediate between our research and its objects. After May of 2007,
               the HMT Fellows had access to preliminary versions of digital images of the A and B
               manuscripts, taken at the Biblioteca Nationale Mariciana. These they found helpful in
               decyphering some of Allen’s more cryptic notations regarding those manuscripts. And
               they found some places where Allen’s apparatus was not entirely precise. For example,
               at 11.525, Allen’s text reads: 
                  
                     Τρῶες ὀρίνονται ἐπιμὶξ ἵπποι τε καὶ αὐτοί.
                  The Trojans were driven in confusion, both their horses and themselves.
              Allen’s apparatus notes that Manuscript A has αὐτοί in ras., that is, written over an erasure; other texts, according
               to the apparatus, have both the horses and men (καὶ
                  ἄνδρες), or both the
                  horses and others (καὶ ἄλλοι). This
               notice in ras. moved the HMT fellows to look at the image of folio 147-verso
               of the Venetus A. Here they saw that the words τε καὶ
                  αὐτοί, and themselves were indeed written over the erasure, but
               that the erasure was in fact almost three times as long as that phrase, far longer
               than necessary if the erased text were either of the alternative texts given in
               Allen’s apparatus. Allen, too, had noted only the last word, αὐτοί, as having been written over the erasure, which was clearly not
               the case. So whatever Manuscript A originally had, it replaced τε καὶ αὐτοί and contained many more letters than that
               phrase. Our undergraduate researchers noted that fact and recorded it in their XML
               transcription. This information, now discoverable and machine-readable, will be new
               information to anyone who has relied on the century-old Comparetti Facsimile of the
               manuscript, which, as T.W. Allen says, imperfectly renders erasures and corrections.
               , 
            
            The task of reading and transcribing the texts of specific manuscripts is skilled
               work, but easily within the abilities of good, advanced students of Greek, once they
               have some familiarity with the language of Homeric poetry, and have access to some
               reference materials on Byzantine palaeography. That this work is valuable scholarship
               needs little argument, and certainly is not limited to advocates for any particular
               school of interpretation, or to devotees of technological innovation in humanities.
               T.W. Allen, in the closing paragraph of his editio maior of the Iliad, that most imposing monument of traditional
               scholarship, unintentionally presents an argument for a project precisely like that
               of the Homer Multitext Fellows. He has listed a number of categories of textual
               phenomena that he has intentionally ignored in compiling his apparatus criticus;
               these include things like mute iota, νυ
               ephelcysticon (that is, the letter n added to the end of a word
               for the sake of euphony), accented versus unaccented τε and ῥα, and questions of
               accentuation on words such as ἄρ, ἐμε, μιν, νυ, οἱ, τιν’,
                  τις, μευ, σευ, θην, πως, που, πη, accentuation on Aeolisms
               καγ, καδ, κακ, and καμ, and accentuation on the various forms of the verbs εἰμί and φημί. . He explains these omissions thus: 
                  Various reasons made these omissions
                     necessary: to lighten the apparatus, which would have swelled to almost
                     unprintable proportions; the fact that the collations, though considerable,
                     were not exhaustive and therefore did not admit of statistical conclusions; and
                     that the phenomena belong to the history of medieval Greek accentuation and the
                     usage of Byzantine scribes rather than to the Homeric texts. On these subjects
                     further I have paid little attention to the evidence of quotations, whether in
                     scholia, which being divorced from their context are peculiarly at the mercy of
                     copyists, or of authors, especially in the older editions where the editors may
                     be suspected of adding conventional prosody. 
                  
                Allen limited his apparatus due to the constraints of the printed text, lest
               it become unprintable. His scholarship was further limited by the fact that he
               was its sole author; he could not do exhaustive collation (by himself), and had to
               rely on secondary scholarship (earlier editions) for manuscripts that he did not
               collate himself. Allen’s apparatus is, therefore, represents a
               least-common-denominator, limited by the most careless of the earlier editors on
               whose work he relied. He admits that the omitted information would be the subject for
               statistical analysis, were it collected in a systematic way. But his most regrettable
               criterion for omission is that of interest — he excluded material that he
               deemed of interest only for Byzantine palaeography and bibliography, and of interest
               only to scholars of medieval Greek accentuation. 
            A humanist scholarship that is unwilling to divide itself along strict (but strictly
               arbitrary) lines — where the Homeric text of a manuscript is somehow divorced
               from questions of the usage of Byzantine scribes and the history of
                  medieval Greek accentuation — should take note of Allen’s list of obstacles
               and work to overcome them. The answer, we think, is clear: model of collaborative
               research, the products of which are electronic texts (not required to be
                  printable) in transcription (rather than collation), involving scholars who
               may be senior professors or juniors at a liberal arts college, working with
               high-quality images of the primary texts, the papyri, the Byzantine and medieval
               manuscripts.
            The rewards of such work are manifold. The results would be subject to statistical
               analysis, and any other kind of analysis that interested readers might envision, even
               if they are asking questions that have never occurred to the editors of these
               electronic texts. The undergraduate members of such a team have the experience of
               engaging without mediation the very stuff of philology, the most ancient witnesses to
               a literary tradition; the task is within their abilities while being extremely
               challenging, and they know that they are doing real work of real value, not merely
               exercising an arbitrary set of skills before the judging eyes of a single teacher.
               The faculty of Furman University and the College of the Holy Cross who have worked
               with the Homer Multitext Fellows as they meticulously transcribe these texts and
               explore the problems that those texts reveal have witnessed a degree of dedication
               and excitement that turns the glowing rhetoric of undergraduate research from a
               marketing pitch to an honest appraisal.
         

            Conclusion
            Because technology has lowered the economic barriers to academic publishing — a
               reality that too few publishing Classicists have fully understood — it is easy to
               guide student - writers into becoming student-authors. We who teach Classics can add
               to our pedagogy the technological tools of the information economy, thus arming
               ourselves against charges of impracticality and at the same time possibly attracting
               students whose interests lie outside the Classics. And as digital libraries begin to
               inter-operate, they breathe new life into largely disregarded scholarly genres and
               invent entirely new ones — geographic information systems, computational linguistics,
               and so forth. We have presented some very specific examples of the kind of work, and
               the kind of thinking, that we have found to be fruitful in encouraging undergraduates
               in their research. We believe in scholarship; we believe that scholarship should be
               rigorous; we believe that scholarship demands precision and dedication; but we also
               believe that scholarship can assume many useful forms, and we are convinced that
               scholarship, if done properly, should not seem like the kind of burdensome task the
               ancient Greeks called a ponos. In the community of professional
               scholars, each must find for her- or himself the motivations for doing the reading,
               thinking, and typing necessary to produce an article, a monograph, an edition. But
               our students have not yet made any such commitment, and many of them never will,
               preferring to find their lives outside of the academy. But even to those students,
               and perhaps especially to them, we have an obligation, to help them experience
               scholarship that is not a ponos. It is our experience that the closer we
               can bring our students to the real sources of knowledge — the ancient texts, the
               archaeological remains, the papyri and parchment — and the real reward of scholarship
               — the joy of producing a piece of work that one knows will be discovered and read
               with interest and pleasure by people we may never meet — the closer we can bring
               students to the experience of being true scholars, working beside other scholars, the
               more enthusiasm we find. Rather than students writing five-paragraph essays under
               constant suspicion of plagiarism in order to win the dubious prize of a high grade
               among already inflated grades, we prefer to see a student reading a speech in Greek
               and summarizing it for a non-Greek-reading audience, a student compiling perhaps for
               the first time the primary source texts for a problem in ancient history, a student
               paging through an 11th century manuscript and noting the text that appears on each
               folio, a student correcting the text-criticism of one of the great classicists of the
               20th century. Seeing these makes our teaching, like our scholarship, seem less a
                  ponos and more a joy.
         
