Title:  It’s For Sale, So It Must Be Finished: Digital Projects in the Scholarly
               Publishing World
Volume:  003
Issue:  2
Date:  18 June 2009
Abstract:  
            Since the early 1990s, theorizing in the digital humanities has often celebrated
               open-endedness and incompletion as inherent qualities of digital work. But a
               scholarly publisher undertaking preparation and sale of digital objects cannot
               altogether dispense with traditional notions of deadlines and completion if those
               publications are to enter the dual marketplaces of peer review and institutional
               purchase. The Electronic Imprint of the University of Virginia Press was funded in
               2001 with the goal of bringing born-digital scholarly projects under the aegis of the
               same review and marketing system that applies to books. In this article I describe
               how we defined the criteria for done-ness in creating two very different
               projects, a born-digital edition of Herman Melville’s Typee manuscript and a conversion of the letterpress Papers of George Washington into a digital edition. Our experience
               suggests that it is possible to categorize different genres of digital creations
               based on the extent to which intrinsic criteria for “done-ness” can be applied to
               them, and that decisions about completeness are always subject to extrinsic factors
               as well, such as budgetary constraints and the pressures created by competition and
               the evolution of standards.
         
Full Body Text: 
It's For Sale, So It Must Be Finished: Digital Projects in the Scholarly Publishing
            World

            Some History of Terms
            Viewed from the perspective of someone who works for a university press, the
               semantics of the term done as applied to digital objects is rather curious.
               From our point of view, it's generally a good thing for a scholarly publication to be
                  done: review copies can be sent out, books can be shipped to distributors,
               and budgets perhaps even met. Traditional publication in the scholarly publishing
               world has always meant the implicit guarantee that a work is the end product of a
               rigorous process of peer review, revision, copyediting, design, and proofreading
               shared institutionally by author, press boards, outside scholars, and in-house staff.
               When a book or journal issue is done it is a source of pride and satisfaction
               for everyone concerned.
            The case seems to be different with digital objects. The claim that a digital project
               or publication is done may be met with suspicion. What do you mean, your
               Web-thing is finished? Since it's nonlinear, how do you know where it starts or ends?
               Won't there always be more features or links you can add? If your Web-thing is so
               much like an old-fashioned codex book that you can call it done, does it
               really belong online in the first place? This suspicion has a history. Theoretical
               discussion of projects in the digital humanities has, since the 1990s, suffered from
               semantic slippage between two related but nonidentical pairs of contradictory terms:
               on the one hand, open versus closed; on the other hand, complete
               versus incomplete (or unfinished versus done, etc.). The
               tendency has been to merge these two sets into a single pair, then to valorize the
               first pair of terms and to demonize the second.
            One of the more polished articles on Wikipedia these days, ironically, is on the
               topic Unfinished Work; it discusses incomplete works in
               various domains from literature and music through architecture to software. On the
               article's discussion page, the first thing we find is some amused perplexity about
               the label's applicability to the very source it appears in :
            
               
               
               Screen shot of the quoted discussion from Wikipedia
            
            It is a familiar conundrum about the nature of digital texts. Obviously, a formally
               defined text like a sonnet can be recognized as complete or incomplete; it's the
               difference between a well-wrought urn and a pot whose clay is still wet. But can a
               nonlinear, extensible, text ever be said to be finished? Is it by definition
               unfinished, or is the opposition finished/unfinished just plain inapplicable
               to open-ended texts?
            These are theoretical questions I'm not in a position to answer, but I would submit
               that early in the 1990s the postmodern admiration of the open-ended at the
               expense of the closed somehow got turned into a celebration of the
                  unfinished and a suspicion of the done, and that this transmutation
               may have been one of the things that delayed the entrance of digital scholarship into
               the traditional system of peer-reviewed academic publication.
            Consider these assertions from George Landow and Paul Delany's 1991 essay Hypertext, Hypermedia and Literary Studies: The State of the
                  Art: 
                  Particularly inapplicable [to hypertext]
                     are the notions of textual completion and of a finished product.
                     Hypertext materials are by definition open-ended, expandable, and incomplete.
                     If one put a work conventionally considered complete, such as the Encyclopedia Britannica, into a hypertext format, it
                     would immediately become incomplete.
                  
                  
                A clever reader might object that even in print the Encyclopedia Britannica is always incomplete: like any reference work, it
               is constantly being updated and reissued. So when Landow revises this particular
               passage for his 1992 book Hypertext, he makes the claim even more
               radical by making a single change to the second sentence to replace the encyclopedia
               with a work of literature: 
                  Hypertextual materials, which by
                     definition are open-ended, expandable, and incomplete call such notions into
                     question. If one put a work conventionally considered complete, such as Ulysses, into a hypertext format, it would immediately
                     become incomplete.
                  
                  
                Landow is now claiming that even a recognizably closed, well-wrought modernist
               text becomes both open and unfinished when put online. And he ends his 1992
               discussion of completion by citing Derrida to the effect that a form of textuality that goes beyond print forces us to
                     extend...the dominant notion of a text
                  , so that it 
                  is henceforth no longer a finished
                     corpus of writing, some content enclosed in a book or its margins but a
                     differential network, a fabric of traces referring endlessly to something other
                     than itself, to other differential traces
                  
               .
            Julia Flanders has observed in a memorable phrase that the digital humanities have
               sometimes suffered from 
                  a culture of the perpetual
                     prototype
                  
               , and identified some plausible economic and institutional causes. To them I
               think we can add the theoretical conflation of the digital with
                  différance. After all, what was the postmodern project if not a
               cult of the perpetual prototype?
         

            Rotunda: A Scholarly Digital Imprint
            My organization, the Electronic Imprint of the University of Virginia Press, was
               established in 2001 to test the proposition that instances of digital scholarship
                  can be bounded, completed, and presented for review, sale, and
               academic consumption in much the way journals and monographs had been for decades. We
               were grant funded, with support from the University and the Mellon Foundation awarded
               to a proposal co-written by the Press and John Unsworth, who was then head of the
                  Institute for Advanced
                  Technology (IATH) at Virginia. We became fully staffed in late 2002, and two
               years later released our first publication, a born-digital edition of Dolley
               Madison's correspondence, under our new imprint name of Rotunda. Since then we
               have expanded to a total of seven publications in two separate collections:
               nineteenth-century literature and culture, and the American Founding Era. Our main
               focus for the next few years will be creating fully-featured digital versions of the
               papers of American presidents and other Founding Era figures that began as
               multivolume (and often still ongoing) print editions, joining our Papers of George Washington Digital Edition (PGWDE), which was released in February 2007.
            The underlying data format of all of our Rotunda publications is XML, tagged
               according to the guidelines of the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), plus accompanying
               digitized graphical material. Unlike many other university presses with digital
               projects, we outsource none of our technical work except for graphic Web design; our
               markup specifications, stylesheets for file transformation, and programming for Web
               delivery (mostly coded in XQuery using MarkLogic Server as the back-end platform) are all done in-house by several
               programmers and technical editors.
            Born-digital Rotunda publications go through the same steps that our books go
               through: approval by a Press committee and then the Press Board after reports from
               external reviewers; signing of a contract complete with royalty agreements; sharing
               of review copies (in the form of password access) with librarians and academic
               reviewers. Digital editions such as PGWDE that are based
               on existing print series are produced in close collaboration with the scholarly
               communities (historians and documentary editors) who create and use the letterpress
               volumes. Clearly all parties to our process of publication and sale are implicitly
               agreeing to bracket the theoretical issue of when or whether a digital work is ever
                  done by applying a socioeconomic definition: it is done when the
               Press is prepared to offer it for purchase and customers are prepared to buy it.
            I turn now to two very dissimilar examples of our publications — PGWDE and an edition of Herman Melville's Typee manuscript — and discuss the decisions we made about what we could
               or couldn't include in the finished work; when we counted each as done for
               initial release; and to what extent we consider the published release genuinely
               complete or part of a work still in progress.
         

            Melville's Typee: A Fluid-Text Edition
            
               
                  Typee splash page
               
               Splash page of Rotunda "Typee" edited by John Bryant
            
            John Bryant's edition of a portion of Herman Melville's novel Typee was first envisioned and prototyped years before Rotunda came into
               existence. Bryant has been editing Melville's texts for two decades, and has long
               felt that any critical edition of a text that survives in more than a single version
               needs to be faithful to its evolutionary history; it should be what he calls a
                  fluid-text edition. Because a fluid-text edition needs to capture a dynamic
               process, a computer-based format is a natural fit, and he began imagining one for
               Melville as early as the 1980s (personal communication).
            The textual history of Typee is fairly complicated. The
               only surviving manuscript fragment covers about three chapters of the published
               novel. It contains a multitude of cancellations, erasures, and additions by Melville,
               both in ink from the time of first composition and in pencil from later stages of
               revision and proofreading Figure 3. 
                  Part of a Typee manuscript page, showing
                     Melville's typical deletions and insertions; the circled x above
                     the fourth line is keyed to a separate insertion leaf.
                  
                  Sample manuscript page from Melville's Typee
                We know that Melville made changes in proof before the first English
               edition was issued, and that the first American edition contained still more changes,
               some requested by Melville, others made by the publisher probably without the
               author's assent. Bryant's goal for a digital fluid-text edition was to capture all of
               these stages and to allow the reader to follow the sequence of composition and the
               editor's narrative reconstruction of that sequence, zooming in and out to any point
               in manuscript time and space during the entire period from initial composition
               through the published editions.
            
               Development of the Edition
               Bryant was not himself a programmer or XML specialist, but he did have ideas about
                  what a computer edition might look like, and created detailed storyboards before
                  any actual programming work began. Although these were necessarily static, they
                  used frame- and button-like boxes to suggest how a screen presentation might
                  respond dynamically to reader choices (Figure 4). In
                  1998 he was named an IATH Visting Fellow
                  and received technical assistance to create a first proof-of-concept prototype of
                  the edition , which translated the storyboards into
                  standard HTML frames (Figure 5).
               
                  An early storyboard by John Bryant illustrating a possible interface and
                     layout for the Typee edition
                  
                  One of John Bryant's original storyboards for the Typee edition
               
               
                  A first prototype of the Typee edition produced
                     in 2000 by IATH at the University of Virginia
                  
                  Screen shot of an early prototype of the Typee edition
               
               In late 2003 we received Bryant's manuscript of the edition, consisting of
                  Microsoft Word and PageMaker files containing manuscript transcriptions flagged
                  with hundreds of revision sites and for each separate revision site a
                     revision sequence and a revision narrative. We licensed from the
                  New York Public Library the rights to reproduce their full-color photographs of
                  the entire manuscript. Our goals at this point were (1) to convert all
                  transcription and commentary to TEI-XML, and (2) to design an environment that
                  could deliver combinations of text and image to realize as closely as possible the
                  author's intentions for his edition. Our own finished rendering of the original
                  concept  would look like this: 
               
                  Default view of the Rotunda version of Typee,
                     with a manuscript page image in the top frame and a bitmapped typographic
                     transcription in the lower one (the current state of HTML made browser
                     rendering impractical). Readers can choose to display different combinations of
                     image and transcription state in either frame. JavaScript controls allow upper
                     and lower frames to scroll in unison.
                  
                  Screen shot 1 from Rotunda's Typee edition
               
               
                  The lower frame now shows a textual transcription of the same lines rendered
                     in HTML, where color-coding represents revision sites from different
                     stages of compositional history.
                  
                  Screen shot 2 from Rotunda's Typee edition
               
               
                  Clicking on any highlighted revision site brings up a window containing
                     Bryant's reconstruction of the revision sequence and a narrative explanation of
                     it.
                  
                  Screen shot 3 from Rotunda's Typee edition
               
               Once we had our basic page display working, all that remained was to code a search
                  page and add the editorial introductions before declaring the edition done
                  and releasing it in March 2006.
               Three months later we added an enhancement, our major one to date, an XML-based
                  version of the entire first British edition of the novel, which the University of
                  Virginia Library digitized for us from a copy in their holdings. We created for it
                  a display interface combining a transcription of the text with images (Figure 9).
               
                  The added first British edition includes an XML-based transcription of the
                     text plus optionally viewable page images from the printed text.
                  
                  Screen shot of first British edition page from the Rotunda
                     Typee
               
            
            
               Is Our Typee Done?
               Neither Bryant nor the Press conceived of the Typee
                  edition as an open-ended project. The editor's work was done once he had finished
                  all the manuscript transcription, identification of revision sites, exposition of
                  revision sequences and narratives, and the introductory editorial essay. Our work
                  was done once we had translated the editor's vision into a fully functional
                  edition that coordinated photographic facsimiles with several transcription
                  formats, and that hyperlinked all revision sites with their editorial
                  expansions. The March 2006 edition was lacking one intended feature, the first
                  British edition, owing to extrinsic factors (our library's digitization schedule).
                  Once that was added, Typee was for practical purposes
                  stable and complete.
               Nevertheless, we were aware of the potential for improvements and enhancements,
                  some more immediately practicable than others:
               
                  We could generate RDF metadata files in the format used by the Collex tool
                     created by Jerry McGann and his NINES
                     team. In July 2007 we did this, so that the base view of each manuscript page
                     exists as an indexed object in Collex, along with the editorial introduction
                     and the publication home page.
                  The full-text search needs improvements to return hits on supplied text and
                     to properly handle word tokens containing XML tags (for example:
                        savage<add>ry</add>). The first item is on our
                     to-do list; the second is on hold until our MarkLogic software adds the ability
                     to ignore selected elements for the purpose of word tokenization.In fact
                        we could get around this software limitation by adding TEI tagging to
                        provide the regularized word tokens for indexing, and adjusting our
                        processing code accordingly. The decision not to do so was based on a
                        cost-benefit analysis, feeling that the amount of time it would require
                        outweighed the added utility in the context of this particular
                        publication.
                  
               
               More radically still, it is conceivable that all of our underlying XML markup and
                  presentation might be entirely revised if John Bryant were to incorporate the
                  proposals for temporal encoding in genetic digital editions that Elena Pierazzo
                  has advanced , as both her tagging strategy and
                  theoretical approach vary significantly from his own. A revision of that magnitude
                  would be analogous to issuing a second edition of a book that differs markedly
                  from the original because it has responded to new evidence and/or arguments. All
                  scholarly and scientific publications are potentially imperfect and thus
                     incomplete to the extent that later work can call them into question,
                  but it would be an equivocation to say that they are therefore always unfinished
                  in a formal sense.
            
         

            The Papers of George Washington Digital Edition
            
            
               
                  PGWDE splash page in July 2007
               
               Splash page of Papers of George Washington Digital Edition
            
            The Papers of George Washington Digital Edition
                is a very different project, one initiated in 2004 by
               the Press in collaboration with the editorial staff of the Papers of George Washington (also
               based at the University of Virginia), and partially funded by a grant from Mount
               Vernon. Our mission was to produce an online version of the fifty-two volumes then in
               print of our letterpress Papers of George Washington
               , the authoritative scholarly edition of the documentary
               legacy of the first president. Owing to the size and complexity of the letterpress
               edition, 
                  The size and scope of the project can be illustrated with a few statistics:
                  
                     52 printed volumes (originally published between 1976 and 2004) totalling
                        ca. 30,000 printed pages, rekeyboarded and tagged as TEI-XML
                     ca. 18,500 separate documents from 29,000 original sources (much of
                        Washington's official correspondence survives in multiple drafts and
                        copies)
                     entries from Washington's diaries covering 560 months, with 6800 separate
                        daily entries
                     2930 unique document authors and 1900 unique recipients
                     corpus of ca. 11.5 million words (documents + annotation), with ca.
                        91,000 different word tokens, all indexed for full-text searching
                     separate back-of-the-book indexes from each volume merged into a
                        consolidated index containing over 35,000 main entries and nearly 100,000
                        subentries, with a total of over 400,000 separate page references
                  
                its adaptation to a fully-featured online format offered us as many design
               and programming challenges as a born-digital project like Typee. We needed to establish an appropriate XML schema and encoding
               specifications, decide on what structural and semantic tagging to do and what
               metadata to add, figure out how much regularization of inconsistencies in the
               letterpress edition we could accomplish, and design a Web environment for display,
               navigation, and searching of the edition usable by advanced scholars and beginning
               students alike.
            For the editorial staffs of The Papers of George Washington and UVa Press, the
               criteria for regarding a letterpress volume as complete have been well established
               since the project began in the 1970s: 
                  all known documents from the period covered by the volume are included or
                     referenced
                  all document transcriptions are complete and have been checked for accuracy
                     against manuscript facsimiles
                  all possible identifications of persons have been made and included in the
                     endnotes
                  all other annotation and editorial introductions are written
                  the manuscript has been copyedited
                  page proofs have been checked and used to produce a back-of-the-book
                     index.
                But for us, including the full content of the print edition would not be
               sufficient. We could consider PGWDE
               done only when we had reliably translated textual and scholarly conventions
               into an online format that offered as much (to use the inevitable marketing phrase)
               added value as possible beyond simply being able to access the publication without
               visiting a library.
            
               Goals for the PGWDE
               
               Determining where we could add value to the print edition required a preliminary
                  analysis of what makes a scholarly edition valuable in the first place. In such an
                  edition, the basic textual unit is the single document, always accompanied at a
                  minimum by bibliographical information and usually by editorial annotation, and
                  sometimes by translations, enclosed documents, or other ancillary material.
                  (Diaries and journals are a special case: depending on how chronologically
                  structured they are, the basic textual unit may be the single-day entry, the
                  single-month entry, or a longer narrative.) Besides the original text and
                  editorial material, documents contain metadata, cross-references, abbreviations
                  and other special features that are represented using a variety of editorial and
                  typographical conventions, as highlighted in the facsimile of the original
                  letterpress version of a letter from William Livingston to George Washington
                  (shown below). Beyond the document level, most
                  volumes contain scholarly apparatuses (lists of abbreviations and bibliographic
                  expansions of short-title references), editorial and historical introductions, and
                  a detailed index of all proper names and hundreds of topic categories. The
                  translation of all of these print conventions into their TEI-XML equivalents is
                  what must undergird a digital edition. (Our final XML encoding of the Livingston
                  letter may be seen in the appendix.)
               
                  A page from the Revolutionary War Series of the print edition of The Papers of George Washington. Many, but by no means
                     all, of the features in a documentary edition that need to be captured in the
                     underlying XML representation are typographically distinct; determining the
                     optimal mixture of automated and human tagging is one of the challenges of
                     converting a legacy edition.
                  
                  A sample page from the print edition of PGWDE
               
               Our initial goals for the digital edition were:
               
                  to provide document-by-document display (or, for diaries, month-by-month or
                     day-by-day, as appropriate) closely resembling that of the letterpress
                     source;
                  to offer a wide variety of means for navigating into the documents: through
                     full-text search; through a hyperlinked consolidated index based on the
                     back-of-the-book print indexes; via tables of contents similar to those in the
                     print edition; and by chronology (in order to collect all documents and diary
                     entries for a given date, for example);
                  to use as much tagged information as possible for display, linking, and
                     refinement of searching;
                  to create a genuinely new edition incorporating corrections to the print
                     edition submitted by the Papers of George Washington staff, along with
                     consolidated and regularized lists of names and titles that had varied from
                     volume to volume in the letterpress edition.
               
               Work on PGWDE began in fall of 2004; a beta version
                  for public display was ready by October 2006; and we formally released a published
                  version for sale in February 2007. Screen captures of the online version of the
                  Livingston letter illustrate how we realized some of our goals (Figure 12, Figure 13).
                  Compasses are used to navigate the four hierarchies identifed in goal 2. A
                     breadcrumb trail allows quick navigation up to any higher node of the
                  current tree. Hyperlinks or mouseovers provide dynamic equivalents of their print
                  counterparts in ways that are familiar to Web users: endnote superscripts connect
                  to their notes via bidirectional linking; abbreviations and short-title references
                  (indicated by dotted underlining) are expanded when the user mouses over the
                  abbreviated text; and cross-references to other documents in PGWDE are active links.
               
                  Top of the Livingston letter in a browser view.
                  
                  Screen capture of completed display of Livingston letter in Rotunda PGWDE
                     edition
               
               
                  Bottom of the Livingston letter.
                  
                  Screen capture of completed display of Livingston letter in Rotunda PGWDE
                     edition
               
               Along with the document navigation and display, we programmed a search page that
                  combines full-text search with optional filtering based on author, recipient,
                  and/or date range; and we added an online version of the consolidated index that
                  resembles a back-of-the-book index except that document titles and dates replace
                  page numbers and are, of course, hyperlinked.
               We had scheduled official release of PGWDE for
                  President's Day — February 19, 2007. By a month or so ahead of this deadline, we
                  realized that every last cleanup task could not be completed by that date. Online
                  publication meant we could do a triage: fix first the things that affect the most
                  documents, or that are most obvious to the average reader; fix afterwards problems
                  or errors limited to single documents, or ones that would be noticed only by a
                  specialist (for example, an incorrect birth year for a minor historical figure).
                  Corrections of bad links and minor formatting glitches continued for about a month
                  after the February 19 release. Corrections to errors in transcriptions or
                  annotations, as identified by Papers of George Washington staff, have been
                  ongoing. So, too, have further regularization and consolidation: since first
                  publication, PGW staff have provided us with fully normalized lists of names of
                  all document authors and recipients that we have used to update the document
                  metadata, and with a corrected and up-to-date list of repository abbreviations and
                  expansions based on MARC
                     codes that we have used to globally update the XML volume files.
            
            
               Planned Enhancements
               So is PGWDE done? Yes and no. It is a stable release
                  version with some remaining imperfections, but there's a lot more we plan to do
                  with it, even apart from adding content as we digitize new volumes after they
                  appear in print. We've recently met with the PGW staff to agree on a list of
                  priorities for enhancement. The tasks fall into three general categories: 
                     Optimization of existing features. Examples: improving search speed and
                        index retrieval; rewriting the search parser to make it more Google-like and
                        to include more boolean operators. 
                     New features. Add an advanced search page that will allow users to
                        search by document features or language, for example. We'll add full-text
                        searching on the index. Farther down the road may be keeping up with the
                           Joneses enhancements, like enabling the user to save a personal
                        workspace containing bookmarked documents and search result sets as the Works of Jonathan Edwards
                           Online at Yale has done. 
                     Features required by aggregating PGWDE into
                        the larger Founding Era collection. Over the next year we will be adding
                        editions of the Adams Family Papers, the Papers of Thomas Jefferson, and The Documentary History of the Ratification of the
                           Constitution. In order to build an extensible framework, we have
                        already begun a thorough rewrite of our delivery code and encoding
                        specifications so that our publication system will scale gracefully as more
                        publications are added.
                   But it is impossible for us to project all of the enhancements that may
                  become desirable or possible in the future. We are in a position not too
                  different, really, from that of the editors who began planning American
                  documentary historical editions beginning in the 1950s. They of course knew that
                  their completed volumes would eventually need to be supplemented and corrected as
                  new documents and historical information emerged. What they couldn't envision was
                  a time, our own, when scholarship that exists only in print is increasingly seen
                  as ipso facto lacking an essential quality. Likewise, we
                  can really only guess at what new features advancing technology may make possible.
                  For instance, we have often wished we had time and funding to add rich XML tagging
                  for personal and place names (beyond the author/recipient identifications in
                  existing metadata), and assumed that this would require a major commitment of
                  human labor. But it's not impossible that advances in automated named entity
                     recognition will enable us in a not-too-distant future to pipe PGWDE through a program that will reliably recognize and
                  tag those names and link them to, say, genealogical databases or a GIS-based
                  interface like Google Earth. 
               So we don't really expect ever to be able to say more than that PGWDE is done — for now.
            
         

            A Few Conclusions: Generalizing from the Rotunda Experience
            
               
                  
                     Ask any developer out there if a program is ever finished and they'll tell
                        you, No, of course not, I still need to.... But, ask any developer
                        out there if the program is almost finished and, assuming that
                        the development cycle has progressed far enough along, their answer will
                        invariably be, Yes, all I have to do is.... They may even quantify
                        it: 80% complete. Ask them a couple of days, weeks, months (depending
                        on the magnitude of the project) later and you will get a similar response,
                        but with a different percentage, say 90%. And so forth…but never 100%.
                  
                  
                     Never Finished; or Zeno's Paradox as an Analog to Software
                        Development
                  
               
            
            It is entirely possible to define done-ness for computer software in such a
               way that no instantiation of a software project can ever satisfy the definition. For
               example, suppose we stipulate that: A program is complete and can be distributed
                  when it (1) satisfies all initial design requirements, (2) is known to run 100%
                  bug-free under all potential conditions of use, and (3) incorporates
                  state-of-the-art programming techniques and tools at the time of distribution to
                  offer the user an optimal mix of powerful features and ease of use. The second
               and third criteria entail that none but the simplest programs could ever count as
               complete. To claim my program is bug-free because I have found no bugs in it
               is argumentum ad ignorantiam; that you haven't found any doesn't
               mean they aren't there. And criterion 3 turns done-ness into a Red Queen's race,
               since the state of the art is constantly advancing, and at release time most complex
               software projects are already belated relative to the cutting edge of
               technology. To the extent that digital publications count as software projects, they
               too would fail ever to count as finished under such a definition.
            The adjective simplest in the preceding paragraph hints at a way around the
               paradox. If my goal is to write a hello world program in Perl and I respond
               with the one-line program 
                  print "Hello World!\n";
                I can confidently say I'm done. If my task is to write a new operating system,
               it's another matter. As a rule, the more complex a task is,
               the less susceptible it is of being judged finished by any set of formal criteria.
               Contrast these two assignments: 
                  Create a crop circle in the shape of a simple circle with a diameter of 40
                     meters.
                  Create a crop circle representing the coastline of Great Britain at 1/10000
                     scale.
                The first project is done once you've made a single circuit while tromping
               down wheat at the end of a 20m tether. The second project is done when you've created
               as accurate a representation as your time and skill allow. Tracing a coastline is a
               problem in fractal geometry for which completeness will always be relative. In a
               sense, it is a formal property of project 2 that it is done only when you decide it
               is done. To put it another way, intrinsic criteria are used in both cases to
               determine when the project qualifies as finished, but as project 2 is formally
               undecidable (embodying the Turing halting problem that Matt Kirschenbaum mentions in
               his introduction), extrinsic criteria are also required to make the
               determination.
            The digital publications that we have worked on in Rotunda have tended to resemble
               the fractal project more than the simple circle. With PGWDE, for example, the coastline we needed to reproduce was, like
               that of Britain, a pre-existing and well-defined object, the fifty-two volumes of the
               print edition. To have omitted a volume would have been as clear a sign of
               incompleteness as leaving Cornwall out of the crop circle. But decisions about the
               richness of our feature set were very much a matter of how far to trace, and
               in the end were dictated by our available time and skill (and budget). If our
               experience is representative, deciding when to call a digital project done
               usually requires a process of negotiation between intrinsic criteria and external
               factors.
            
               Intrinsic Criteria
               Intrinsic criteria are formalist: they assume that the completeness of an object
                  derives from its inner properties alone, without reference to any social or other
                  external context. In the following table there is a continuum from objects like a
                  monograph (or a lyric poem) that can be judged to possess organic unity, to ones
                  like a collaborative virtual world that cannot. It is no accident that the latter
                  are the ones felt to be characteristically digital.
               
                  
                     Done as a function of intrinsic criteria
                  
                     Category
                     Object has definable boundaries?
                     Object has satisfied its design goals?
                     Print world example
                     Digital example
                     Is it done?
                  
                  
                     1
                     yes
                     yes
                     monograph, journal article
                     monograph-like object, online article
                     yes
                  
                  
                     2
                     yes
                     no
                     preprint, rough cuts
                     
                     beta or 0.9 release
                     not yet
                  
                  
                     3
                     no
                     yes (for current stage)
                     encyclopedia; any work issued in discrete series
                     same as for print world
                     yes (for now)
                  
                  
                     4
                     no
                     no
                     ? ?
                     open-ended wiki, collaborative blog or social space, virtual world,
                        etc.
                     no (by definition)
                  
               
               Category 1 objects are the most familiar in scholarly publishing, hence the most
                  fully integrated into the tenure-and-review system. Bryant's Typee essentially falls into this category. Probably owing to the
                  influence of online publishing, Category 2 objects are becoming more familiar:
                  online preprints are accredited scholarly communications in a growing number of
                  disciplines, and cutting-edge book publishers like O'Reilly with their Rough Cuts series of
                  early-access PDF are adopting a versioned model of publication.
               Category 3 objects are also familiar from the print world, where they represent
                  the one kind of open-endedness that does not upset traditional notions about
                  scholarly authority. The Oxford English Dictionary is
                  a good example. It has been supplemented, transformed, and extended many times
                  since the first fascicles were issued in 1884. Yet each discrete stage of
                  publication was accepted by the academic community as authoritative for its
                  moment. It is no accident that this category has translated easily to digital
                  format: the only essential difference between the print and online OED is that the latter is updated far more often.
               Category 4 is the one to which the term done seems the most inapplicable.
                  Its characteristic objects are more like processes than products, and it is
                  difficult to think of genuine analogues in the print world outside the realm of
                  experimental literature of the Oulipo variety. A publication like
                     Wikipedia can perhaps be seen as a special case of Category 3 in
                  which discrete stages succeed each other with extreme rapidity, but a virtual
                  world like 
                     Second Life
                   exists in such constant motion that it requires something akin to calculus
                  for adequate description. Unsurprisingly, Category 4 is the form of digital
                  creation least amenable to naturalization in the academic reward system or the
                  scholarly publishing marketplace.
            
            
               Extrinsic Factors
               For a scholarly publisher, intrinsic criteria of done-ness are important but are
                  often trumped by extrinsic factors. The judgement that a book manuscript is done
                  and ready for press requires an agreement among author, acquiring editor, external
                  reviewers, and the manuscript editorial and production departments that is based
                  largely on its formal content. But completely extrinsic factors such as the desire
                  to include the book in a particular season's list will often lead a press to veto
                  an author's wish to continue tinkering with a manuscript. Similarly, an author may
                  not consider a monograph on Chinese art formally complete without the inclusion of
                  several dozen full-page color reproductions on glossy inserts, but a publisher may
                  omit them for the wholly extrinsic reason that the profit-and-loss sheet doesn't
                  budget for them. Once a book is in print, decisions about its subsequent
                     done-ness (i.e., whether to reprint, revise, issue in paperback, etc.)
                  are based almost entirely on economic factors. In the case of digital
                  publications, I will suggest, extrinsic factors become important at an earlier
                  stage and are proportionately more important at every stage of composition and
                  publication.
               The following list of extrinsic factors is not meant to be exhaustive; they are
                  the ones that have been most prominent in Rotunda's experience.
               
                  
                     Economic constraints
                     Two maxims apply: (1) if a digital publication doesn't sell, it's
                              done; (2) if the projected cost of upgrade exceeds projected
                           revenue, it's done
                        . (For freely distributed projects, substitute when no more grant
                           funding or volunteer time is available, it's done.) 
                  
                  
                     Competition
                     Maxim: when your competition is adding features to its product, they
                           can render your finished product incomplete.
                         In the print world, this phenomenon is familiar in textbook and
                        reference publishing. In the digital world, it is absolutely pervasive. No
                        online publication, free or for sale, can afford long-term stasis when the
                        peer publications it is compared with are adding bells and whistles (a list
                        that would include, as of 2008, things like Ajax-powered form fields, tag
                        clusters, user reviews and personal workspaces, page previews on mouseover,
                        selectable themes or skins . . .) In the prestige economy as in the
                        market economy, keeping up with the Joneses is not optional.
                  
                  
                     Standards evolution
                     Maxim: even absent competition, the evolution of standards can make a
                           finished project incomplete.
                         This is primarily a matter of adhering to best practices, though not
                        entirely free from the keeping-up-with-the-Joneses factor. Certainly if your
                        academic discipline adopts a new format for metadata, or your institution
                        adds a requirement that Web publications meet accessibility guidelines, your
                        projects need to be revised for conformity. In other cases, it may be a
                        matter of pride to demonstrate that a project has upgraded to the latest
                        standard, for example by converting archival XML from TEI P4 to P5
                        compliance, or by following the very latest W3C recommendation for XHTML or
                        CSS.
                  
                  
                     Aggregation
                     Maxim: a stand-alone publication will probably become
                              incomplete when it is aggregated with other material. In
                        Rotunda's experience, it is inevitable that the user interface and back-end
                        coding one develops for a single digital project will need to be
                        substantially revised once a second project is added and meant to
                        interoperate with the first. (As a case in point, it would require major
                        effort to get our first publication, the 
                           Dolley Madison Digital Edition
                        , seamlessly integrated with PGWDE, as
                        the back-end programming and underlying XML data formats of the two
                        publications are quite different.)
                  
                  
                     Technological change
                     Maxim: new technology will make your publication
                              incomplete
                        . This goes almost without saying. The evolution of hardware,
                        operating systems, programming languages, and Web standards will eventually
                        make any online publication obsolete. Failure to migrate a digital object
                        periodically as technical conditions require is the analogue of allowing a
                        published book to go out of print. (In fact it's worse: it's like printing
                        the book on high-acid-content paper with ink that fades on exposure to
                        light, and then letting it go out of print.)
                  
               
            
            
               A Necessary Synthesis
               Whether you are a publisher or the editor of an open-access publication, allowing
                  extrinsic factors to influence your decision about whether a digital project is
                  done is in no way an admission of defeat or an abdication of responsibility. It
                  is, in fact, the only way to avoid the form of Zeno's paradox whimsically
                  propounded in the epigraph to this section. The progress of knowledge in the arts
                  and sciences is continuous, but in order for it to happen at all, scholarly
                  discourse must be distributed in the form of discrete objects that can be shared,
                  read or viewed, responded to, assimilated, quoted, disputed, and revised. In the
                  marketplace of ideas, it's less important how you decide when your piece is done
                  than that you do decide, label it and put it on display, and prepare
                  to haggle with others over its value.
            
         

            Appendix: XML markup of a sample Washington letter
            (Formatting has been applied for convenience in reading; carriage returns are not
               introduced within mixed-content elements in the original files.)
            <div1 xml:id="Rev13d180" type="doc">
    <FGEA:mapData id="GEWN-03-13-02-0189">
        <bibl>
            <title>From William Livingston, 13 January 1778</title>
            <author>Livingston, William</author>
            <name type="recip">GW</name>
            <date when="1778-01-13"/>
        </bibl>
        <FGEA:Author>Livingston, William</FGEA:Author>
        <FGEA:Recipient>GW</FGEA:Recipient>
        <FGEA:mapDates>
            <FGEA:searchRange from="1778-01-13" to="1778-01-13"/>
            <FGEA:dayRange from="1778-01-13" to="1778-01-13"/>
        </FGEA:mapDates>
        <FGEA:pageRange from="Rev13p227" to="Rev13p227"/>
    </FGEA:mapData>
    <pb n="Rev13p227"/>
    <head>From William Livingston</head>
    <div2 type="docbody">
        <opener>
            <salute>Sir</salute>
            <dateline>Morris Town [N.J.] <date when="1778-01-13">13th Jany 177[8]<ptr n="1"
                        target="Rev13d180n1"/></date></dateline>
        </opener>
        <p>Upon frequent Complaints that Capt. Kennedy's Residence at his Farm was injurious to the
            State, &amp;amp; occasioned great Clamours from the People in This Neighbourhood, the
            Council ordered his Attendance on the Board — they at the same time desired a Gentleman
            near the Spot, to procure what Affidavits he could respecting Captn Kennedy's Conduct —
            He sent us by return of the Express three Affidavits with Copies of which I take the
            Liberty of troubling you; Capt. Kennedy denies the Accusations sworne against him,
            &amp;amp; refers to a Parole he signed to your Excellency in this Town. The Board would
            therefore be glad to know the Nature of that Parole (of which he has no Copy) &amp;amp;
            whether you consider him as a Prisoner of War, since Your Excellency has taken Paroles
            from persons professedly Subjects of this State &amp;amp; not pretending to any
            Connextions with Britain, meerly to prevent their being detrimental to this State as
            disaffected Subjects — If he is considered as a Prisoner we suppose him exchangeable
            &amp;amp; in the mean time it would probably be best to have him removed at a greater
            Distance from the Enemy's Lines — If his Parole was taken only to prevent mischief
            &amp;amp; in Aid of the magestrate whose Authority was then very inadequate to suppress
            Disaffection we shall consider him as altogether within the Civil Line<ptr n="2"
                target="Rev13d180n2"/> — I have the Honor to be With great Respect your Excellys
            Most Hum: Servt</p>
        <closer>
            <signed>Wil: Livingston</signed>
        </closer>
        <ps>
            <p>P.S. I am sorry that Troup has been suffered to return to the Enemy after being so
                clearly convicted of being a Spy. I have this moment received Intelligence that a
                party is engaged to way-lay me between this place &amp;amp; my house, of which I
                have reason to think Troup is at the bottom.<ptr n="3" target="Rev13d180n3"/></p>
        </ps>
    </div2>
    <div2 type="docback">
        <note type="source" xml:id="Rev13d180sn">
            <p>
                <bibl n="docSource">
                    <rs type="dType">
                        <abbr>LS</abbr>
                    </rs>
                    <rs type="dWhere">
                        <ref target="GWPrep37" type="repository">DLC:GW</ref>
                    </rs>
                </bibl> The postscript is in Livingston's writing.</p>
        </note>
        <note n="1" type="fn" xml:id="Rev13d180n1">
            <p>Livingston wrote '1777.'</p>
        </note>
        <note n="2" type="fn" xml:id="Rev13d180n2">
            <p>The New Jersey council of safety had agreed on 10 Jan. 'that a Warrant do issue for
                apprehending and bringing before the Board Archibald Kennedy Esqr, that an Enquiry
                be made into his past conduct, and that the Oaths of Government may be tendered to
                him.' On 13 Jan., Kennedy appeared before the council, which after considering
                'sundry Affidavits' resolved that 'a letter be written to Genl Washington respecting
                the nature of Captn Kennedy's Parole &amp;amp; that copies of the Affidavits
                relative to his conduct be also transmitted with the Same' (<ref target="PGWst1204"
                    type="short-title">
                    <hi rend="italic">N.J. Council of Safety Minutes</hi></ref>, 186–88). Copies of
                the affidavits of Nathaniel Camp, Jr., Robert Neil, and Robert Nicholls, all dated
                12 Jan., are in <ref target="GWPrep37" type="repository">DLC:GW</ref>. See also <ref
                    type="document" target="Rev13d236">GW's letter to Kennedy of 20
                January</ref>.</p>
        </note>
        <note n="3" type="fn" xml:id="Rev13d180n3">
            <p>See <ref target="Rev13d242" type="document">GW's first letter to Livingston of 20
                    January</ref>.</p>
        </note>
    </div2>
</div1>
         
