Title:  XML, Interoperability and the Social Construction of Markup Languages: The
               Library Example
Volume:  003
Issue:  3
Date:  29 September 2009
Abstract:  
            The past decade has seen XML widely adopted within a variety of communities,
               including the digital library community. While it now plays a critical role in the
               infrastructure of many digital library operations, XML's promise of interoperability
               of data across systems and organizations has not been fully realized within digital
               libraries. The reasons for this are not primarily technical in origin, but social,
               and relate to the cultures of XML's designers and XML language implementors, and a
               failure on the part of the digital library community to grapple with the
               sociotechnical nature of XML and its implementation. Possible strategies for
               addressing these issues of interoperability might include reduction of the
               flexibility afforded by specific XML-based markup languages used by the digital
               library community, and an increased focus on standardizing translations between
               various communities of practice use of such markup languages.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction: Failures of Interoperability with XML
            Eleven years after its endorsement by the World Wide Web Consortium, XML has been
               widely adopted within numerous, disparate communities and in a vast range of
               application domains, from standards for electronic filing of federal income tax  to user interface design . The
               digital library community has been an active and early adopter of XML, for use in
               structuring both content and metadata. The reasons for this rapid uptake of XML
               within the digital library community are familiar to anyone with experience in the
               world of markup languages: 
                  XML helps ensure platform (and perhaps more critically vendor) independence,
                     simplifying the migration of content between systems;
                  XML provides the multilingual character support critical to the handling of
                     library materials;
                  XML's extensibility and modularity allow libraries to customize its
                     application within their own operating environments;
                  XML helps minimize software development costs by allowing libraries to
                     leverage existing, open source development tools;
                  XML, through virtue of being an open standard which enables descriptive
                     markup, may assist in the long-term preservation of electronic materials; and
                     perhaps most importantly
                  XML provides a technological basis for interoperability of both content and
                     metadata across library systems.
                For all of these reasons, XML-based content standards such as the Text
               Encoding Initiative (TEI) have seen wide adoption within the library community, and
               librarians have been actively engaged in the development of a number of XML-based
               metadata standards, including Encoded Archival Description (EAD), Metadata Object
               Description Schema (MODS), Metadata Authority Description Schema (MADS), Metadata
               Encoding and Transmission Standard (METS), Metadata for Images in XML (MIX), MPEG-21
               Digital Item Declaration Language (DIDL), Open Archives Initiative Object Reuse and
               Exchange (OAI-ORE), Preservation Metadata Implementation Strategies (PREMIS) and many
               others. XML is now used throughout the research library world, and is a fundamental
               part of the infrastructure developed within the digital library community over the
               past decade.
            Despite its success, however, XML has not lived up to many librarians' expectations
               within one area, that of interoperability. Efforts to exchange information employing
               XML-based metadata standards such as Dublin Core have fallen prey to a number of
               encoding and semantic inconsistencies . Variations in
               the use of namespacing (date vs. dc:date), in regional conventions
               (08-11-2008 in the U.S. vs. 11-08-2008 in the U.K.) and language and culture (11
               Août, 2008 vs. 8 Sha'aban 1429 A.H.) confound application developers trying to
               process XML data.
            Perhaps more surprising is the failure of XML to ensure interoperability at a
               syntactic level.As a reviewer for this article noted, the meaning of
                     interoperability is vague and its interpretation highly variable
                  depending on the community and context in which it is used. Within the discussions
                  among the members of the digital library community upon which this article is
                  based, interoperability is interpreted primarily as the ability to reuse data and
                  metadata outside of the technological system in which they were originally
                  instantiated as well as outside of the community they were originally intended to
                  serve. Interoperability thus has both a technological and a social
                  component. Digital library developers have expected that shared use of a
               XML standard for structuring content and metadata (what is commonly called
                  structural metadata within the digital library community) would ensure
               content interoperability and promote the development of tools and services designed
               to work with content encoded according to that standard .
               In practice, however, this goal has proved rather elusive. Experiments conducted by
               participants in the Library of Congress National Digital Infrastructure for
               Preservation Program (NDIIPP) to test the exchange of digital objects between
               repositories failed even when participants were using the same XML-based encoding
               format , .
            While some of the failures experienced by the Library of Congress NDIIPP tests were
               the result of incompatible repository infrastructure, others resulted from mismatched
               expectations regarding the appropriate use of METS, one of the XML formats employed
               for the test. DiLauro et al., discussing Johns Hopkins University's experience in the
               NDIIPP tests, state, 
                  
                     Stanford commented after their ingest of the JHU archive that they had
                        expected one METS object for the entire archive. Because our approach
                        resulted in many METS files – on the order of the number of items in the
                        archive – the Stanford ingest programs experienced out-of-memory conditions.
                        This situation may have been ameliorated had they used the reference code
                        provided by JHU; however, this will be an area that we will look into for
                        future archive ingest projects.
                     This matter points to a broader issue observed during the various import
                        processes of this phase. Though three of the four non-LC participants
                        (including JHU) used METS as part of their dissemination packages, each of
                        our approaches was different. Clearly there would be some advantage to
                        working toward at least some common elements for these processes.
                  
                  
                As alluded to by , a critical difficulty for
               achieving interoperability using structural metadata standards such as METS is the
               level of flexibility they enable in structuring a description of an object. As  note in their discussion of using the MPEG-21 Digital Item
               Declaration Language during the NDIIPP test, it is possible to map a single object
               into multiple different encodings using MPEG-21, depending on the level of
               granularity you wish to employ in the description. The same is true of METS and
               other, similar information packaging standards. They each provide a grammar to
               describe the structure of complex digital objects. To facilitate description of
               arbitrarily complex structures, these standards employ a relatively flexible grammar,
               and document authors can and do find a variety of different ways to describe the
               structure of a single object using one of those grammars.
            To date, the digital library community has treated these interoperability issues
               surrounding structural metadata standards as a technical problem demanding a
               technical solution. Most efforts to solve these interoperability problems have
               focused on the use of a profiling mechanism to further constrain the creation of
               instance documents conforming with a XML schema, sometimes in conjunction with a
               validation mechanism (such as Schematron) to test instance documents conformance with
               the additional requirements established in the profile ,
                  . In essence, profiles exist to limit authors'
               flexibility in the use of a given XML language. If different institutions can agree
               on using a particular profile of a language, they are far more likely to be able to
               produce content objects which can be readily exchanged and interoperate with a
               variety of different systems.
            However, while these mechanisms may be successful in ensuring interoperability within
               a narrowly defined local context, they are not in themselves any guarantee of
               interoperability at the scale envisioned by digital library projects such as Aquifer
                  , which hope to promote the ready exchange and
               interoperability of digital library content among a multitude of institutions. The
               official METS profile registry already contains a variety of mutually incompatible
               profiles for similar types of objects, with profiles varying in their choices of
               descriptive metadata (Dublin Core vs. MODS), use of controlled vocabularies in
               descriptive and administrative metadata sections, and their structure (e.g.,
               requiring the use of a single structMap element in the case of the Oxford
               Digital Library METS Profile and mandating the use of two structMap elements
               in the case of the Indiana University METS Navigator profile).See http://www.loc.gov/standards/mets/mets-registered-profiles.html for the
                  set of formally registered METS profiles. While profiles may enable
               localized interoperability, they do not necessarily lead to widespread agreement
               regarding the best ways of describing objects' structure, and in fact, it is
               conceivable that to a certain extent they reify differences between institutions.
               Allowing the specification of local profiles of a XML language may help formalize the
               problem of interoperability, but it does not solve it.
            If we are to deal with the issues of interoperability that continually manifest
               themselves in the realm of structural metadata standards for digital libraries, we
               need to cease viewing this purely as a technical problem, and acknowledge that it is
               the result of the interplay of technical and social factors. The XML
               standards for structural metadata employed by the digital library community represent
               cases of sociotechnical systems, and only when we have analyzed the social, as well
               as the technical, components of these systems will we be able to suggest how they may
               be optimized to achieve the goals of interoperability, usability and preservability
               desired by librarians and their patrons.
         

            XML from a Sociotechnical Perspective
            One of the fundamental tenets of sociotechnical systems theory is that technological
               design and technological evolution are not value neutral processes. Technological
               design is both informed by, and seeks to inform, the social environment in which
               technology is used, and the work of designers and engineers can be seen as being as
               much social engineering as technical engineering. By providing a new means of
               accomplishing a task, a technologist is also prescribing a new set of behaviors
               centered on the new technology (and possibly proscribing others). This
               conceptualization of technology was concisely summarized by , who argues that 
                  ...when technologists define the
                     characteristics of their objects, they necessarily make hypotheses about the
                     entities that make up the world into which the object is to be inserted.
                     Designers thus define actors with specific tastes, competences, motives,
                     aspirations, political prejudices, and the rest, and they assume that morality,
                     technology, science, and economy will evolve in particular ways. A large part
                     of the work of innovators is 
                        inscribing
                      [emph. original] this vision of (or prediction about) the work in the
                     technical content of the new object
                  
                All the existing and developing standards for structural metadataI am
                  including within this set the Metadata Encoding & Transmission Standard (METS,
                  see http://www.loc.gov/standards/mets/), the MPEG-21 Digital Item
                  Declaration Language (DIDL, see http://www.chiariglione.org/mpeg/standards/mpeg-21/mpeg-21.htm), the
                  Open Archives Initiative Object Reuse & Exchange standard (OAI-ORE, see http://www.openarchives.org/ore/) and the Fedora Object XML
                  specification (FOXML, see http://www.fedora-commons.org/documentation/2.2.2/userdocs/digitalobjects/introFOXML.html).
                  There are a variety of other structural metadata standards that are of particular
                  interest to the digital library community, although not being developed within it,
                  including standards for data archiving such as the XML Formatted Data Unit
                  specification (XFDU, see http://sindbad.gsfc.nasa.gov/xfdu/) being developed by the Consultative
                  Committee on Space Data Systems and standards for structuring content for
                  e-learning systems such as the IMS Content Packaging specification (IMS-CP, see
                     http://www.imsglobal.org/content/packaging/) developed by the IMS Global
                  Learning Consortium and the Shareable Content Object Reference Model (SCORM, see
                     http://www.adlnet.gov/Technologies/scorm/default.aspx) developed by the
                  United States Department of Defense. within the digital library community
               are XML-based. Any sociotechnical examination of these standards therefore must start
               with at least some consideration of XML itself. Our questions concerning XML, then,
               are what world view have XML's authors inscribed within it and what influence has
               that had on XML's uptake and use within the digital library community.
            We can learn a great deal about the viewpoints of a particular technology's designers
               from the documents they author which define the goals for the technology (e.g., use
               cases and user needs analysis), those which help implement the technology (e.g.,
               specification documents), and those which attempt to explain or promote the new
               technology to potential users. If we look at the original specification document for
               XML, we find a relatively clear set of goals for the technology enumerated: 
                  
                     
                        XML shall be straightforwardly usable over the Internet.
                        XML shall support a wide variety of applications.
                        XML shall be compatible with SGML.
                        It shall be easy to write programs which process XML documents.
                        The number of optional features in XML is to be kept to the absolute
                           minimum, ideally zero.
                        XML documents should be human-legible and reasonably clear.
                        The XML design should be prepared quickly.
                        The design of XML shall be formal and concise.
                        XML documents shall be easy to create.
                        Terseness in XML markup is of minimal importance
                     
                  
                  
                These goals convey some of the world view that XML's designers brought to bear
               in creating the technology. They saw XML as a transmission format for communications
               (hence the requirement that it be usable over the Internet). They believed that XML's
               success was contingent upon it being flexible enough to support a wide variety of applications. They also clearly
               believed that for XML to succeed it must be easy to use, but they also recognized
               that the meaning of ease of use is contingent upon the use one might make of
               the technology. Ease of use for a document author (XML documents shall be easy to create,
               XML documents should be human-legible and reasonably
                  clear) is a good deal different from ease of use for a software developer
               (It shall be easy to write programs which process
                  XML Documents,
               The design of XML shall be formal and
                  concise).
            This relatively small set of goals for the XML language was further elaborated upon
               by members of the original World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) XML Working Group in a
               variety of papers they authored to introduce and clarify XML to its potential user
               community.  further defines the goals of XML as supporting
               the user needs of extensibility, to define
                  new tags as needed,
               structure, to model data to any level of
                  complexity,
               validation, to check data for structural
                  correctness,
               media independence, to publish content in
                  multiple formats, and vendor
                  and platform independence, to process any conforming document using standard
                  commercial software or even simple text tools. The benefits adhering to
               XML's providing a standardized format are identified as including complete interoperability of both content and
                  style across applications and platforms; freedom of content creators from vendor
                  control of production tools; freedom of users to choose their own views into
                  content; easy construction of powerful tools for manipulating content on a large
                  scale; a level playing field for independent software developers; and true
                  international publishing across all media. Emancipatory language is
               invoked repeatedly here through the use of the terms freedom and
                  independence, particularly affording users the freedom to define new tags and in so doing
                  choose their own views into
                  content. In the designers' world view, a key benefit to XML is the freedom
               it provides users to define their own structure for documents and data, using their
               own semantics, and to escape restrictions that software vendors (through their own
               inscriptions in their own products) might wish to impose on their users. Other
               articles by members of the XML Working Group (see, for example,  and ) reiterate a vision of XML as
               a technology allowing users to define their own structures while simultaneously
               supporting interoperability of documents and data on a global scale.
            The XML 1.0 Recommendation bears the inscription of its designers' ideological stance
               towards appropriate mechanisms for data and document structuring as well as
               appropriate relationships between document creators and software and platform
               vendors. The effort to promote a metalanguage over any specific markup language, the
               adoption of Unicode as a basic character set, and the elimination of SGML features
               which proved difficult to implement (including CONCUR, OMITTAG and SUBDOC) are some
               of the technological means through which XML's designers sought to normalize and
               reify a particular set of social and technological relationships. Nor did this
               process stop with the release of the XML 1.0 recommendation in 1998. The period
               between February 1998 and October 2001 saw the development and release of a plethora
               of additional XML specifications, including XML Namespaces, XSLT, XPath, XML Schema,
               XLink/XBase, XML Information Set and XSL-FO, as well as a variety of XML software
               tools including parsers, editors and stylesheet engines. All of these various
               technological objects presented their own opportunities for their designers to
               further refine the ideological inscription carried within the XML 1.0 Recommendation.
               One of these objects in particular, the Namespaces in XML Recommendation, deserves
               further examination due to its significant affect on structural metadata standards
               developed by the digital library community.
            
                provides the following justification for the introduction
               of a formal namespace mechanism into XML: 
                  We envision applications of Extensible Markup Language (XML) where a single XML
                     document may contain elements and attributes (here referred to as a markup
                        vocabulary) that are defined for and used by multiple software modules.
                     One motivation for this is modularity; if such a markup vocabulary exists which
                     is well understood and for which there is useful software available, it is
                     better to re-use this markup rather than re-invent it.
                  Such documents, containing multiple markup vocabularies, pose problems of
                     recognition and collision. Software modules need to be able to recognize the
                     tags and attributes which they are designed to process, even in the face of
                        collisions occurring when markup intended for some other software
                     package uses the same element type or attribute name.
                A strong motivating force for the Namespaces in XML recommendation,
               then, was a desire to promote modularity in the design of markup languages.
               Interoperability was also cited as a motivating factor by the World Wide Web
               Consortium in the introduction of Namespaces in XML
               . Fundamentally, the authors of the Namespaces in
                  XML recommendation wanted to simplify XML document authors' lives by ensuring
               that they did not need to reinvent markup languages which already existed, and that
               they could readily mix elements and attributes conforming to disparate schemas within
               a single document instance without worrying about collisions between element and
               attribute names. Again, modularity and flexibility in design of markup languages
               would give users the freedom they need while also insuring interoperability.
            XML's designers have inscribed two overarching messages within the technology they
               have created. The first is that XML is about establishing a new social
               relationship between content creators and software vendors. By putting control of
               data formats into the hands of the content creation community via an open standard,
               XML provides that community with signicant political leverage. They can avoid the
               proprietary data formats that software vendors have used to lock them into continuing
               use of a particular software package. XML thus represents the path to freedom. The
               second message is that XML enables easy communication and
               interoperability. XML will not only allow you to control your content, it will make
               it easier for others to use your content. Freedom and interoperability are the two
               underlying themes running through the complete set of XML specifications, with
               modular design embraced as the means for achieving these ends.
         

            Structural Metadata Standards and the Digital Library Community
            Libraries' exploration of the use of markup languages for encoding of library data
               predates the origin of XML by several years. Collaborations with the digital
               humanities community on the development of the TEI Guidelines, the development of
               Encoded Archival Description, and early efforts to apply SGML to bibliographic
                  dataSee http://www.loc.gov/marc/marcsgmlarchive.html for information regarding
                  the development of an SGML version of the MARC 21 record format. provided
               the library community with experience in the use of markup languages and
               demonstration of the benefits they could provide. When the XML 1.0 Recommendation was
               released, many digital library projects were already using SGML, and libraries were
               quick to embrace XML. XML's simpler design meant that software tools for processing
               XML data were readily available, and the new capabilities for data typing introduced
               by XML schema languages made XML even more attractive for certain uses than its
               predecessor, SGML. Early projects which employed XML, such as the Making of America
               II project , were rapidly followed by a number of
               XML-based markup languages intended for use in the library community. A significant
               focus of much of the library community's work with XML has been developing languages
               which can serve to structure all the metadata and data comprising a digital library
               object into a coherent whole. Examples of languages developed and explored for this
               purpose in the library community include the Metadata Encoding and Transmission
               Standard (METS), the Fedora Object XML (FOXML) language, MPEG-21 Digital Item
               Declaration Language, and the new Open Archives Initiative Object Reuse and Exchange
               (OAI-ORE) specification.
            Most of these languages employ a similar pattern for structuring content and
               metadata. They provide an encoding mechanism which allows the author to record a
               hierarchical structure defining the object, and then associate both content and
               metadata with various nodes within that structure. Figure
                  1 depicts a very simple version of such a structure, a book with a single
               chapter; metadata and content files (and metadata for the content files)
               are associated with appropriate nodes. 
                  A simple digital object
                  
                  Depiction of a structure and content and metadata object
                A METS encoding for such an object can be seen in Example 1. The hierarchical structure for the object is defined within the
                  structMap element as a set of recursive div elements. Subsidiary
                  fptr elements within a div are used to associate that
                  div element with content files described in separate file
               elements, and ID/IDREF linking attributes are used to associate the root div
               element with a descriptive metadata record, and the individual file elements
               with an administrative metadata record. A TYPE attribute on the div elements
               allows the METS document author to indicate the type of subobject represented by each
               node in the structural hierarchy.
            
               <mets xmlns="http://www.loc.gov/METS/" 
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
    xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.loc.gov/METS/  http://www.loc.gov/standards/mets/mets.xsd">
    <dmdSec ID="DM1">
        <mdWrap MDTYPE="OTHER">
            <xmlData>
                <meta>Descriptive Metadata for Book</meta>
            </xmlData>
        </mdWrap>
    </dmdSec>
    <amdSec>
        <techMD ID="AM1">
            <mdWrap MDTYPE="OTHER">
                <xmlData>
                    <meta>Administrative metadata applicable to TIFF files</meta>
                </xmlData>
            </mdWrap>
        </techMD>
    </amdSec>
    <fileSec>
        <fileGrp>
            <file ID="F1" ADMID="AM1">
                <FLocat LOCTYPE="URN" xlink:href="urn:x-mets:Location_of_Page_One_TIFF_Image"/>
            </file>
            <file ID="F2" ADMID="AM1">
                <FLocat LOCTYPE="URN" xlink:href="urn:x-mets:Location_of_Page_Two_TIFF_Image"/>
            </file>
            <file ID="F3" ADMID="AM1">
                <FLocat LOCTYPE="URN" xlink:href="urn:x-mets:Location_of_Page_Three_TIFF_Image"/>
            </file>
        </fileGrp>
    </fileSec>
    <structMap>
        <div TYPE="book" DMDID="DM1">
            <div TYPE="chapter">
                <fptr FILEID="F1"/>
                <fptr FILEID="F2"/>
                <fptr FILEID="F3"/>
            </div>
        </div>
    </structMap>
</mets>
            
            The goal of representing the structure of a work as a hierarchy of nested
                  div elements with TYPE attributes was to have a relatively simple,
               abstract hierarchical structure that could be readily applied to a variety of
               materials. This was intended to promote the adoption of the standard (a single,
               simple standard is more likely to be adopted than a variety of complex ones), which
               in turn was seen as promoting interoperability. Having all of the digital library
               community using a single standard for structuring content and metadata was seen by
               METS' designers as preferable to the community adopting a disparate set of
               standards.
            It should be noted that this move towards abstraction was a relatively significant
               break from the SGML design practices that many research libraries had been using to
               date. While it is true that the notion of using nested div elements was
               derived from the TEI text apparatus, TEI does not rely on pure abstraction; one does
               not expect to encounter encoding such as <div type="figure"> in a TEI
               document, when a figure element is available to use. Just as XML itself, the
               METS schema carries an inscription of its designers' world view, that it was
               preferable to develop a single, simple, generalizable, highly abstract model and
               encoding mechanisms to structure content and metadata for digital library objects,
               rather than to pursue the development of a variety of highly specific schemas (one
               for photographs, one for journals, etc.), or a grand encompassing schema that
               contained elements appropriate to different genres that could be combined as needed
               (e.g., the TEI model). Despite its use of the abstract div element with a
               TYPE attribute to represent the structural components of a digital library object,
               however, the METS schema insisted on the use of more specific concrete elements to
               identify different forms of metadata, with the dmdSec element used for
               descriptive metadata and the amdSec element used for administrative
               metadata, along with a series of subelements for different forms of administrative
               metadata (technical, rights, provenance and source). This typification of different
               forms of metadata was itself an effort to promote both modularity in further metadata
               schema development and the creation of certain types of metadata schema. By
               identifying specific subclasses of metadata within the METS schema, METS' designers
               hoped to encourage XML developers in the digital library world to create discrete,
               specialized metadata standards that would align with those subclasses, and that those
               creating digital library objects could then select from a set of such modular XML
               metadata standards in composing a particular object. Through METS' design, its
               implementers consciously sought to encourage the adoption of modular schema design
               practices within the digital library community.
            Other XML-based markup languages adopted by the digital library community have taken
               a similar approach. The MPEG-21 Digital Item Declaration Language also employs a
               rather abstract hierarchical structural mechanism for ordering content and metadata.
               It differs inasmuch as non-structural metadata (Descriptor elements in
               MPEG-21 parlance) are not typed, and structural metadata elements, while still rather
               abstract, are of three different types: Container, Item and
                  Component. The Open Archives Initiative Object Reuse and Exchange
               specification is perhaps the most abstract of all the structural metadata standards
               adopted within the digital library community; while it has multiple serialization
               syntaxes, all of them employ a single mechanism to link an abstract aggregation with
               a set of aggregated resources (although the specific linking mechanism varies
               according to the serialization syntax employed). Those aggregated resources may in
               turn be aggregations, and any aggregation may be associated with a variety of
               additional metadata.
            If we examine these other standards to determine what inscriptions their designers
               have placed within them regarding their use, we find messages very similar to that of
               METS. Structural metadata should be highly abstract, so that a very small set of
               elements can be employed to structure widely disparate content genres. While METS was
               perhaps more vocal in trying to push the message that further development of metadata
               schemas should try to create small, focused and modular metadata sets that could be
               drawn upon as needed to encode a particular object, the other standards convey the
               same message (through the use Descriptor elements to associate metadata with
               other elements in the case of MPEG-21, and through RDF mechanisms in the case of
               OAI-ORE). Other structural metadata standards of interest to the digital library
               community employ similar mechanisms. The XFDU standard for data archiving uses
               hierarchies of ContentUnit elements that may be associated with
                  dataObjects and metadataObjects. The IMS Content Packaging
               standard for learning objects uses hierarchies of item elements that may be
               associated with resources and metadata. While implementations
               differ in details, the pattern is similar and widespread across the various
               structural metadata standards of interest to the digital library community. Again and
               again we see designers seeking to achieve wide adoption of their standard in order to
               promote interoperability between differing institutions; to secure this goal, they
               favor a highly abstract structural mechanism which can be applied to a wide variety
               of content, and mechanisms to allow a variety of additional metadata schemas to
                  plug and play within the larger structural framework.
            While of perhaps some limited interest to social researchers of technology, none of
               the preceding seems particularly surprising or problematic. That the designers of XML
               itself, and the designers of encoding standards for digital library metadata and
               content, should favor flexibility, extensibility, modularity and the use of
               abstraction to support the generalizability of their standard, and hence promote its
               widespread adoption to help achieve interoperability, would not be a great shock to
               anyone who has spent more than five minutes in the company of computer scientists.
               These are all considered almost innate goods among software engineers in general and
               markup language enthusiasts in particular. Yet the NDIIPP tests cited previously
               would seem to indicate that flexibility, extensibility, modularity and abstraction
               are not in and of themselves sufficient to achieve interoperability. So what,
               specifically, is the problem that METS and other structural metadata standards are
               encountering?
         

            Defining the Problem, or, Why is XML like a rope?
            One of the earliest discussion points in the development of the METS standard was
               which of the various elements within the schema should be declared mandatory and
               which optional. After some discussion among the members of the working group that
               established METS' original design, it was decided that the structMap
               element, which records the basic tree structure on to which content files and
               metadata are mapped in METS, would be the only required element. METS, in the group's
               opinion, was fundamentally a structural metadata standard; it existed to
               provide a framework into which other descriptive and administrative metadata, as well
               as content, could be placed. The structMap element provided the tree upon
               which all the other structural components of METS where hung, where the logical and
               physical structure of a work could be delineated, and so was really the only section
               that needed to be mandatory. As the structMap was the only mandatory portion
               of a METS file, it was also expected that any structural description of a work should
               reside there; software that would process a METS file would expect to find logical or
               physical descriptions of the structure of a work residing within a structural map,
               and not elsewhere in the METS file.
            It was a matter of some surprise for many in the METS community, then, when the
               Library of Congress, which serves as the maintenance agency for the METS standard,
               began to produce METS files for digital versions of certain kinds of audio recordings
               which placed the logical structure of the works in MODS records contained within the
               METS descriptive metadata section (dmdSec) rather than in the structural
               map, and registered a profile of METS establishing this as their formal internal
               practice for recorded events
               . The MODS record within a METS file would provide a logical
               structure for the work using a hierarchical arrangement of the MODS
                  relatedItem element, while the METS structMap would contain the
               physical structure, with ID/IDREF links used to draw connections between the two
               structural descriptions. A recorded concert, for example, might have a MODS record
               containing a hierarchy such as this:Complete MODS and METS records for this
                  example can be found at the Library of Congress webpage for the 1946 Library of
                  Congress recital at http://lcweb2.loc.gov/diglib/ihas/loc.natlib.ihas.200003790/default.html
               
            
            
               <mods:mods xmlns:mods="http://www.loc.gov/mods/v3"
            xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
            xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.loc.gov/mods/v3
                  http://www.loc.gov/standards/mods/mods.xsd">    
     <mods:titleInfo>
         <mods:nonSort>The </mods:nonSort>
         <mods:title>1946 Library of Congress recital</mods:title>
     </mods:titleInfo>
     <mods:relatedItem type="constituent" ID="DMD_disc01_tr001">
         <mods:titleInfo type="uniform">
             <mods:partName>Chaconne von Vitali</mods:partName>
         </mods:titleInfo>
     </mods:relatedItem>
     <mods:relatedItem type="constituent" ID="DMD_disc01_tr002_005">
         <mods:titleInfo><mods:title>Sonata in G minor, BWV 1001</mods:title>
         </mods:titleInfo>
         <mods:relatedItem type="constituent" ID="DMD_disc01_tr002">
             <mods:titleInfo><mods:partName>Adagio</mods:partName>
             </mods:titleInfo>
         </mods:relatedItem>
         <mods:relatedItem type="constituent" ID="DMD_disc01_tr003"> 
             <mods:titleInfo><mods:partName>Fuga : allegro</mods:partName>
             </mods:titleInfo>
         </mods:relatedItem>
         <mods:relatedItem type="constituent" ID="DMD_disc01_tr004">
             <mods:titleInfo><mods:partName>Siciliano</mods:partName></mods:titleInfo>
         </mods:relatedItem>
         <mods:relatedItem type="constituent" ID="DMD_disc01_tr005">
             <mods:titleInfo><mods:partName>Presto</mods:partName></mods:titleInfo>
         </mods:relatedItem>
     </mods:relatedItem>
     <mods:relatedItem type="constituent" ID="DMD_disc01_tr006">
         <mods:titleInfo><mods:title>Paganiniana : variations</mods:title></mods:titleInfo>
     </mods:relatedItem>
     <mods:identifier type="lccn">99594334</mods:identifier>
</mods:mods>
            
            Meanwhile, the structural map would record the physical structure of the work as
               follows:
            
               <div TYPE="cd:compactDiscObject" DMDID="MODS1">    
     <div TYPE="cd:disc">       
         <div DMDID="DMD_disc01_tr001" TYPE="cd:track"></div>       
         <div DMDID="DMD_disc01_tr002" TYPE="cd:track"></div>       
         <div DMDID="DMD_disc01_tr003" TYPE="cd:track"></div>       
         <div DMDID="DMD_disc01_tr004" TYPE="cd:track"></div>       
         <div DMDID="DMD_disc01_tr005" TYPE="cd:track"></div>       
         <div DMDID="DMD_disc01_tr006" TYPE="cd:track"></div>    
     </div> 
</div>
                  
               
            
            This represents a valid use of METS (in the technical XML sense), but is
               a departure from expected practice, which would be to include both the logical and
               physical structural information within one or more structMap elements.
            This example demonstrates two problems that have impeded the development of
               interoperable content within the digital library community. The first is that the
               implementation of highly abstract elements for the definition of structure provides a
               tremendous amount of flexibility to document encoders; there are a vast number of
               potential encodings of any given object in METS, with variations possible in depth of
               structure (do I limit my structure to musical movements or do I provide structural
               information down to the measure level?), labeling (you say TYPE="book",
               I say TYPE="monograph"), and arrangement (should the Lord of Rings film
               trilogy be encoded as a single METS file? Three METS files? Three METS files for the
               individual films and a fourth representing the abstract notion of the Trilogy?). This
               can lead to significant variation in encoding practices, even between two
               institutions dealing with remarkably similar material and using the same metadata
               standards, as noted by .
            The second problem is what we might call the problem of standards independence. Many
               of the XML metadata schemas that have been developed with the help of the digital
               library community have been created with the understanding that ensuring their
               usefulness in a variety of application environments requires that they not contain
               inherent dependencies on other schemas; they need to be able to express all the
               relevant information within their particular domain on their own. In many of these
               XML standards, the designers recognized a need to be able to account for
               relationships between various content objects being described, whether the
               description being applied was the more traditional form of intellectual description
               you would expect in a library catalog, or a technical description of the composition
               of a TIFF image. The result has been that a number of common metadata schemas within
               the digital library field contain elements for expressing structural metadata, even
               schemas that are not primarily intended for recording structural metadata. Dublin
               Core has its relation element, MODS has its RelatedItem element,
               the PREMIS schema for preservation metadata has a relation element, even the
               MIX standard for still image technical metadata contains an element for referencing
               previous image metadata. As the standards' developers felt they should not make their
               efforts dependent on structural metadata mechanisms in other standards, they
               implemented their own. Unfortunately, with the addition of each new metadata standard
               containing structural metadata capabilities, the potential for difficulties with our
               first problem increases. Every new metadata standard created within the digital
               library community seems to add another mechanism for describing the structural
               relationships between content objects, and hence greater potential for variation in
               object encoding practices.
            The irony is that both these problems derive from the flexibility, extensibility,
               modularity and use of abstraction to create structural metadata elements that the
               designers of the metadata schemas hoped to promote. The potential range of variation
               in encoding structural metadata is the result of each of these factors. The use of
               abstraction in METS (i.e., the div element) was an attempt to make the
               standard flexible in application; however, it opens up a tremendous degree of play in
               encoding practice. If you ask two different individuals how many page breaks there
               are in a text, the likelihood that they will give the same answer is a good deal
               greater than if you ask them how many divisions there are in a text. The use of
               abstraction opens up encoding to a much greater degree of personal interpretation,
               and hence variation. The extensibility of METS, and the hope to promote a modular
               system of metadata schema reuse that its authors inscribed within it, opens up the
               possibility of using other metadata schemas to encode structural metadata. And it was
               this same desire for flexibility and modularity that has led other metadata schema
               designers to include structural metadata components in their own schemas; they wanted
               to ensure that their own efforts were flexible enough to be applied in a variety of
               settings, and with a variety of others. But having to design their own schemas
               without knowing the specific supporting capabilities to be found in other schemas
               with which their own might be used, they are inevitably forced to create structural
               metadata capacities of their own within their schemas. The designers of metadata
               schemas (structural or otherwise) within the digital library community have sought to
               adhere to a particular set of design practices, seeking to create flexible,
               extensible, modular and generalized tools, and to promote like practice in others
               through inscription of their view of appropriate XML design within their
               technological artifacts. Unfortunately, promoting such good practices has been a
               death blow to one of the principle reasons for adopting XML in the first place: to
               ensure interoperability of digital library materials across systems. Wide-scale
               interoperability requires wide-scale adoption, but the design practices of schema
               implementers intended to promote wide-scale adoption run directly counter to wide
               spread interoperability.
            Hence XML's similarity to a rope. Like a rope, it is extraordinarily flexible;
               unfortunately, just as with rope, that flexibility makes it all too easy to hang
               yourself.
         

            Strategies for Interoperability in a World of Multilingual Markup
            The digital library community seems to face a dilemma at this point. Through its
               pursuit of design goals of flexibility, extensibility, modularity and abstraction,
               and its promulgation of those goals as common practice through their inscription in
               XML metadata standards, it has managed to substantially impede progress towards
               another commonly held goal, interoperability of digital library content across a
               range of systems. How then, should the community respond?
            One possible response to this situation would be to say that perhaps our community
               cares less about interoperability than we thought. Despite projects intended to
               promote interoperability, such as the Digital Library Federation's Aquifer, it may be
               that interoperability is actually a lower priority for the digital library community
               than it likes to believe, and the adoption of metadata standards that impede
               interoperability is merely a reflection of that underlying reality, and not a major
               problem to resolve. There is at least some reason to suspect this may be the case.
               Research libraries typically have a clearly defined local clientele, and while voices
               within the digital library community have been calling for some time for the
               liberation of content from local silos to enable their use by a larger community , libraries' primary responsibility will always be to their
               local communities. The first sentence in the mission statement for the University
               Library at the University of Illinois at Chicago exemplifies the priorities present
               at most research libraries: The
                  University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) Library strives to meet the information
                  needs of UIC students, faculty, and staff.
               For the complete mission state of the University of Illinois at Chicago
                  Library, see http://www.uiuc.edu/lib/about/libmission.shtml
                Prioritizing service to the local community is endemic to the social
               structure of library systems, and if systems developed to deliver digital library
               content to that community are successful in that context, and if the costs associated
               with achieving much more widespread interoperability are high, then many libraries
               may decide that interoperability, while desirable, is a goal which may have to
               wait.
            If libraries do wish to make progress on the issue of interoperability of structural
               metadata, they will need to recognize that, as  observed,
                  every significant information
                  processing standardization effort must skillfully negotiate competing and
                  apparently irreconcilable objectives, [and] serve a wide variety of stakeholders
                  with many different interests. In the case of structural metadata, the
               particular competing objectives that the digital library community does not seem to
               have successfully reconciled to date are what , in a
               discussion of blogging practices, has labeled the problem of control vs. connection. The structural metadata
               standards which have been developed to date, with their emphasis on flexibility,
               extensibility and modularity have sought to afford local institutions the greatest
               degree of control possible in their encoding practices. The standards are designed to
               allow any given institution to do what it wants. This has clear benefits in terms of
               easing adoption of the standard in any given context, and as a result insuring the
               standard's widespread adoption (obviously a good thing in a standard). However,
               increasing the amount of local control over the ways in which a language is used and
               developed is fundamentally at odds with a language's ability to serve as a means for
               connection with others outside the local context. It is, in essence, promoting the
               development of regional dialects at the expense of mutual intelligibility. The
               particular case of structural metadata standards reveals that sufficient local
               variation in syntax, the ways in which people structure their objects using a markup
               language, can be as fatal to communication as variation in semantics.
            Given this fundamental tradeoff between internal control and external connection,
               libraries wishing to promote interoperability of digital library content have two
               possible strategies. The first, and most obvious, is to attempt to alter the balance
               currently struck between connection and control to more strongly favor connection.
               There are several mechanisms which the library community might employ in pursuit of
               this strategy, including the design and use of schemas which more significantly
               restrict both the means for recording the structure of objects and the ability to
               employ arbitrary additional schemas within instance documents (or developing profiles
               of existing schemas to achieve the same ends), establishing formal rules of
               structural description (equivalent to rules of description used in cataloging for
               creating bibliographic records) dictating aspects of object encoding not susceptible
               to enforcement through XML's validation mechanisms, and mandating the use of
               particular controlled vocabularies and ontologies within document instances to record
               information such as a div element's TYPE attribute in METS.
            Decreasing the possibility for local variation in encoding of structural metadata
               will certainly help improve digital libraries' capability to interoperate with each
               other. However, removing local capacity for variation will also tend to reduce the
               number of institutions who are willing to use such a markup language. If the digital
               library community, for instance, was to revise the METS standard to forbid any use of
               a relation or RelatedItem element in a descriptive metadata section
               to express the logical structure of a work, it would assist in insuring
               interoperability of digital content, but it might also very well mean losing the
               Library of Congress's support for the standard. More importantly, however, such an
               approach overlooks one of the fundamental realities of the web environment:
               communities of practice no longer operate in isolation from each other (if indeed,
               they ever did). Even if libraries could agree on a structural metadata standard that
               enabled a significantly greater degree of support for interoperability than we find
               with today's standards, libraries must now interact with a variety of other
               communities (publishers, museums, archives, educational technology companies, etc.)
               that are also creating their own structural metadata standards. This is not to say
               that pursuit of this strategy is futile or even inappropriate in many instances;
               libraries' previous experience with standard efforts such as MARC demonstrate that
               with sufficient time and effort a particular community of practice can achieve
               widespread interoperability of metadata. However, the library community's
               interactions with other communities clearly indicates that this strategy by itself is
               insufficient to resolve the interoperability problems that libraries confront
               today.
            To deal with these wider issues of interoperability, the library community must adopt
               a second strategy based on accepting that the need for community control over
               encoding practices is a valid one, that community dialects of markup languages
               are inevitable, and that we must find ways to facilitate information exchange across
               the boundaries of different communities' markup vernacular. However, this will
               require a significant shift in the digital library community's relationship to the
               notion of standards. Specifically, the library community needs to shift from its
               current singular focus on schema development to a dual focus on both schema
               development and translation between schemas.
            This is certainly not the case today, as can be seen if we examine the work of some
               of the major agencies involved in metadata standardization in libraries such as the
               Library of Congress. The Library of Congress currently serves as maintenance agency
               for a variety of XML standards developed within the library community; if you examine
               the list of standards that they are maintaining , however,
               you will find that while there are several metadata standards listed, standardized
               stylesheets to enable conversion between formats are not listed here. Such
               stylesheets do exist in some cases. The Library of Congress has, for example,
               provided stylesheets to enable conversion of MODS descriptive metadata records into
               MARC/XML format and back. These efforts to formalize prior work that established
               crosswalks between different descriptive metadata standards are not, however, seen by
               the community as having the status and importance of standards, as exhibited by their
               omission from the Standards at the Library of Congress
               web page. If the digital library community wishes to support interoperability while
               simultaneously affording institutions localized control over encoding practices, that
               situation needs to change. We can no longer view the creation of translations between
               standard formats as an ancillary activity; instead, we must regard it as a form of
               standards activity in its own right, as important, if not more important, than the
               creation of schemas for metadata sets.
            A heightened emphasis on standardizing translation between markup languages will mean
               further work on formalizing translations between markup languages using XSLT, and
               treating those with the level of attention and care that the community has lavished
               on metadata schemas. However, it might also be worth considering whether the notion
               of formal rules of structural description mentioned earlier might be of benefit in
               trying to achieve greater translatability between different markup languages. As an
               example of what this might mean, consider the example of the 1:1 principle in Dublin
               Core , that a single Dublin Core record should describe
               one and only one resource. The 1:1 principle provides guidance on the relationship
               between a metadata record and a described resource that is applicable outside the
               realm of Dublin Core; in fact, several other descriptive metadata standards developed
               since Dublin Core refer to the 1:1 principle as a guide to usage. We could easily
               envisage similar principles being developed for structural metadata that could guide
               usage of a variety of different structural metadata standards, and by working to
               insure similar use practices, would help insure ease of translation between different
               structural markup languages. We might, for instance, take as a working principle that
               any given structural metadata document should never contain more than two levels of
               structural hierarchy. Our METS example above passes muster with this rule; if,
               however, we modified it so that a third level of div elements was needed (of
               TYPE subchapter, for example), then we would be in violation of this
               principle. To fix this problem, we could employ METS' mptr element to allow
               the div elements for each chapter to reference separate METS files
               containing the structural descriptions for the individual chapters. Through the
               establishment of common principles of structural encoding and standardized
               stylesheets for translation, we might be able to improve our ability to interoperate
               while simultaneously retaining some flexibility for local encoding practice (although
               obviously adoption of common principles of structural encoding may impede local
               control in favor of connection to some degree).
            The rise of the network information society is presenting libraries with a variety of
               new challenges. Perhaps the most significant of these is the heightened degree of
               interaction with communities of practice that do not share libraries' standards,
               practices or values. If libraries are to survive and thrive in this new information
               society, they must alter their own value structure to prioritize communication with
               other communities to an equal, if not greater, extent than internal communication
               between libraries. If they pursue this course, they may find that issues of internal
               interoperability of library systems are more tractable than they have appeared to
               date.
         
