Title:  Text Minding: 
Volume:  003
Issue:  2
Date:  18 June 2009
Abstract:  
            A response to the Data Mining
               cluster, exploring the role of machine learning in textual study.
         
Full Body Text: 
Text Minding: A Response to Gender, Race, and Nationality in
               Black Drama, 1850-2000: Mining Differences in Language Use in Authors and their
               Characters
         

            Head of the first division
            Should he find his way to this special issue of DHQ,
               Sven Birkerts, author of The Gutenberg Elegies, would
               likely add machine learning to his cataract of digital distractions besetting
               literary reading in the electronic age. He would agree with the authors of Gender, Race, and Nationality in Black Drama, 1850-2000, I
               presume, only when they conclude their discussion of the performance of algorithms in
               generating feature lists that successfully distinguish American and non-American
               playwrights in the Black Drama database, and anticipate the objection, that the task itself is a trivial case, attempting to
                  confirm a distinction that is all too obvious to be of significant literary
                  interest. The depth of literary meaning, Birkerts would assert, cannot be
               mined by machines trained for data. I don’t share Birkerts’ vision that literary
               reading and new media technologies are mutually exclusive. He comes to mind upon
               reading these experiments in text mining, rather, as a way to illuminate what I think
               the significant literary interest of machine learning can and should be for humanists
               and literary critics. That interest, to put it simply before elaborating a bit
               further in this response, is a renewed and more robust understanding of the
               textuality, the principal object (if not subject) of our studies, that many critics
               (and print-centric critics like Birkerts among them) too frequently take for
               granted.
            The basis for such renewed critical potential is evident when the authors frame their
               experiments in machine learning as a complement, rather than supplement, to
               traditional text analysis. In summarizing the performance of text mining with regard
               to gender classification of characters within the drama database, the authors
               emphasize this complementarity in asserting, The
                  degree to which these lists reveal true differences among black American male and
                  female authors is a matter for discussion. The important thing is that the mining
                  algorithm gives fuel to the discussion and serves as a starting point for closer
                  textual study. Machine learning, on this view, is a tool for closer
               textual study, a staple of literary criticism; this tool is particularly rich in its
               potential to identify meaningful patterns across increasingly greater amounts (and
               distances) of texts. The authors are justifiably circumspect in worrying about the
               ways in which such a computational tool may distort the meanings of literary texts or
               offer an analysis at too great a distance from such texts. Most interesting, to me,
               is the worry that the binary logic necessary for computation may reveal binary
               thinking in the texts, but with the result of unduly privileging the stereotypical
               force of such patterns.
            I offer to this concern a three-fold response. First, we should worry such things;
               but this concern, of course, is not limited to digital tools of analysis. As Jerome
               McGann reminds literary critics in Radiant Textuality,
               all of our critical tools of analysis are and always have been prostheses for acting at a distance, the same 
                  distance that makes reflection
                     possible
                  
               . Second, in view of this understanding of interpretation as a dynamic between
               tools and texts, always oscillating between method and meaning, I would suggest that
               the self-awareness of this critical problem made evident in Mining Differences is not just a credit to the article; this greater
               attention to the mediations of critical method is enhanced by the mediation of the
               machine. The point is that the texts we study, whatever the substrate, are already
               mediating technologies, compilations of linguistic and printing and picture-making
               machines. Textual technologies such as the machine learning and text mining software
               at issue here, can and should, if used thoughtfully, offer insight into the
               technologies of the texts we study. Katherine Hayles, emphasizing the need for
               literary critics to pursue media specific
                  analysis, argues that digital media give us the opportunity 
                  to see print with new eyes
                  
               . Birkerts could certainly take note; despite his title and his defense of the
               book, there is very little Gutenberg in his de-materialized conception of
               reading.
            This closer understanding of text technology, it seems to me, might begin to address
               the concern for binary opposition raised by the authors though not interrogated
               further in the article. That limitation of the machine may well be the source of
               literary insight. In his Figures in Black, the African
               American literary theorist and scholar Henry Louis Gates, Jr. offers a compelling
               analysis of how Frederick Douglass employs binary opposition in his first slave
               narrative as a complex rhetorical device aimed at undermining, by way of revealing,
               the binarity of language that slavery employs in its ontology of slaves versus men.
               The critical insight is that the arbitrary and binary mechanics of language as such
               can be appropriated and used differently by the author who knows how to operate and
               deconstruct the literacy machine. Douglass thus mines the language of slavery and
               race in his narratives in order to reveal a mind within the machine. The lesson is
               that how we read and write does indeed determine what we read. For Douglass, the
               interaction of medium and meaning drives the revisionary potential of his narrative;
               we see the black author in print with new eyes. I see a similar insight into the
               relation between ontology and textual technology suggested in Mining Eighteenth Century Ontologies, where the knowledge discovery of
               machine learning locates its Enlightenment type in the knowledge discovery, ancestral
               hypertext of the Encyclopedie. We shouldn’t be
               surprised, I suspect, to find similar insights regarding the ontologies of race and
               gender in the texts of black drama — a genre, after all, whose textuality is
               inherently and complexly multimedia. Surprised or not, the suggestive patterning of
               textuality that machine learning can reveal, combined with the critical
               self-awareness that the humanities seeks, represents a significant means for this
               critical discussion to move forward.
         
