Title:  Cervantes Project: The Digital Quixote Iconography Collection
Volume:  003
Issue:  3
Date:  29 September 2009
Abstract:  
            In 2001 the Cervantes Project (CP) started
               the creation of a hypertextual archive to include digital images of the illustrations
               taken from over 500 of the most significant editions to form the textual iconography
               of the Quixote (as permitted by copyright limitations). Our main objectives are to
               make the illustrations more accessible and to establish their contribution to the
               reception and interpretation of the text. At the time of this poster's creation, the archive has
               acquired, digitized, and made available online more than 25,000 images, supported by
               a fully searchable database and complemented by rich metadata and innovative
               visualization tools.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Poster Abstract
            It is often stated by critics that the Quixote is a
               theatrical, graphic, and visual book. Thus, visual representations, like theatrical
               performances, popular iconography, and book illustrations, have been recognized as
               significant contributions to the understanding of Cervantes’ masterpiece.
               Nevertheless, the thousands of woodcuts, engravings, etchings, drawings, and
               lithographs that have accompanied the text are, for the most part, a little known
               interpretative tradition, and a much neglected critical and artistic treasure.
             Obstacles, such as the difficulty to get access to rare books, have prevented the
               illustrative tradition from being well appreciated by scholars, students, and users
               in general. In 2001 the Cervantes Project
               (CP) started the creation of a hypertextual archive to include digital images of the
               illustrations taken from over 500 of the most significant editions to form the
               textual iconography of the Quixote (as permitted by copyright limitations). Our main
               objectives are to make the illustrations more accessible and to establish their
               contribution to the reception and interpretation of the text. At the present time,
               the archive has acquired, digitized, and made available online more than 25,000
               images, supported by a fully searchable database and complemented by rich metadata
               and innovative visualization tools.
             The availability of the archive will contribute to the understanding and
               appreciation of Cervantes’ novel by initiating new explorations from many
               perspectives: textual, artistic, critical, bibliographical, and historical. In
               particular, we provide resources and assistance to examine the reception and
               evolution of the Quixote’s readings across time, culture, audience, and milieu.
               Furthermore, the images can be grouped according to several layers of content to
               cater for the users’ need for information selection of a specific critical focus.
               This is achieved by cataloging each image using a comprehensive taxonomy of the
               episodes, adventures, themes, and characters. We are also in the process of inserting
               cataloged anchors in the textual narrative to establish thematic interlinking between
               the locality in the narrative and the subject of the illustrations. 
             At the same time, this novel iconographic approach in our project will enable
               scholars to go beyond the literary aspect of Cervantes’ works. As an invaluable
               pictorial depository, we also emphasize supplying information regarding the historic
               value and artistic significance of the images. The hermeneutic and aesthetic values
               of each individual image can be carefully examined by art historians and the results
               incorporated in the archive as scholarly commentary. Additionally, we are also
               developing biographical commentary about artists and engravers. These rich scholarly
               commentaries will help to boost the study of book illustration art, which has been to
               date secondary in Art History, in aspects such as the evolution of techniques, from
               the first woodcuts (early 17th century) to modern mechanical offset (20th century),
               and the influence or achievement of an engraver, illustrator, or lithographer.
             For additional information about the project, and to view the Digital Quixote
               Iconography collection, see http://cervantes.tamu.edu/. 
         

            Poster
            Download poster (PDF file) .
         
