Title:  Digitizing Latin Incunabula: Challenges, Methods, and Possibilities
Volume:  003
Issue:  1
Date:  26 February 2009
Abstract:  
            Incunabula, or books printed before 1500, are extremely difficult and expensive to
               convert to digital form. The primary challenges arise from the use of non-standard
               typographical glyphs based on medieval handwriting to abbreviate words. Further
               difficulties are also posed by the practice of inconsistently marking word breaks at
               the end of lines and reducing or even eliminating spacing between some words. As
               such, these documents form a distinct genre of electronic document that poses unique
               challenges for conversion to digital form. From 2005–2007, the Preservation and
               Access Research and Development Program at the National Endowment for the Humanities
               funded a study to explore methods for digitizing these difficult texts. This paper
               describes some of the results of that project. The work described in this paper
                  was completed by the Approaching the Problems of Digitizing
                     Latin Incunables project funded by the National Endowment for the
                  Humanities Division of Preservation and Access. The material in this paper is
                  drawn from the project application, internal technical reports, grant project
                  reports and the project descriptions included in 
                  and . Much of this work was inspired by Ross
                  Scaife and his work building a corpora of Latin Colloquia. I am deeply grateful
                  for Ross's comments, advice and support. A version of this paper will also be
                  published as part of the project web site.
            
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Incunabula and other early printed works pose intriguing challenges and test cases
               for large-scale mass digitization projects such as Google Books
                  
                and the Open Content Alliance.
                  ; 
                While there are many different challenges related to the digitization of
               early printed books such as encoding layout information, marginalia, hand-added marks
               to denote the structure of works, etc., the project described here focused on only
               one class of problem. Our primary aim was to study the challenges associated with
               representing in digital form the complex and non-standard typefaces used in these
               texts to abbreviate words in imitation of of medieval handwriting practice. Although
               there are many different types of abbreviation, the most prevalent is the use of a
               macron over vowels to indicate the removal of the subsequent nasal
                  consonantThis discussion appeared in the original proposal, and was
                  summarized in 
               . These glyphs can represent different sets of characters in different
               contexts. For example, the string ê can be used to designate en or
                  em, while a stylized variations on the letter q can denote many
               different common Latin words such as que and quod, and stylized
               variations of the letter p to denote the common prefixes per or
                  pro. There are also specialized characters for some very common words.
            
               Sample Brevigraphs
               
               Sample brevigraphs from early Latin books
            
            In addition to non-standard glyphs, two other early modern typographical practices
               make incunabula difficult to digitize. First, word divisions or spaces between words
               are often unclear; it can be difficult for data entry contractors to tell where one
               word begins and the next word ends.
            
               
                  Sample Unclear Word Division
                  
                  Sample Unclear Word Division from early Latin books
               
            
            Second, words often break across line endings without hyphenation or any other mark.
               For example, the first three characters of a word can appear on one line with the
               final three characters on the following line and no typographical indicator of the
               word break. This practice can vary from line to line within a text; one line may be
               hyphenated while the next line will have a word break that is not hyphenated.
            
               Sample word break across line ending
               
               Sample word break across line ending from early Latin books
            
            These examples of the most common abbreviations only begin to describe an extremely
               complex typographic system. For example, the 1488 edition of the Stultifera Navis was printed using some 168 unique glyphs while Pincius’
               1497 Latin translation of Diogenes’ Vitae et Sententiae
                  Philosophorum contains some 156 unique glyphs. With the additional
               complexities introduced by varying practices from press to press across Europe and
               even among compositors at a single press, the number of possible variations expands
               exponentially. 
            These features of early typography occur at varying rates in different texts, but
               they appear so frequently in every early printed text that any digitization project
               must try to account for their presence. For example, the Archimedes Digital Library
               Project to digitize important early printed source texts for studying the history of
               mechanics created a library of sixty texts printed between the years 1495 and 1691.
                  ; 
                In this broad corpus of texts, on average there are three to five
               abbreviations on every page. As one moves earlier in the history of print,
               abbreviations become much more common and correspondingly more difficult to deal
               with. For example, the Stultifera Navis (1488) has 313 pages and 12,404
               abbreviations, an average of 39.8 abbreviations per page; the Legenda Aurea (before 1478) has 829 pages and 120,261 abbreviations, an
               average of 145 abbreviations per page; and the Vitae et
                  Sententiae Philosophorum (1497) has 190 pages and 52,267 abbreviations, an
               average of 276 abbreviations per page. 
            Because of the prevalence of these glyphs, incunabula cannot be processed using OCR
               software. Commercial OCR programs produce almost no recognizable character strings,
               let alone searchable text. Sravana Reddy and Greg Crane have shown that ABBY
               FineReader can recognize only 84% of the glyphs on a page and that the open source
               GAMERA system can be trained to recognize only 80% of the glyphs in texts from our
               testbed . Other methods must be explored.
         

            Methods
            When considering methods for digitizing early printed books, it is first essential to
               ask how much functionality end-users require from a digital facsimile of an incunable
               and study how much human intervention is required to create a text that end-users
               might find usable. We evaluated the costs and added value associated with different
               approaches to digitizing these documents. These approaches can be roughly organized
               into five groups:
            
               
                  Image Books: Image books are simply page images that are scanned or
                  photographed and placed online. A user can browse the pages sequentially, but
                  there is no text to be searched — only images to be viewed. 
               
                  Image Books With Minimal Structural Data: This structural data
                  includes section headers, chapter headings, indexes, et cetera. These allow for
                  some navigation of the text, but still not full text searching. 
               
                  Image Front Transcriptions: Image front transcriptions were
                  pioneered by projects such as Making of America at the University of Michigan and
                  Cornell. In this format, page images are run through an optical character
                  recognition process and then the uncorrected OCR is used for searching, but the
                  end user is only ever presented with the page image. This means that some of the
                  benefits of searchability are made available to the end user while not incurring
                  the expense of actually going through and cleaning up the OCR text to a point
                  where it would be presentable to a human user.
               
                  Carefully Edited and Tagged Transcriptions: These sorts of texts
                  are the kind that you might find in a digital library such as Bartleby or the
                  Perseus Project. These are texts that exist in the public domain that have been
                  typed or processed via OCR. A scholar carefully checks the text against the
                  original to make sure it is accurate and places it online. Generally, these texts
                  are marked up in XML (projects that began before the creation of XML might also
                  have texts in SGML). These texts are also marked up according to a DTD such as
                  DocBook or the Text Encoding Initiative. 
               
                  Scholarly and Critical Editions: These digital texts replicate the
                  work that scholars have done with printed text for hundreds of years. Scholars
                  will choose an author, examine all his or her works, study all the variants and
                  create an authoritative version of a text. They will replicate in digital form all
                  of the standard footnotes and critical apparatus that one would expect in a
                  printed scholarly edition of a text. 
            
            In our project, we initially planned to create tagged transcriptions of many
               different sample texts. As we considered these different genres, we decided that it
               would be much more interesting to create sample texts in each of these genres except
               for a full scholarly critical edition. This would allow us to see and evaluate first
               hand the costs and benefits of the different approaches. We created image books of
               Petrarch's 1492 De Remediis Utriusque Fortunae (Cremona, Bernardinus de Misintis and
               Caesar Parmensis; text images provided courtesy of National Library of Medicine) and
               Isidore of Seville's 1472 Etymologiae Liber IX (Ausberg, Gunther Zainer; text images
               provided courtesy of National Library of Medicine). We created image books with
               minimal structural data of Pliny the Elder's 1472 Naturalis Historiae Liber (Venice,
               Nicolas Jenson; text images provided courtesy of Linda Hall Library). We created
               image front transcriptions of Sebastian Brant's 1488 Ship of Fools (Lyons, Jaques
               Sacon; text images provided courtesy of Harvard University Countway Library) and
               Jacobus de Voragine's pre-1478 Legenda Aurea (Ulm, Johann Zainer; text images
               provided courtesy of Conception Abbey Seminary Library). We carefully transcribed and
               edited Suetonius' 1494 Vitae XII Caesarum (Milan, Leonard Pachel text images provided
               courtesy of Conception Abbey Seminary Library) and Diogenes Laertius' 1497 Latin
               translation of the Lives of Eminent Philosophers (Philippus Pincius for Benedictus
               Fontana; text images provided courtesy of the Universiyt of Missouri Kansas City
               Libraries.)
            As one moves from image books to critical editions, the cost of the digital facsimile
               predictably increases because each element of human intervention introduces new
               costs. Capturing an image is the least expensive minimum baseline that all other
               editions build on; structural metadata adds human labor and expense beyond the
               cataloging of each image. Assuming that a text is amenable to OCR, image front
               transcriptions are only slightly more expensive and might even be cheaper than image
               books with manually created minimal structural metadata. The creation of a scholarly
               or critical edition lies at the other end of the cost spectrum; this is the sort of
               work that might take many years or even represent a scholar's lifetime achievement.
               The biggest jump in cost comes in the move from an image front transcription to a
               carefully edited and tagged transcription. Although preparing a page for OCR adds
               additional labor, manual data entry costs substantially more; when an editorial team
               must also be paid, costs escalate rapidly.
            It is least expensive, of course, to produce digital images of a book and not provide
               any searchable text; the ability to search a text, however, is such an important
               function for most users that the extra labor and expense is justified. An optimial
               compromise between cost and functionality seems to emerge in the image-front model
               pioneered by projects such as the Making of America and now being implemented on a
               broad scale by Google Book Search and the Open Content Alliance. This approach is
               successful because it allows for the cost-effective digitization of large numbers of
               books while also providing the functionality and readabilty that most users expect.
               Indeed, most people who use digital texts expect to be able to search them, but they
               are not necessarily displeased to find a page image as opposed to a typed text
               transcription. While the findings of Reddy and Crane show that incunabula cannot yet
               be processed using this sort of workflow, these large scale projects are extremely
               intriguing. Ultimately, if the problems of typography and layout can be resoloved to
               the point that these texts can be processed automatically, it would be possible to
               imagine the creation of similarly large corpora of early printed books.
            The image-front approach to digitizing modern books should be applicable to early
               printed books because many of the high cost components are the same regardless of the
               source text. The Open Content Alliance claims that their method has moved costs from
               twenty dollars per page to ten cents per page. In our project, we had similar costs;
               when creating a human-edited searchable transcriptions, we spent between twenty and
               thirty-five dollars per page. These costs broke down as follows. We spent between two
               and ten dollars for each photograph of a page. The cost here depended primarily on
               the physical location of the book. Many of the books that we photographed in this
               project were physically located at libraries in Washington, D.C. and Boston, so we
               had to factor in our travel expenses for those images. We were able to photograph the
               books located in Kansas City for roughly two dollars per page. We then paid two
               dollars to six dollars per page to create character sets and to have the text typed.
               We paid one dollar and twenty-five cents per megabyte and used character sets to
               identify the unusual and non-standard characters that the data entry contractors
               encountered. In general, we found that it was possible for a human to edit the
               transcriptions and expand the abbreviations at a rate of two pages per hour. In our
               work, each page was checked twice resulting in a cost of ten to twelve dollars per
               page for tagging and proofreading. To this must be added supervision, training and
               project administrative costs, and institutional overhead rates. In order to reduce
               these costs and enable large scale digitization projects for early printed works, the
               primary aim must be to reduce tagging and proofreading costs. Because of the fragile
               nature of early printed books, manual photographers cannot be replaced by robotic
               scanners, but even with this expense our work suggests that it should be possible to
               create an image-front edition for somewhere between five and six dollars per
               page.
         

            Data Entry Methodology
            Once the decision has been made to digitize the text rather than displaying page
               images or page images with minimal metadata, the next issue to be faced is how to
               address the numerous characters and glyphs that cannot be represented in current
               computer encoding systems including Unicode. It was necessary, therefore, for us to
               develop a method that data entry contractors could use to represent these characters
               as they were typing our texts. The data entry process begins with a manually created
               catalog of every brevigraph that appears in each printed book (illustrated in Figure 4).
            
               Sample Catalog of Brevigraphs
               
               Sample Catalog of Brevigraphs
            
             In this process, a unique entity identifier is assigned to each non-standard
               character that data entry personnel use to represent that glyph in a text. For
               example, the opening lines of the 1494 edition of Suetonius’ Vitae XII Caesarum is
               printed as follows: 
                  Sample Lines from Suetonius. Vitae XII
                     Caesarum. Milan: Leonard Pachel. 1494 
                  
                  Sample Lines from Suetonius. Vitae XII Caesarum. Milan: Leonard Pachel.
                     1494 
               
            
            Using the catalog of brevigraphs, this line would have been entered by data entry
               contractors as follows:
            
               patr&e1; amisit sequ&e2;tibus&q1; co&c1;sulibus flamen dialis
                  destinatus
            
            If the goal of this process is to create a carefully tagged TEI-conformant text that
               reflects the typography of a printed page, this product of raw data entry could be
               tagged as followed using the TEI abbr tag from the TEI P4 guidelines to represent
               each different glyphWhen this project was planned in 2004, we based our work on
                  the TEI P4 guidelines and elected to use the abbr tag in our work.
                  The new TEI P5 standard released in November of 2007 now has much more complete
                  guidelines for working with character sets that are not represented in the Unicode
                  standard. Although these guidelines appeared too late to inform the work of this
                  project, the guidelines would need to be incorporated into any further work on
                  these documents.. 
            
               patre<abbr type='e1'>m</abbr> amisit; seque<abbr
                  type='e2'>n</abbr>ntibus<abbr type='q1'>que</abbr> co<abbr
                  type='c1'>n</abbr>sulibus flamen dialis destinatus
            
         

            Possibilities
            Because the expansion of these abbreviations is an extremely time-consuming and
               painstaking task, we developed three tools to facilitate the tagging process. These
               tools suggest possible expansions for Latin abbreviations and brevigraphs, help
               identify words that are divided across lines, and separate words that are joined as
               the results of irregular spacing. All three programs can return results in HTML for
               human readability or by XML in response to remote procedure call as part of a program
               to automatically expand abbreviations in these texts.
            The abbreviation expansion tool uses regular expressions to search all attested Latin
               forms in the Packard Humanities Institute Database of Latin, the Perseus Digital
               Library and our collection of texts. The program can return results in HTML for human
               readability or by XML in response to remote procedure call so that texts can be
               automatically tagged. 
            
               Abbreviation Expansion Tool
               
               Abbreviation Expansion Tool
            
            The unmarked word break tool takes broken words and searches that same lexical
               database for possible word combinations. This tool also provides its results by HTML
               and XML. 
            
               Unmarked Word Break Tool
               
               Unmarked Word Break Tool
            
            Finally, the unclear word division tool takes a string and breaks it into pieces and
               searches for combinations that match attested forms in our lexical database and once
               again, the interface is provided for human readability in HTML and for use by a
               remote procedure call via XML.
            
               Unclear Word Division Tool
               
               Unclear Word Division Tool
            
            The results are sorted by frequency to provide the editor with a sense of the most
               likely result. Although we conducted some experiments to see if n-grams or Hidden
               Markov Models can provide better weightings than raw frequencies, they did not
               provide more usable results for human editors. If we were to move to fully automatic
               expansion of these abbreviations, these weighting techinques would come into play.
            
         

            Conclusion
            Our work on this project suggests that it is possible to begin to conceive of a
               large-scale project to create image front editions of early printed texts with
               uncorrected manual data entry available for searching. The biggest expense in our
               workflow lies in the cost of having a human editor tag the abbreviations and a second
               editor proofread that work. Clearly, these costs can be reduced by creating image
               front editions on the model of the Open Content Alliance or the Google Book project.
               It would be necessary for us to replace the uncorrected OCR in their workflow with
               the uncorrected manually typed text from our workflow. Users could then search this
               uncorrected text and actually read from the page image. Because of the high rate of
               abbreviation, there is a price to be paid in terms of search precision. However, the
               precision/recall trade-off would not be such that it would render the text unusable.
               In the texts we studied for the NEH project, some 45-50% of words have no brevigraphs
               or abbreviations and another 25% of the abbreviations can be unambiguously expanded
               into a single word. The decrease in precision is introduced in the remaining 25%; of
               these, 10% have two or three expansions, 7.5% have more than three expansions, and
               7.5% cannot be resolved. These numbers suggest that there would be a substantial
               increase in precision over recall for only a small percentage of searches. These
               results suggest that it would be possible to use these tools to create image front
               transcriptions. We could use our tools to automatically correct our transcriptions
               and perhaps have a single human editor check the corrections at a rate of four to
               five pages per hour. End-users would be able to search this transcription and read
               the page images. 
            While this approach advances our ability to undertake a large scale project to
               digitize early printed books, there is still some missing functionality. One of the
               advantages of a transcribed text is the ability to create automatic hypertexts. For
               many years, the Perseus Digital Library has used its morphological analysis engine to
               create texts that are automatically annotated with morphological and syntactic data.
               In the Perseus interface, a user can click on a word to discover its part of speech
               and the lexical forms from which it could be derived. The interface also provides
               links to dictionaries and grammars that facilitate further inquiry.
                  http://www.perseus.tufts.edu;
                     ; .
            
            
               Sample Interface Showing Page Image and Transcription with Morphological
                  Links
               
               Sample Interface Showing Page Image and Transcription with Morphological
                  Links
            
            These tools allow student and scholars to read texts in the original Greek or Latin
               even if they do not have expert knowledge of these languages. These tools would be
               particularly useful for early printed books because these texts are essential for the
               study of almost every aspect of early modern culture. Many of them, however, have not
               been translated and many scholars who study this period are not afforded expert
               training in all of the languages that they may need to utilize to study this period. 
            The addition of this functionality might justify the substantial additional cost of
               creating a transcribed text. It also creates a compelling question for our research.
               If our image front transcription could also contain pixel coordinates for individual
               words, it would be possible to access the automatic hypertext via the page image.
               Users could click on the page image to see the raw text, the automatic expansions
               suggested by our tools and also the morphological and syntactic information from the
               Perseus morphological analyzer. This model is slightly more expensive than one where
               texts are just searched, but the image is not clickable. The data entry costs must
               increase because the typist will capture the pixel coordinates for each word. At the
               same time, however, editorial costs will fall because the transcription will only be
               used for searching with the word coordinates used for morphology and, in fact, we
               would hope that the text could come back from our data entry contractor and be used
               almost as is with minimal human intervention. 
            How do we analyze the costs and benefits of this approach? The idea of just in
                  time conversion provides us with the best model for analysis. John Price
               Wilkins, in a 1997 article entitled Just in Time Conversion,
                  Just in Case Collections, argues that digital library usage patterns
               mirror those of traditional libraries.
                  
                In this usage pattern, many materials can sit unused for very long periods of
               time punctuated by a period of high and intensive use. This pattern holds in the
               digital collections we have created for other projects. In some semesters, many texts
               will not be used at all, but one or two will be used very intensively. To the extent
               that this pattern holds larger collections of lightly edited text seem to provide
               more benefits to a broader audience than smaller collections of closely edited
               transcriptions or critical editions.
            Further, using this model does not preclude the creation of a more carefully edited
               transcription or critical edition. Rather, it can provide the foundation for these
               texts. In this model, the raw or lightly corrected text can be provided to scholars
               with the expertise and inclination to create a more carefully edited version. This
               text could be released under a Creative Commons license that requires that the
               improved text to be returned to the scholarly community. For example, we could
               initially publish an uncorrected image front edition of the Legenda Aurea. A scholar
               working with this text could download the uncorrected transcription and devote their
               expertise to creating a better electronic transcription of the text. Under the
               Creative Commons license, they could use this as they wished and they would also
               return it to us and, ultimately, improve the entire digital library. 
         
