Title:  Designing Choreographies for the 
Volume:  003
Issue:  2
Date:  18 June 2009
Abstract:  
            The nature of the academic lecture has changed with the introduction of wi-fi and
               cellular technologies. Interacting with personal screens during a lecture or other
               live event has become commonplace and, as a result, the economy of attention that
               defines these situations has changed. Is it possible to pay attention
               when sending a text message or surfing the web? For that matter, does
                  distraction always detract from the learning that takes place in
               these environments? In this article, we ask questions concerning the texture and
               shape of this emerging economy of attention. We do not take a position on the
               efficiency of new technologies for delivering educational content or their efficacy
               of competing for users’ time and attention. Instead, we argue that the emerging
               social media provide new methods for choreographing attention in line with the
               performative conventions of any given situation. Rather than banning laptops and
               phones from the lecture hall and the classroom, we aim to ask what precisely they
               have on offer for these settings understood as performative sites, as well as for a
               culture that equates individual attentional behavior with intellectual and moral
               aptitude.
         
Full Body Text: 
Designing Choreographies for the New Economy of Attention
         

            
               In an industrial society, the scarce
                  resources are goods and services. In an information society, the scarce commodity
                  is not information — we are choking on that — but the human attention required to
                  make sense of it. Human attention-structures work differently from goods and
                  services and will require a new kind of economics and a new kind of economist. The
                  economists have not realized this yet, but then neither have the rest of
                  us.
               
            
         
University students are browsing Facebook on their laptops and sending text messages to
            their friends when they should be focused on the lecture; they are tending to their
            instant messages, their playlists, their television shows, and their shopping while they
            do their homework. These are the laments of the contemporary professoriate, daily
            confronted with a generation of digital natives whose work practices and patterns of
            attention appear to be multifocal, multivocal, and driven to distraction. As Mark
            Edmundson has recently commented, 
               University students now are virtual
                  Hamlets of the virtual world, pondering possibility, faces pressed up against the
                  sweet-shop window of their all-purpose desiring machines. To ticket or not to
                  ticket, buy or not to, party or no: Or perhaps to simply stay in and to multiply
                  options in numberless numbers, never to be closed down
               
            . Many have decried the stupefying effects of the emerging media, arguing that the
            social and temporal spaces of patient reading, deliberation, and reasoned discourse have
            been eroded, and that, without radical intervention, young people will soon be unable to
            carry on a regular conversation — much less an extended argument — outside of the
            mediating crutch of their laptop or hand-held device .
            Others bemoan the emergence of a new educational economy that threatens to convert
            students into nomadic consumers of information and faculty into 
               automatic professor machines
               
            . Alternatively, advocates for the advancing media have celebrated the
            educational, even liberatory, possibilities of game-based strategies for student
            learning, laptops and wireless networks that provide universal access to information,
            and social networking environments that provide students (and faculty) with ubiquitous
            access to the network and to one another. At the center of this debate are questions
            about changes in the practices and economics of education, and their bearing on
            structures of attention. Are these new technologies reshaping human attention in ways
            that undermine key practices of teaching and learning? Or do they provide a framework
            for new curricular designs and alternative conceptions of attention that occur at an
            order of complexity appropriate to teaching and learning in this new economy?
This article takes its point of departure from questions concerning the texture and
            shape of this emerging economy of attention. Our concern is not to critique the new
            social media as extensions of a shallow and historicall amnesiac mass culture, nor
            alternatively to take a position on the efficiency of new technologies for delivering
            educational content or their efficacy at meeting students where they live, and
            thereby entering into the competition for their time and attention. Indeed, our central
            concern is not about technology at all, but is instead about more stable and enduring
            features of human performative practice that enter into and shape the physical and
            symbolic sites of teaching and learning wherever and however they are organized. And, as
            we will argue, it is precisely these basic conventions of the sited work of education
            that are placed at issue by the availability of easy-to-use interactive technologies.
            Rather than seeking to ban these devices from the lecture hall and the classroom, we aim
            to ask what precisely they have on offer for a culture that equates individual
            attentional behavior with intellectual and moral aptitude.

            Driven to Distraction: The Making of the Attentive Subject
            We live in a society where the inability to focus attention is labeled pathological,
               where millions of young people are diagnosed and treated for Attention Deficit
               Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) each year, and where the ability to focus one’s
               attention is tantamount to proper socialization. As agents of socialization, the onus
               of responsibility has long rested on educational institutions to combat the epidemic
               of wandering minds and diminishing attention spans. Indeed, with the recent clinical
               classification of ADHD, success or failure at this task can now be evaluated through
               measurable diagnoses (http://newideas.net/cgi-bin/adhd-test/questionnaire.pl). The pathological
               designation of ADHD provides a clear backdrop against which educational institutions
               and other social agencies define and manufacture attention as a property of singular
               focus. As a result, the possibility of a nuanced appreciation of the complex
               structure of attention is near absent in the contemporary discourse about knowledge
               acquisition and modern subjectivity. 
            This reified conception of attention — as something that is more or less a property
               of individual neurophysiology and behavior — stands in contrast to a history of
               philosophy in which the concept of attention has evolved in line with differing
               conceptions of mind. For example, the eighteenth-century German philosopher Immanuel
               Kant believed that perception was 
                  a priori
               , a product of principles of synthetic unification that existed in the mind
               independent of our interaction with external stimuli. In the mid-nineteenth century,
               the neo-Kantian emphasis on apperception began to be replaced by empiricist
               philosophies that treated the mind as an aggregator of external stimuli. As
               philosophers and psychologists began to contend with the realities of modern life —
               daily life in the factory, photographic and moving pictures, engaging with the
               cacophony of urban streetscapes — subjectivity came to be viewed less as a universal
               property of mind and more as an individualized product of the self-organization of
               attention. In other words, people could no longer take it all in; they had to
               focus their attention on individual matters, or risk reaching the limits of their
               mental capacity. In response to concerns about the rapidly growing modern metropolis
               during the turn of the last century, the German sociologist Georg Simmel argued that
               daily life in the city required a shift in the psychic life of the individual. The intellect, he
               stated, serves as a protective
                  organ and the mind functions like a calculator, capable of 
                  transforming the world into an
                     arithmetical problem and of fixing every one of its parts in a mathematical
                     formula
                  
               . By the early 20th century, this rational-empiricist conception of mind had
               become pervasive and the command of attention was considered a normative aspect of
               modern life. Outside of the subject’s ability to filter external stimuli, the world
               was utterly incomprehensible. Consciousness in the state of distraction, as Walter Benjamin
               characterized it , had become the natural state of mind. 
            Distraction and attention go hand-in-hand. The very same new technologies and
               landscapes that cultivate a state of distraction are themselves directed
               simultaneously toward the cultivation of attention. Walking through Times Square the
               mind is distracted by multiple simultaneous stimuli, each of which is vying for our
               attention — the moving images, the street vendors, and the billboards. According to
               Jonathan Crary, 
                  modern distraction was not a
                     disruption of stable or natural kinds of sustained, value-laden
                     perception that had existed for centuries, but was an effect — and
                     in many cases a constituent element — of the many attempts to produce
                     attentiveness in human subjects
                  
               . In short, distraction is a logical by-product of a successive array of
               technologies of attention. And so the irony and the felt contradiction of our present
               condition consists in the fact that, while distraction is characterized as a social
               problem, the underlying cause of that problem — ever intensifying technologies of
               attention — continues to masquerade as its solution. This comes into clear relief in
               the context of formal education.
            Since the beginning of the twentieth century, educators have strategized about how
               best to employ complex visual stimuli (photography, film and painting) in the
               classroom, not as an object of study, but as a means of focusing attention. The
               psychologist Hugo Munsterberg, in his 1909 book Psychology and
                  the Teacher, devotes an entire chapter to attention. He concludes that
               attention requires a certain complexity in the presentation of visual objects: 
                  The greater the manifoldness of
                     connections in the attended material, the richer the relations, the fuller the
                     meaning, the more significant the parts, the more important the ideas involved,
                     the more responsive the pupil’s attention will be. It can shift and change and
                     remain always fresh without leaving the work and without the mind wandering
                     outside the classroom.
                  
                The concept is rather simple: the richer and more interesting the material,
               the more focused the mind will be. But he characterizes attention as a dynamic
               process, rather than as a stagnant state. Attention encompasses controlled
               distraction carefully directed towards a particular goal.
            Munsterberg’s depiction of how to capture the pupil’s attention remains influential
               within the contemporary rhetoric of e-education. New technologies are employed to
               make attentive the naturally distracted minds of youth, but they are rarely employed
               to formulate the relationship between structures — or better,
                  choreographies — of attention and the distracted subjects they seek
               to engage.
            We take this choreographic project as our central pedagogical task. The present essay
               grows out of a project funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities where we
               are studying the integration methods of remote participation and digital backchannels
               into live scholarly events (http://digitallyceum.org). We are particularly interested in the physical
               organization of attention and distraction as audience members at a lecture or
               conference interact with one another across multiple channels and sites. Laptops and
               wireless devices are increasingly present in academic settings. Rather than assuming
               that their presence takes away from an established order of attention, we are
               seeking to understand how they reconfigure that order in ways that might allow for
               new methods of engagement. In practice, with the introduction of networked
               technologies into the traditional academic setting, the attention of individual
               audience members is redirected from a single stream of speech to the presence of
               other audience members interacting with a global network of ideas. In the absence of
               strong conventions for shaping the conduct of these events, the presence of the
               network and multiple channels for interaction could, indeed, prove highly
               disorienting. For this reason, we have made a series of deliberate choices about how
               we incorporate technologies into this context and how we introduce these channels of
               communication to the participants. We have designed a suite of backchannel
               tools and incorporated them into the physical lecture setting so that we can observe
               how these additional channels change the texture of attention: how the audience
               directs their glances, how they situate their bodies, ask questions, and in all these
               ways, demonstrate a new and different order of what it means to be attending a live
               event. We are not suggesting that the mere presence of digital backchannels
               positively enhances the academic setting; rather, we suggest that, if properly
               choreographed, these channels, just like the organization of chairs and podiums in a
               lecture hall, can augment the live event in new and powerful ways. Where this
               intentional choreography is present, the mind wanders from the focal event,
               but does so purposively, with guidance from the organizers, the tools, the speakers,
               and the other audience members. Much as the controlled burning of a forest enables
               safe and healthy growth of an ecosystem, controlled distraction enables participants
               to experience richer, multimodal relations without wandering outside the space(s) of
               the event. In this article, we depart from the trend in the literature on e-learning
               that continues to treat distraction as a problem to be solved as opposed to an
               emerging set of practices to be cultivated. Attention is performative and
               situational; as such, we make the argument that designing and implementing new
               choreographies of attention should be central to building sustainable models for
               knowledge production and dissemination in the contemporary academy. 
         

            The Traditional Stage
            We begin with the example of the lecture. Conventionally understood, the lecture is a
               primary mechanism for knowledge delivery in the academy. The lecture is also a piece
               of sited work where typically a speaker stands in the front of a room and shares his
               or her thoughts in speech (ideally) with an attentive audience. Many of the standard
               conventions for organizing attention at a lecture are clear: the audience is seated,
               often in rows, facing forward toward the speaker, and the speaker stands, often
               behind a podium, facing the audience. Opportunities to talk, and their regulation,
               are primarily the responsibility of the speaker. The audience is responsible to
               attend and remain attentive. Checking email, watching TV, sleeping, or knitting do
               not, in most circumstances, provide acceptable outward manifestations of appropriate
               attention. If an audience member is not looking at the speaker, the designated
               presentation screen, or some other point in the room that can reasonably be
               incorporated into paying attention, then they appear — and are available to
               the speakers and others as being — distracted.
            In a famous paper on the topic, the sociologist Erving Goffman suggests that the
               order and organization of the lecture is built around a specific, situated management
               of the tension between maintaining an audience’s attention and exploiting their
               proneness to distraction. According to Goffman, the lecture belongs to 
                  that broad class of situational
                     enterprises wherein a difference clearly occurs between game and spectacle,
                     that is, between the business at hand and the custard of interaction in which
                     the business is embedded
                  
               . If the business of the lecture is
               the subject matter (e.g., Paleolithic history, or recent innovations in gene-splicing
               technology), then the custard of interaction
               is all the conventional work that goes into organizing and staging the event (the
               arrangement of the room and its furnishings, the pre-lecture conversations, the
               formal beginning and introductions, the transitions to questions, the closing, the
               informal talk afterward, etc.) Goffman’s contention is that, in comparison to other
               live performances like a stage play or a ballet, the lecture typically aspires to
               diminish attention to the staging and organization and direct the audience toward a
               focus on the subject matter itself. In this sense, the lecture is a form of
               organization that seeks to hold its staging and its overtly performative elements in
               check so as to provide more extensive access to the topic. While Goffman is clear
               that audiences nevertheless constantly direct their attention to elements of the
               surrounding environment, he suggests that the social and physical site of the lecture
               is structured in such a way that enforces audiences to act as if they were
               engaged directly with the subject matter. Ask an audience member whether a lecture
               was any good or not, and it is far more likely they would say something about the
               flow of ideas than the shape of the podium or the choreography of the event. And yet,
               who was there, whether the speaker was engaging, whether the event began and ended on
               time, and so on, are all matters about which, having attended a lecture, one might be
               expected to comment. Even as the unique organization of the lecture places what
                  was said by the speaker at center stage, the custard of interaction is also deeply woven into our attention to the
               event. This is so even at the level of our undistracted listening. As Goffman
               argues, the audience 
                  skips along, dipping in and out of
                     following the lecturer’s argument, waiting for the special effects which
                     actually capture them, and topple them momentarily into what is being
                     said
                  
               . Despite the fact that the lecture is overbuilt to focus the audience’s
               attention on the speaker, Goffman suggests that, even at the level of the flow of
               speech, audiences have a predilection toward distraction that demands constant effort
               on the part of a speaker to recruit and retain their collective attention. These
               efforts and special effects might be a good
               opening joke, an interesting aside, an evocative turn of phrase, or a moment of
               clarity in an otherwise abstruse topic that transports the audience members from
               their natural state of distraction toward a focus on the topic-at-hand.
            On this analysis, the fact that minds wander, that they are influenced by the myriad
               interactions that make up any situation, that they are curious as to whether everyone
               in the audience is as confused as they are, are phenomena that are strategically
               suppressed in and through the conventional organization of the lecture. Not only does
               the audience have direct access to the lecturer, but the lecturer, in turn, has
               access to the audience and their expressions, and is able to work with that texture
               of attention in a variety of ways during the lecture’s course. Goffman’s analysis is
               focused in part on the sorts of special, rhetorical effects that speakers can use to
               draw an audience in, and he considers as well that audience members communicate
               constantly with one another, through, for instance, smiles or unsettled glances
               between two people, the shifting in chairs that takes place when an audience
               collectively expects the talk to be over, or the quiet contemplation during a
               particularly riveting moment. While most of these interactions are muted by the
               interior design of the lecture hall itself — the horizontal rows of chairs facing the
               speaker, and the presentation screen front and center — that same organization
               focuses the predominant flow of attention and attentional monitoring between speaker
               and audience. Given the centrality of these conventional performative elements to the
               actual conduct and success of these events, it may seem odd that lecturers, lecture
               planners, and audiences, continue to conduct their activities in apparent and
               determined indifference to the lecture’s rather unique performative conventions and
               associated structures of attention. Indeed, we might speculate that the hesitancy on
               the part of some academics to integrate emerging media into their pedagogical
               practice is part of a larger hesitancy to consider these performative conventions as
               central to their craft as educators.
            And yet, it is easy to imagine that if the room’s design were different (both
               physically and informationally), the interactions prompted by the audience’s natural
               condition — distraction — would become more central.
         

            The New Economy of Attention
            It is our contention that the presence of laptops and other networked devices within
                  live academic events changes the texture, flow, and distribution of
               attention, and that this change in the practical order of these events therefore
               requires a rethinking and a redesign of how they are organized and performed. Richard
               Lanham makes the argument that the ability to summon and maintain attention is the
               most valuable commodity in contemporary digital culture .
               His concept of the economy of
                  attention is premised on the idea that all of the elements that comprise a
               situation — its business as well as its custard — are in the process of being
               reorganized by the emerging media and an underlying economy that privileges
                  fluff over stuff. In this new economy, Lanham argues, the most valuable
               commodity is not the stuff we think we’re trading, but is instead the fluff that
               surrounds it — that organization, and architecture, and those rhetorical effects that
               direct our attention and help us make sense of the stuff. In the context of the
               present argument, this would mean that the organizational and performative elements
               that comprise Goffman’s custard
               would move to the foreground, and the work of choreography would occupy a different,
               more privileged place in our thinking about, and planning for, live academic
               events. But Lanham goes a step further and argues that fluff does not simply support
               stuff (i.e. the advertisement does not simply support the product), but the fluff
               itself becomes the commodity. On this argument, the ability to shape people’s
               attention is now a more valuable commodity than the things around which our attention
               is presumably focused. Since the end of the nineteenth century, Lanham recounts,
                  the world of stuff has gradually come
                  to dominate the university curriculum. Science and business education —
               the study of stuff whose outcomes are assessable — have set the agenda for the modern
               university education. 
                  But to the extent that we now live in an
                     information economy…this relationship must invert
                  
               . One implication of Lanham’s argument is that what Goffman deemed special effects become more focal to
               the conduct of interaction. These organizational and rhetorical elements become the
               fundamental mechanism of trade, the primary determinant of value, in a society where
               information-flows, perhaps even more than material structures, determine the
               parameters of every situation. Attention, diffused and de-centered, is the focal
               value of this new economy in which the force of symbols, rhetoric, and information
               design are displacing an order of industry and manufacture. The work of this new economy consists, at least in
               part, in the design and implementation of special symbolic and rhetorical effects
               that provide audiences with options for how they engage in academic environments and
               situations.
            The economist Richard Thaler, together with the lawyer Cass Sunstein, provide
               direction for work in this area through the concept of what they term 
                  choice architecture
                  
               . People will be more inclined to actively engage with the world, they argue,
               if they are given small choices to make within discrete attentional frameworks. In
               the introduction to their book, they use the rather comical example of a Dutch
               economist who developed an innovative solution for that most annoying reality of
               men’s restrooms: urinal spillage. The economist proposed that a picture of a black
               housefly be printed to the left of all the urinal drains in the Amsterdam Airport. As
               a result, spillage was reduced by 80%. It turns
                  out, they conclude, 
                  that if you give men a target, they
                     can’t help but aim at it
                  
               . Choice architecture is about more than just restroom cleanliness; it’s about
               supplying focused choices 
                  in situ
                for people who are otherwise aimless and wandering. Most of us never
               change the default settings on our operating system, or go through the trouble of
               actually mailing in rebates (that is precisely why companies offer them). But if
               significant choices that require little energy (like aiming at a fly in a urinal) are
               designed into our environments, we are more likely to make use of them. If
               economists, architects, and lecturers, actually pay attention to fluff, then stuff
               will get done. It is a matter of gently nudging attention instead of commanding it,
               by designing small choices into every situation. Such is also the solution, we
               contend, for the problem of laptops in the classroom. Indeed, these additional
               information channels can provide endless opportunities for mental and visual
               wandering, but if considered part of the learning space, and designed to provide
               subtle encouragement towards particular modes of participation, than these digital
                  distractions can in fact provide positive wayfinding tools for the
               productive integration of physical and digital spaces. 
         

            Bringing Backchannels to the Front
            Every situation is composed of both the physical architecture and the
               information-flows that accompany that architecture .
               The space of the hall, the time of the event, and the composition of the audience,
               all normative features of the traditional lecture situation, contract and expand in
               accordance with participants’ migratory attention patterns. For instance, a lecture
               in a wi-fi enabled room will include several open laptops, which provide users access
               to email, IM, and the wide-open web. How users engage with these communication
               channels determines the parameters of the situation. We assert that the virtues of
               surfing the web during a lecture will be influenced by the design or lack of design
               of web interfaces made available to participants. When there is no choice
               architecture to nudge the distracted participant, there is little motivation for her
               to integrate additional information channels into the way she assimilates information
               and there is no framework for her to share that information with the event community.
               While some institutions assume that simply providing connectivity is enough,
               connectivity alone does little to encourage the productive uses of the lecture hall
               as a space of collective knowledge creation. Simple connectivity is like a public
               park with no benches, playgrounds, or organized activities. Just like physical public
               spaces, when network spaces are left unplanned, they add complexity without
               encouraging focus, dissemination without articulating message. User attention needs
               our attention.
            Our study focuses on the design and evaluation of these emergent choreographies of
               attention. We assembled a suite of digital backchannels — including chatrooms, web
               links, virtual environments, and archives, and then directed the audience toward
               their use, thus altering the traditional economy of attention toward a more
               decentered experience where the interactions among audience members were integrated
               into the situation’s overall meaning. When backchannels are successfully implemented,
               the parameters of the lecturer’s work must, in turn, expand to take account of the
               user practices that are part of the overall composition of the event. Therefore, the
               periphery of the situation is centralized for the individual user, transforming what
               is typically referred to as backchannels into channels of parallel
               discourse that amplify audience participation. 
            Backchannels are nothing particularly new. Multi-user chat systems have been in
               relatively wide use since the late 1980s with the invention of Internet relay chat
               (IRC). Of course in the 1980s, these systems were primarily used for individuals
               spread out over the Internet to congregate in a digital space for conversation. IRC
               was essentially limited to non-spatially proximate desktop computers. But with the
               introduction of laptops and wi-fi technology, the potential applications of IRC
               expanded. It could be used at conferences, in classrooms, or any place that people
               assemble around wi-fi connectivity. And of course these backchannels were no longer
               limited to IRC – instant messaging, text messaging, virtual worlds, Facebook,
               Twitter, and many other social web applications expanded the potential uses and
               contexts of backchannels. While these applications and their corresponding practices
               are commonly implemented in some industry sectors (i.e. technology conferences),
               outside of very specialized disciplines and institutions, the deliberate
               implementation of backchannels is still relatively uncommon in the academy, even
               though wi-fi connectivity is nearly ubiquitous at most research institutions and
               students and faculty are now continuously connected to the global network. In 2007,
               two thirds of U.S. college classrooms were wireless .
               However, the pedagogical need to design the sort of communication made possible by
               that access is routinely ignored. 
            In February of 2008, we conducted an early experiment during a day-long symposium
               entitled Mixed Realities (http://institute.emerson.edu/floatingpoints/2008/) at Emerson College. In
               many ways, the symposium’s format was traditional. There was a morning and an
               afternoon session with a total of nine panelists. The panelists were arranged behind
               a standard rectangular table positioned at the front of the room. They sat, each with
               a microphone, facing the audience. A large projection screen was directly behind and
               above them, assuring that the panel and the projection would be in the same visual
               frame from the perspective of any audience member in the room. In addition, there was
               a secondary, smaller projection screen to the left of the panelists for the display
               of the various backchannels. This screen was positioned outside of the direct view of
               the panelists. 
            Instead of parallel rows of chairs, we had the audience sit around large, round
               banquet tables. This spatial organization was meant to disrupt the standard
               front-and-center focus of the room even before the addition of digital backchannels.
               Before the panels began, people were not necessarily training their gaze to the front
               of the room. Conversations took place between and across tables; people brought out
               laptops and began working on them, even if their backs were facing the front of the
               room. Walking into that room felt like walking into an active work environment.
               Simply reorienting audience bodies and their corresponding technologies altered the
               fundamental nature of the learning space.
            This physical set-up provided a good context for introducing digital backchannels. We
               built a tool that aggregated feeds from Delicious, the social bookmarking site, and Flickr, the photo sharing site; it also
               included a video feed, a space in Second Life and an open source question tool called
               backchan.nl (http://backchan.nl) . When the symposium started, we announced that these
               features were available and we invited everybody’s participation. Throughout the day,
               we periodically projected various feeds onto the secondary screen and the live
               moderator referenced questions and discussions that were taking place online.
            This experiment reinforced our assumption that the successful implementation of
                  communication channels should always be embedded in the physical organization of
                  space. Choreographing attention is physical as much as it is cerebral.
               Digital backchannels have to be designed into space, not in spite of it. Our
               experiment changed the shape of the room, as it was no longer solely defined by the
               one-way glances of the speaker and audience. In addition to the live presenter,
               people were looking down at their screens, at each other, and towards other
               projections. In many respects, the physical architecture required — and received —
               reorganization as the choice architecture of the screens suggested new possibilities
               for engagement. While we are interested in destabilizing the hegemony of the
               forward-facing gaze, we understand the importance of maintaining a collective
               understanding of the room’s focal points, including the speaker and presentation
               screen(s). While an individual’s use of a laptop would seem to promote and
               individualization of space, we are, in fact, more concerned with how individuals
               understand themselves as part of a group, with collective goals and common objects of
               analysis. There is significant research on how computers and networks facilitate
               collaboration (; ; ; , but little has been
               written about how the practices associated with these technologies transform the
               presentation, assimilation and dissemination of knowledge within large educational
               spaces. 
            With that said, we disagree with the assertions that laptops necessarily take one off
               topic and limit critical thinking. David Cole argues, 
                  I am sure that the Internet can be a
                     useful pedagogical tool in some settings and for some subjects. But for most
                     classes, it is little more than an attractive nuisance.
                  
                We do acknowledge, however, that more channels do not necessarily equal
                  richer communication. Based on observations and questions asked during the
                  Mixed Realities symposium, we learned quite a bit
               about the nuances of successful attentional choreography. 
            While some people were conversing about what was just said, drawing each other’s
               attention to relevant websites and applications, some never bothered with the
               channels provided, choosing instead to only check email or engage in IM chats. Some
               users commented that they couldn’t follow what was going on in the digital space;
               that they needed more structure to get them to participate. And others suggested that
               providing these channels crippled the participatory capabilities of those without
               laptops, making the un-connected participant feel left out of the conversation. The
               successful choreography of attention, therefore, considers how architectural
                  space, digital channels and screens combine to produce a situation that is
                  inclusive and expansive. From the details of the placement of tables to the
               design of computer interface, how the user engages with screens and how that
               engagement is communicated and integrated into the overall event, is how the
               experience of a room (with or without a laptop) is constructed. During our symposium,
               we could have taken several measures to mitigate user fatigue or unproductive
               distraction. By providing more onscreen prompts to help participants find the
               designated tools we could have reduced barriers to participation. This is as simple
               as periodically displaying a URL on the primary projection screen. We also could have
               switched more often between the Second Life space, where the live audience was able
               to see the virtual audience, and the other feeds on the secondary screen. One of the
               challenges we confronted early on was the integration of proximate and remote
               audiences. While the physical audience had nearly constant access to members of the
               Second Life audience, who were watching the live video feed of the event, the Second
               Life audience had no access to the live audience. Ironically, those attending
               virtually had the most forward-focused attentional experience of the event.
               Certainly, although remote participants could have been logging on from anywhere and
               engaged on a variety of levels, the way the space was represented to them
               significantly limited their ability to engage in a collective audience experience.
               This affected the physical experience of the room because the avatars on screen were
               mere pictures to the live audience, as they were never given the opportunity to
               become fully engaged participants. This could have been resolved by bringing more
               variety to the camera angles used to stream the event. 
            Another element that fell short in our experiment was the frequency with which the
               moderator addressed the backchannel conversations. The impression of digital
               integration for those without laptops is enhanced when questions and statements
               streaming from backchannels are explicitly referenced. In essence, the goal is to
               cycle through the backchannel participation as if it is just another piece of the
               content. This is the strategy used on Rick Sanchez
                  Direct, an hour-long news show on CNN. The anchor, Rick Sanchez,
               integrates the micro-blogging service Twitter into the newscast in order to combine live participation with the
               traditional newscast. Twitter is displayed on a computer monitor directly in front of
               him and the camera periodically pans to show the stream of questions and comments.
               More importantly, however, is the way Sanchez consistently refers to these
               participants, quoting them and taking their questions. This formula, while admittedly
               still a bit awkward, manages not to alienate the viewer without a computer, as it
               makes the concept of participation part of the content of the program. Even if not
               actively participating on Twitter, the traditional television viewer is asked to
               enjoy the restructuring of communication channels. The same is true for the
                  live academic event; even if not participating with a laptop, integrating
               the participation of others into the subject of the event, is the challenge and
               promise of the this new economy of attention.
            Based on our experiment, we cannot point to absolute findings, but we can point to a
               need for further investigation and experimentation in this arena. As colleges and
               universities debate their laptop and network policies, as they build new classrooms
               and libraries, they need to consider how this new economy is altering the nature of
               academic space. They need to consider the correspondences between physical and
               networked spaces and their influence on how attention is formulated, captured, and
               purposed towards the goals of teaching and learning. This will happen as more and
               more committed faculty and institutions explore these considerations as central
               elements of intellectual and pedagogical practice. The goal is not simply to resist
               the literature and policies that take a hard line stance against personal
               technologies in the classroom – 
                  attention diverted is attention
                     diverted
                  
                – but to change the discourse all together. Traditional structures of
               attention should not simply be protected or rejected; they should be negotiated.
               Along with tables and chairs, wifi accessibility and data projection, the
               twenty-first century education environment has to design the frameworks of attention
               into its four walls. 
         

            Acknowledgements
            This research was made possible by a grant from the National Endowment for the
               Humanities.
         
