Title:  The Poetess Archive Database
Volume:  003
Issue:  3
Date:  29 September 2009
Abstract:  
            Since it was first mounted in 2005, the Poetess Archive has housed a
               bibliography of materials for studying popular poetry written between 1750 and 1900
               in Britain and America. Recently, we have transferred what were static html pages
               presenting that bibliography into an Oracle database to allow multiple ways of
               organizing and generating bibliographic lists. The archive includes primary
               materials: works by the authors producing Anglo-American popular poetry between 1750
               and 1900, and by their contemporaneous critics. But it also includes secondary
               materials: later criticism of and scholarship about these writers and their literary
               productions.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Poster Abstract
            Since it was first mounted in 2005, the Poetess Archive has housed a
               bibliography of materials for studying popular poetry written between 1750 and 1900
               in Britain and America. We call it the Poetess Archive because it contains writings
               by and about 19th-century poets writing in the poetess tradition, as well as writings
               by men and women who feel the need to work against that tradition. Recently, we have
               transferred what were static html pages presenting that bibliography into an Oracle
               database to allow multiple ways of organizing and generating bibliographic lists. The
               archive includes primary materials: works by the authors producing Anglo-American
               popular poetry between 1750 and 1900, and by their contemporaneous critics. But it
               also includes secondary materials: later criticism of and scholarship about these
               writers and their literary productions. The bibliography of secondary (critical and
               scholarly) materials spans the 20th century up to our own moment. In addition to
               offering bibliographic data and multiple ways of searching that data, the Poetess
               Archive also presents some full texts, engravings, and pictures of the physical
               aspects of collections – book boards, slipcases, etc. All are TEI-encoded and
               accompanied by metadata in RDF (Resource Description Framework) for interoperability
               with aggregated sites within the NINES
               network.
             The Forget Me Not Hypertextual Archive, edited by Katherine D. Harris, has recently
               been folded into the Poetess Archive. Dr. Harris is now editor of our literary
               annuals collection. Also to be folded into the Poetess Archive is the Literary Annual
               Database by Harry Hootman and Anthologies and Miscellanies by Laura Mandell and Rita
               Raley. Once this work is complete, one will be able to find all the poems published
               in collections by specific authors in Britain, a feat that is not even possible using
               the proprietary English Poetry Database published by Chadwyck-Healey. Recently, Laura
               Mandell has started working with digital artist Ira Greenberg to create a
               visualization tool for the Poetess Archive (http://unixgen.muohio.edu/~poetess/vmodel/vmodel.html).
             This tool will produce new kinds of Humanities research by allowing scholars to ask
               research questions about relationships among the form, themes, and physical media of
               nineteenth-century British and American popular poetry. The tool will generate
               multiple graphics produced with minor variations in search constraints that can be
               viewed all together, juxtaposed on a page. Enabling quickly apprehensible, visible
               comparisons, this tool will encourage perceiving and investigating correlations among
               data that might have gone unnoticed without it. 
         

            Poster
            Download poster (PDF file) .
         
