Title:  Mapping Concord: Google Maps and the 19th-Century Concord Digital Archive
Volume:  003
Issue:  3
Date:  29 September 2009
Abstract:  
            The 19th Century Concord Digital Archive implemented a scholarly map interface
               that draws on current open source technologies. The archive includes interlinked
               literary texts, maps, census materials, town reports, broadsides, and period
               newspaper clippings. These texts are technologically designed to reference and
               interact with each other. However, the archive does not seek merely to present a set
               of texts for study. Instead, it tests an initial map interface to the textual
               data. When we are able to view satellite photos of the topography and quickly
               find a physical description related to the topography in an essay, what new
               information might be revealed? When we explore a place visually and then link to the
               text, what new conclusions might scholars draw?
         
Full Body Text: 

            Poster Abstract
            The 19th Century Concord Digital Archive is implementing a scholarly map interface
               that draws on current open source technologies. The archive includes interlinked
               literary texts, maps, census materials, town reports, broadsides, and period
               newspaper clippings. These texts are technologically designed to reference and
               interact with each other. However, the archive does not seek merely to present a set
               of texts for study. Instead, we are testing an initial map interface to the textual
               data. The 19th Century Concord Digital Archive is currently in the first phrase of
               testing a Google map conversion user interface that represents spatial information of
               Concord, MA (homes, ponds, cemeteries, etc.) visually (VR 360 walkable images)
               and textually (connected related data from documents and database). The ability to
               zoom in and out, obtain contemporary satellite images, locate particular buildings
               and view VR 360 images that lead to textual data in a visual interface creates a new
               form of data interface in digital humanities studies. The initial Concord Archive map
               interface utilizes Google map manipulations to produce an interactive map that allows
               users to locate a particular Concord site. The maps that serve as one user interface
               also influence the way that a scholar will deal with textual materials included in
               the archive. While we know the reasons for using TEI/XML markup for digital texts,
               following a standardized metadata structure for texts is beneficial in visual
               integration. Names and locations are encoded with a key that refers to a database
               table in which the editor provides name and place variants, and, for places, GIS
               longitude and latitude points. We've added other materials that scholars might find
               helpful, such as complete town census records transcribed into database tables for
               ease of use; then scholars can work through large numbers of documents, all
               editorially marked, searching for particular references to people and places, quickly
               and accurately. And, the possibilities of visual searches focused by the encoding
               practice allows scholars multiple possibilities of manipulating and comparing a large
               body of geographically related texts. Texts will be linked to the maps and users will
               be able locate materials that are related to the particular sites visualized on the
               map — a merger of text and visual, of technology rethinking the way in which we work
               with texts. When we are able to view satellite photos of the topography and quickly
               find a physical description related to the topography in an essay, what new
               information might be revealed? When we explore a place visually and then link to the
               text, what new conclusions might scholars draw?
         

            Poster
            Download poster (PDF file) .
         
