Title:  Open Arabic
               Periodical Editions: A Framework for Bootstrapped Scholarly Editions Outside the
               Global North
Volume:  016
Issue:  2
Date:  25 June 2022
Abstract:  
            
            This paper introduces and evaluates the project Open Arabic
                  Periodical Editions (OpenArabicPE) as a case study of minimal computing.
               It confronts hyperbolic promises of mass digitization and computational methods for
               the exploration of digitized cultural heritage as a hegemonic episteme
               rooted in 20th-century, English-speaking, neoliberal capitalism from the margins.
               OpenArabicPE is a framework for open, collaborative, and scholarly digital editions
               of early Arabic periodicals from the late Ottoman Eastern Mediterranean. It addresses
               the specific affordances of a historical multilingual society, whose material
               heritage continues to be looted, destroyed, and neglected; whose material heritage
               resists digitization efforts by being dependent on non-Latin scripts and, for
               instance, non-Gregorian calendars; and whose contemporary heirs cannot draw on the
               vast resources in wealth and socio-technical infrastructures of the Global North.
               Centered around generosity and minimal computing, OpenArabicPE is run by volunteers
               and currently hosts six editions with some 630 journal issues and more than 7 million
               words, without any funding, by re-purposing data, software, and
               infrastructures.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Early Arabic periodicals published across the Eastern Mediterranean from the mid-19th
               to the early 20th centuries were at the core of social developments and formative
               discourses of modern(izing) societies that carry continued prominence across the
               region and beyond, such as the Arabic (cultural) renaissance (nahḍa), Arab nationalism, and the Islamic reform movement (ṣalafiyya). Yet, the vast majority of journals and newspapers remain obscure
               and understudied beyond a few well-known titles from Beirut and Cairo. As physical
               artifacts — frequently printed with cheap ink on cheap paper and handled without care
               in transit — they are vulnerable to neglect and active destruction. Neoliberal
               defunding of cultural heritage institutions as a global phenomenon is compounded by
               an onslaught of iconoclasts, failing institutions, and wars ravaging Syria, Yemen,
               and Iraq.
            Turning to Alex Gil and Élika Ortega’s question of What do we need? , 
               the answer, therefore, is simple: preservation and access. Societies of
               the Global South have a right to unhampered access to their own cultural record — a
               cultural record that is frequently held by institutions of the Global North. Access
               would also allow the scholarly communities concerned with the histories of Middle
               Eastern societies to study them through their own cultural production.
            Taking up this issue, the following paper consists of two parts. I begin with
               challenging the equation of digitization = access by outlining the layers of
               inaccessibility inherent in existing digitization efforts of textual cultural
               artifacts from the late Ottoman Eastern Mediterranean. The Eastern Mediterranean,
               between Mesopotamia in the East and the Libyan desert in the West, the mountains of
               Anatolia in the north, and the Arabian Peninsula in the south, is home
               to historically multilingual and multiscriptural societies. Predominantly Arabic
               speaking, the area was part of the Ottoman Empire for four centuries until the
               end of World War I. The material cultural heritage of these societies has been and
               continues to be looted, destroyed, and neglected, as exemplified by the recent scandal
               surrounding the Museum of the Bible in Washington or the destruction of Palmyra by
               the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and Syria. Their textual cultural heritage
               resists digitization by being dependent on scripts other than Latin (such as Arabic,
               Armenian, Syriac, or Hebrew scripts) and calendars, as well as corresponding
               conceptions of time other than the Gregorian (such as the Ottoman fiscal or mālī calendar, the reformed Julian calendar, or the Islamic
                  hijrī calendar). This is further exacerbated by their
               contemporary heirs' relative lack of resources in wealth and socio-technical
               infrastructures when compared to the Global North. The second part introduces the
               project Open Arabic Periodical Editions (OpenArabicPE) as a practical critique of
               these layers of inaccessibility that creatively bootstraps existing data, tools, and
               infrastructures into a framework to produce and distribute open scholarly periodical
               editions drawing on the affordances of the Global South. Open Arabic Periodical
                  Editions is available at https://openarabicpe.github.io/.  I argue that
               OpenArabicPE demonstrates the feasibility of bootstrapping approaches by having published
               six full-text editions of Arabic journals originally published in Baghdad, Cairo, and
               Damascus between 1892 and 1918 with a total of 41 volumes comprising 645 issues,
               12,830 pages that link to digital facsimiles, The linking has only been
                  completed for five periodicals, which is reflected by this page count. and
               more than six million words (Table 2), without any resources beyond voluntary labor
               and private laptops.
         

            Inaccessibility of Digitized Arabic Periodicals
            The first layer of inaccessibility is a knowledge gap rooted in the physical artifact
               and its history. Scholars have written on the late Ottoman periodical press of the
               Eastern Mediterranean since the early twentieth century   and there is a plethora of encyclopedic work on the Arabic press 
                     
               , listing titles and dates of first publication. Yet, the history of the
               vast majority of individual titles remains unknown, and only a handful of periodicals
               have been the subject of systematic studies    . 
               This is particularly true for all places beyond the traditional
               scholarly focus on Beirut and Cairo. For a more detailed overview of the state
                  of Arab Periodical Studies see . If we were interested in the
               series of food riots that shook cities across the predominantly Arabic speaking
               provinces of the Ottoman Empire in summer 1910 , we would
               not know which contemporary newspapers and journals from Homs, Hama, or Gaza could be
               consulted for reports on these events.
            The second layer of inaccessibility is a direct consequence of the knowledge gap and
               can be summarized as a digitization bias rooted in collection bias and survival bias
               . Publishers sought to minimize the cost of publishing, and, as
               a result, the durability of printed newspaper and periodical copies were not
               necessarily their primary concerns. Surviving copies are scattered across libraries
               and private collections around the globe. In the absence of a survey of collection
               histories, I deduce from the copies I have seen that many collections came about by
               chance and reflect local, regional, and global distribution networks more than
               specific collection policies. We must also take into account individual publishers’
               agency in influencing collections through donations of library copies, even long
               after their publication. The Ottoman-Arab intellectual, journalist, founder of the
               Arab Scientific Academy, and Minister of Education, Muḥammad Kurd ʿAlī (1876–1953),
               for example, established the monthly journal al-Muqtabas (The
               Digest) in Cairo in 1906. Kurd ʿAlī moved to his hometown of Damascus after the Young
               Turk Revolution of 1908, where he continued to publish al-Muqtabas until the end of World War I . In 1914, six years
               after its publication in Cairo, Kurd ʿAlī gifted a library copy of the second year of
                  al-Muqtabas to his friend Jūrj Fākhūri. Two years later, he
               gifted another library copy of the same volume to the library of the Ṣalāḥiyya
               College in Jerusalem. The former is now held by the University of Minnesota and a
               digital facsimile can be accessed through HathiTrust. The latter ended up in the
               al-Aqṣā Mosque’s library in Jerusalem and was digitized by the British Library’s
               Endangered Archives Programme. Handwritten note on al-Muqtabas
                  2.1, p.1. The digital facsimile is available at: https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/imgsrv/image?id=umn.319510029968616;seq=12. For more information about the Endangered Archives Programme, visit http://eap.bl.uk
            
            Preservation of these brittle materials is costly, and frequent, prolonged wars,
               regime changes, and economic crises continue to have a devastating effect on
               surviving holdings. The Lebanese National Library, for instance, was shut down and
               its collections, including extensive periodical collections, were hastily stuffed
               into boxes and stored in the port of Beirut in 1975, where they remained for the next
               forty-odd years. A rehabilitation project has been underway since 2003, and reading
               rooms were opened to the public in 2018, but the status of the periodical collections
               remains opaque.
            Locating a specific title and issue or all titles published in a particular place is
               a tedious endeavor exacerbated by the state of online catalogs. Existing catalogs are
               not necessarily published or digitized beyond onsite records. The website of the
               Lebanese National Library, for instance, still advertises its catalog as forthcoming.
               Union catalogs, on the other hand, have fallen out of fashion and should probably be
               read as historical sources rather than finding aids   
                   . 
               Known and confirmable collections are predominantly located in the Global
               North and are frequently incomplete. Figure 1 illustrates the combined survival,
               collection, and cataloging biases with the example of al-Muqtabas. Based on data from WorldCat and the Arabic Union Catalogue
               (ArUC), we can locate only nine complete collections worldwide: five in the US, two
               in Lebanon, and one each in Egypt and Saudi Arabia, including a reprint published by
               Dār Ṣādir in Beirut in 1992.The Arabic Union Catalogue (ArUC) is available at https://www.aruc.org/.
            Digitizing and hosting digital artifacts are expensive, and the cost scales almost
               linearly. In order to justify their expenses, curators will almost always turn to the
               rare and beautiful. Hundreds of thousands of periodical pages in foreign languages
               are frequently not considered important enough to warrant this investment for
               institutions in the Global North. Funds, infrastructures, and access to the physical
               artifacts, on the other hand, are commonly not available in the Global South. In
               consequence, we witness a neo-colonial absence of the Global South from the digital
               cultural record   . In the
               absence of aggregators or an index, specific titles are incredibly hard to find in
               the patchwork of existing collections of digitized periodicals. Figure 2 shows the
               distribution of all Arabic periodical titles published across the Middle East and
               North Africa between 1789 and 1929, based on Project
                  Jarāʾid, a scholarly
               crowdsourcing effort we have been running since 2012 to gather publication and
               holdings data. Based on this data set, only 504 or 15.59% of the 3232 titles could be
               located in collections and only 148 or 4.58% have been at least partially digitized
                .
            
            
            
            
            
               Geographic distribution of library holdings of
                  al-Muqtabas (Cairo and Damascus, 1906–18) as recorded by WorldCat and Arabic Union
                  Catalog (ArUC). The size of circles corresponds to the number of volumes in a collection. The color indicates whether collections are complete (green) or incomplete (red). The map is available online at 
                  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4154171.
               
               an image of a world map
            
     
            
               Geographic distribution of Arabic periodical titles
                  published across the Middle East and North Africa between 1789–1929. The size of
                  the pie charts corresponds to the total number of titles published at a location.
                  Slices show the percentage of known holdings and digitized collections. This and
                  other maps as well as the same data set are available at
                  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4815717.
               
               an image of a map showing pie charts
            
            
            
          
            The third layer of inaccessibility is one of socio-technical infrastructures: digital
               infrastructures, despite all promises towards the opposite, are rooted in the
               epistemic hegemony of late 20th-century, Anglo-American, neoliberal capitalism. Most
               digitized periodicals are kept in data silos without any means for interchange or
               interoperability in the form of application programming interfaces (APIs) or the
               option to download data in machine-actionable, standardized, open file formats.
               Reading access to these silos is frequently restricted by paywalls and geo-fencing, a
               method to restrict access based on the geographic location of a user’s IP address.
               Table 1 provides an overview of the accessibility of the ten largest online platforms
               serving digitized Arabic periodicals. 
               
               al-Muqtabas, for example, is commonly deemed in the public
               domain in the United States. Copies from the University of Minnesota and Princeton
               University are openly available online at HathiTrust — for scholars at member
               institutions and the general public in the U.S. as determined by a user’s IP address.The University of Minnesota copy is available at https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/100658549 and the Princeton University copy is available at https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/008882293.
               Everyone else will see blank pages. Downloading content in order to circumvent
               ill-suited interfaces is often limited to individually identifiable users. Automated
               downloads frequently violate terms of use, and most vendors try to prevent this on
               the technical level — at least in one case, detected attempts of automated downloads
               will result in the vendor punishing subscribing institutions for violations from
               within their IP range with a blanket block.
            
            
               Accessibility of platforms serving digitized Arabic
                  periodicals.
               
                  platform
                  vendor
                  vendor type
                  UI language
                  paywall
                  log-in required
                  geo-fencing
                  APIs
                  download
                  download formats
                  machine-readable metadata
               
               
                  
                     al-maktaba al-shāmila
                  
                  
                  private, non-profit
                  ar
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  yes
                  EPUB, PDF (journal)
                  no
               
               
                  
                     arshīf al-majallāt al-adabiyya
                        wa-l-thaqāfiyya al-ʿarabiyya
                  
                  
                  private, non-profit
                  ar
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  NA
                  no
               
               
                  
                     Endangered Archives Programme
                  
                  British Library
                  public, non-profit
                  en
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  IIIF
                  no
                  NA
                  no
               
               
                  
                     Early Arabic Printed Books
                  
                  Cengage Gale
                  commercial
                  en
                  yes
                  yes
                  no
                  no
                  yes
                  PDF
                  no
               
               
                  
                     Global Press
                        Archive
                  
                  East View
                  commercial
                  en
                  partial
                  yes
                  no
                  no
                  yes
                  PDF (page)
                  no
               
               
                  
                     HathiTrust
                  
                  HathiTrust
                  ppp, non-profit
                  en
                  no
                  yes
                  yes
                  yes
                  yes
                  PDF, txt (volume)
                  no
               
               
                  
                     Institut du
                        Monde Arabe
                  
                  
                  public, non-profit
                  ar, en, fr
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  NA
                  no
               
               
                  
                     Arab
                        American Newspapers Project (beta)
                  
                  NC State University
                  public, non-profit
                  en
                  no
                  yes
                  no
                  no
                  yes
                  PDF Claims to provide a proprietary PDF version, whose text layer is
                        currently incompatible with Adobe’s PDF reader. Download has, therefore,
                        been disabled. (issue) currently disabled
                  
                  no
               
               
                  
                     Translatio
                  
                  University of Bonn
                  public, non-profit
                  de, en, fr
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  IIIF
                  yes
                  PDF (issue)
                  METS/ MODS
               
               
                  
                     WikiSource
                  
                  Wikimedia foundation
                  private, non-profit
                  ar, en, fr, …
                  no
                  no
                  no
                  yes
                  yes
                  EPUB, MOBI, PDF
                  no
               
            
            
            Proprietary web-interfaces are commonly neither tailored to the display of Arabic
               material nor themselves available in Arabic   ,
               while bibliographic metadata is regularly
               limited to the issue level and is woefully inadequate. This is due to ambiguity of data
               found in the physical artifacts, such as ambiguous references to calendars in
               mastheads, limited knowledge about these artifacts among librarians and the
               contractors who did the actual digitizing work, and software stacks
               incapable of handling anything but Western scripts and hegemonic Western concepts of
               dates and names. In consequence, often incorrect bibliographic metadata are
               recorded and shared in transcription to Latin script — of which there are as many
               varieties as there are languages written in Latin script (see Figure 3) . Take for example, the Ottoman Turkish newspaper Yenī
                  Taṣvīr-i Efkār from Istanbul. Holdings at the al-Aqṣā Mosque’s library were
               digitized through the Endangered Archives Programme. Ottoman Turkish was written in
               Arabic script until 1924. The catalogers transcribed a truncated title into Latin
               script but did so according to the rules for Arabic, which resulted in the
               grammatically wrong title Taṣwīr Afkār. In addition, they
               provided Jerusalem as place of publication instead of Istanbul. See, for
                  example, https://eap.bl.uk/archive-file/EAP119-1-18-1. Although practices
               have been improving in recent years and many catalogs can now display Arabic script,
               re-cataloging the original script is costly and not a priority for vendors. 
            
            
               Annotated interface of the Translatio platform
                  (University of Bonn) for a digitized copy of the Arabic journal al-ʿIrfān. Next to
                  a facsimile of the front cover, they provide an English interface (yellow)
                   for the bibliographic information, some of which is presented in
                     German (green) and some in Arabic (purple) in Latin transcription transcribed into Latin script (purple) according to the system of the Deutsche Morgenländische
                     Gesellschaft (DMG).
               
               Image of an annotation interface
            
          
           
            The second aspect of socio-technological inaccessibility is the hegemonic approach of
               computational systems to script through the metaphors of discrete characters and
               typesetting and by conceptually equating scripts with (national) languages . 
               Yet, Arabic script is a writing system for many Asian and African
               languages . It runs from right-to-left, with most letters
               connecting within a word. Letters have up to four forms depending on their position
               within a string, while multiple letters share the same basic shape (rasm). Diacritical signs (dots) above and below the rasm have been introduced to unambiguously identify a letter (see
               Figure. 4). There are only a few exceptions to these script-specific writing rules
               across languages. For an introduction to the particularities of Arabic script
                  see . However, dots are not strictly necessary for
               reading, and their use is subject to taste. Some regional cultural practices almost
               consistently omit them for specific letters, particularly at the end of words.
               Unicode — as a character-encoding standard that enables the vendor-independent
               exchange and interoperability of multilingual textual material of the networked age —
               does not adequately encode this cultural preference for ambiguity and forces
               transcribers to select a specific interpretation of the string in front of them.
               Transcribers have to either normalize orthographic variance or pick visually matching
               but wrong glyphs. On the other hand, because it is organized into (national)
               languages, Unicode provides multiple code points for the same glyph, introducing a
               potentially large variance in possible encodings for the same string of letters
               depending on the input keyboard of the transcribers. Egyptian Arabic speakers, for
               instance, would virtually never write the two dots underneath a final yāʾ (U+064A: ي). To mirror their cultural preference, they can
               either select the Arabic alif maqṣūra (U+0649: ى) or the
               Persian ye (U+06CC: ی). On the background of Unicode and
                  its application to Arabic, see . Nemeth also provides the most
                  concise overview of the work of Thomas Milo, the most profound critic of digital
                  approaches to Arabic script and the founder of DecoType . Unfortunately, search algorithms built into modern operating
               systems are not aware of this variance, and any application software relying on them
               will return skewed results without additional efforts at regularization or a
               reduction to the rasm .  
           
            
               Example of basic Arabic typesetting from :
                  America and the Arab scholars. The red arrow indicates the reading direction.
                  Words are underlined in
                  red. Ligatures of multiple letters are underlined in 
                  green.
               
               Image of Arabic typesetting with reading directions marks with red lines
            
            
           
            The fourth layer of inaccessibility is the digital artifact itself: Digitized
               periodicals commonly mean scanned images (facsimiles) with limited or no text layer
               due to the particular challenges of Arabic script for optical character recognition
               (OCR) and the difficulty in automated layout recognition for dense multi-column page
               layouts. In addition to the characteristics of Arabic script outlined above, and
               depending on font and writing style,
               letters will form ligatures. They will not necessarily sit on a single base line, and
               base lines can be tilted (Figure 4). Segmentation into letters as the traditional
               approach to OCR has consequently proven extremely complicated and error prone.
               Accuracy rates for leading Arabic OCR solutions are well below 75% on the word level
                  ,
               which causes the Internet Archive to state that the
               language [is] not currently OCRable (e.g., ). This is about to change with
               recent developments in machine-learning based approaches to OCR and hand-written text
               recognition (HTR), from Kraken, to Transkribus and Tesseract, which
               generally have shown to reliably produce high levels of accuracy independent of input
               language and script, including Arabic . The Open Islamicate
               Texts Initiative Arabic-script OCR Catalyst Project (OpenITI ACOP) will train
               recognition models for the most frequent fonts and types , and their technology will eventually find its way into HathiTrust
               . However, there is an important catch beyond the still unsolved
               layout recognition: machine-learning requires enormous resources — from labor time
               and the skills needed to use specialist software, to necessary hardware requirements
               and power consumption   .
            Commercial vendors and even some public institutions claim opaque break-throughs for
               in-house OCR technologies, but none share their software, evaluation reports, or even
               full-text layers (e.g., ).
               
               Instead, their interfaces foreground full-text search capabilities
               with hits superimposed onto the digital facsimiles. Exploratory searches often reveal
               a high number of false positives among the search results while the extent of false
               negatives, strings that should have been found but weren’t, and the
               veracity of full-text operations remains inherently unknown.
            Finally, informal online libraries of Arabic literature, most prominent and popular
               among them 
                  al-Maktaba al-shāmila
                (The Comprehensive Library, 2005–) , provide access to a
               small number of full-text editions of Arabic periodicals based on the work of
               anonymous human transcribers. Unfortunately, they do not provide information on
               editorial principles, the quality of the transcription, or the material artifacts
               they were based on. In addition, such informal editions lack information linking
               the digital remediation to the original artifact, namely bibliographic metadata and
               page breaks, which makes them almost impossible to employ for scholarly research. In
               a final twist, I found that the informal editions from al-Maktaba
                  al-shāmila, with all their gaps and omissions, were rendered as images with a
               pseudo-original layout to provide fakesimiles and served through 
                  Arshīf al-majallāt al-adabiyya wa-l-thaqāfiyya al-ʿarabiyya
                (Archive of Literary and Cultural Arabic Journals), the largest Arabic online
               platform for historical periodicals. There is a huge and unmarked gap in al-Maktaba al-shāmila’s transcription of al-Muqtabas 5.7 between p.463 and p.466, which is reproduced in this fakesimile. While this reveals the cultural significance
               of seemingly faithful reproductions, the existence of such fakesimiles requires any
               scholar to exert additional scrutiny before using material from these informal
               platforms.
            These four layers of inaccessibility
               have an already detrimental effect on any Arabic speaker from Syria, Jordan, or
               Palestine with only limited knowledge of foreign languages, particularly English, and
               no affiliation with wealthy institutions from the Global North. They are, however,
               further compounded by the infrastructural dependencies of digital remediations on
               access to devices, Internet connections, and electricity. Neither of these can be
               taken for granted for the societies of the Global South. In the — all too frequent
               — worst case, devices are old, Internet connections are slow, traffic is
               prohibitively expensive, and electricity is perilously scarce . 
            Because OpenArabicPE was set-up in and run from Beirut, Lebanon, I illustrate this
               multi-layered digital divide For a recent conceptualization of the term see
                  . Unfortunately, while acknowledging the multiple socio-technological
                  layers, they focus solely on the Internet and do not mention the hegemony of
                  English. This is also true for . with the Lebanese
               example: only 15% of inhabitants have access to a landline and less than 1% have a
               broadband subscription, while 73% have a mobile phone . 
               Many people rely on mobile Internet connections because wired infrastructures
               are insufficiently deployed or because they cannot sign up for a landline due to an
               unofficial rent agreement. They might also have no access to a personal computer or
               the necessary private space to use one due to cramped living conditions. Mobile
               internet connections, while by and large reliable and fast (4G), are prohibitively
               expensive. 20GB traffic or 30 days of service, whichever is less, cost about 40 USD,
               while at least 30% of the population lived on less than 120 USD a month in 2018  . 
               Consequently, plans to levy a daily one-dollar tax on the usage of
               widely popular WhatsApp ignited wide-spread popular protest against the government
               and the entire political class in October 2019. Electricity has been another major
               issue. For the last decades, rising demand could not be matched by constantly
               decreasing supply. The single, state-run utility relies on insufficient power plants
               and imported, subsidized fuel. Consequently, the capital city of Beirut has been
               suffering from regular daily power cuts of three hours, even before the accelerating
               economic collapse that commenced in 2019. Already at this point, electricity had been
               expensive and easily came in at about 120 USD per month per household despite having
               been heavily subsidized. Generator subscriptions to offset power cuts were equally
                  expensive. It must be noted that corruption and waste are not the only
                  culprits to blame. Israel deliberately damaged and destroyed power plants in the
                  2006 war. 
               The situation has
               deteriorated since. At the point of writing, the local currency lost 94% of its
               purchasing power for buying the necessary fuel for generating power on the
               international market, and Beirut had about one hour of electricity per day. 
            The impact of these infrastructural realities is not only limited to individual users
               of digital cultural artifacts, but also severely impacts institutions planning to
               host them. At my home institution, a well-funded foreign research institute, for
               instance, we share a single connection of 24Mbps. Even under perfect conditions,
               simply loading the landing page for a single volume of al-Muqtabas at the Endangered Archives Programme requires three seconds.
               With 20 colleagues and another 20 library users all trying to access online services
               and resources, load time quickly multiplies tenfold and more. Browsing through a
               large number of scanned images behind such a bottleneck is a daunting task. Uploading
               multiple gigabytes of high-resolution scans to a cloud computing service for
               machine-learning based OCR, for instance, is practically impossible, and we prefer to
               ship hard drives and wait for months for the results.
         

            Bootstrapping for Access
            I set up OpenArabicPE in August 2015 in order to
               address these socio-technical layers of inaccessibility of existing digitized Arabic
               periodicals with the affordances of the Global South and the tools at hand. Building
               on the guiding principles of simplicity and credibility for the sake of accessibility
               and sustainability, OpenArabicPE was inspired by Alex Gil’s talk at Digital
               Humanities Institute-Beirut, during which he introduced the audience to the ideas
               of minimal computing, and by
               discussions and workshops at the 2015 Digital Humanities Summer Institute. A second
               strand of inspiration came from ideas about crowdsourcing and democratic public
               domain editions based on distributed version control systems that had emerged from
               the open-source communities in the early 2010s   
                . The idea is simple: re-use — sometimes creatively
               — openly available data, tools, and infrastructures to produce and share open,
               collaborative, scholarly digital editions of early Arabic periodicals. OpenArabicPE’s
               resources were and remain extremely constrained: we have no funds, no staff beyond
               volunteering interns, and no equipment beyond our own computers. OpenArabicPE,
               therefore, also represents (and reflects the changing boundaries of) our own ability
               to produce, disseminate, and preserve digital scholarship ourselves, without the
               help we can’t get, even as we fight to build the infrastructures we need at the
               intersection of, with, and beyond institutional libraries and schools . 
               As such, OpenArabicPE constitutes a contribution to the digital
               commons   and provides a practical critique of neoliberal
               capitalism along the lines of what Valeria Graziano, Marcell Mars, and Tomislav Meda
               have recently called pirate care  .
            

               The Data Layer
               On the data level, OpenArabicPE combines the virtues of immensely popular, but
                  non-academic, informal online libraries of volunteers with academic and
                  institutional scanning efforts and editorial expertise. We transformed the digital
                  text of six Arabic periodicals (see Table 2) — published in Baghdad, Cairo, and
                  Damascus between 1892 and 1918 from 
                     al-Maktaba al-shāmila
                  
                  — from HTML (packaged as EPUB) into an open, standardized
                  plain-text file format (XML) following the Text Encoding Initiative's (TEI) guidelines  . Additionally, we linked
                  each page to digital facsimiles from various sources, namely the Endangered
                  Archives Project, Translatio, HathiTrust, and 
                     Arshīf al-majallāt al-adabiyya wa-l-thaqāfiyya
                        al-ʿarabiyya
                  . Each periodical issue is modeled as a single file to align with the
                  original organizational principle of these compound texts. We then model each
                  issue with light structural mark-up for articles, sections, mastheads, and bylines,
                  as well as other bibliographic information. Our TEI customization for Arabic
                     periodicals is openly available at https://github.com/OpenArabicPE/OpenArabicPE_ODD. As far as
                  possible, authors and locations are identified and linked to local and
                  international authority files. Bibliographic metadata on every article and in
                  common standardized formats such as BibTeX and Metadata Object Description Schema
                  (MODS) is then automatically generated from the modelled TEI XML source. Our
                     code is openly available at https://github.com/OpenArabicPE/convert_tei-to-bibliographic-data. It
                     uses <tei:biblStruct> as an intermediary format and can also generate
                     YAML and Zotero RDF. Thus, we provide the advantages of truly digital
                  editions and a means to verify the text layer and our mark-up against facsimiles
                  of the original artifact.
               
                  Al-Maktaba al-shāmila has been repeatedly evaluated for
                  building scholarly corpora with a focus on distant reading approaches to classical
                  texts  . OpenArabicPE
                  was the first to focus on modern genres and to expand this basis into reliable and
                  citable digital scholarly editions. Going through two journals in our corpus for
                  the purpose of locating page breaks also revealed some of al-Maktaba al-shāmila’s editing practices, such as the omission of all
                  footnotes and terms in scripts other than Arabic from the transcription. Most of
                  the journals made extensive use of footnotes and articles covering recent
                  developments in technology and sciences at the turn of the 20th century, often
                  providing French, English, and Latin terms for clarification, which makes such
                  systematic omissions relevant for evaluating distant reading approaches to the
                  texts. Other scholars already noted that al-Maktaba
                     al-shāmila’s editors omitted Rashīd Riḍā’s commentary on the Qurʾān (tafṣīr) from their transcription of the monthly journal al-Manār (The Lighthouse) even though it accounted for more
                  than one-fifth of the journal’s content . A combination of
                  algorithmic searches for uncharacteristically short pages with close reading of
                  these pages further substantiated the hypothesis of human transcribers without
                  quality control strategies such as double keying. Most omissions can be plausibly
                  explained by common human errors: skipping a few words on a long line, jumping a
                  small number of lines, or turning two pages at once. In other instances,
                  transcribers left completely unmarked comments in the transcription itself,
                  stating, for example, that they couldn’t read the following lines in the copy in
                  front of them. See  for an example, stating, Four
                     lines are unclear on p.422. From these notes and common normalization
                  of spelling variants, we can safely deduce that the transcribers were Arabic
                  speakers. We are still looking for ways to adequately acknowledge their work
                  beyond a generic reference in the metadata section of our TEI files.
               Linking page breaks to facsimiles, although trivial, proved extremely
                  labor-intensive because page breaks seemingly did not matter enough to the
                  anonymous transcribers to be consistently recorded. Each of the ~8000 page breaks
                  in the journals 
                     al-Muqtabas
                   and 
                     al-Ḥaqāʾiq
                   needed to be manually marked up by volunteers. In other instances,
                     such as the journals Lughat
                        al-ʿArab and al-Ustādh,
                        al-Maktaba al-shāmila did provide page breaks that
                     correspond to a printed edition. My gratitude goes to Dimitar Dragnev, Talha
                     Güzel, Dilan Hatun, Hans Magne Jaatun, Xaver Kretzschmar, Daniel Lloyd, Klara
                     Mayer, Tobias Sick, Manzi Tanna-Händel, and Layla Youssef, who contributed their
                     time to this task.  
                  
                
               
                  OpenArabicPE’s corpus of
                     periodical editions.
                  
                     Periodical
                     Place
                     Dates The current cut-off date is 1918.
                     
                     DOI
                     Volumes
                     Issues
                     Words
                     Size (MB) Size includes TEI files and bibliographic metadata
                           (BibTeX, MODS).
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        al-Ḥaqāʾiq
                     
                     Damascus
                     1910–13
                     
                        10.5281/zenodo.1232016
                     
                     3
                     35
                     298090
                     15
                  
                  
                     
                        al-Manār
                     
                     Cairo
                     1898–1918
                     
                     20
                     387
                     c.3000000
                     NA
                  
                  
                     
                        al-Muqtabas
                     
                     Cairo, Damascus
                     1906–18
                     
                        10.5281/zenodo.597319
                     
                     9
                     96
                     1981081
                     107.6
                  
                  
                     
                        al-Ustādh
                     
                     Cairo
                     1892–93
                     
                        10.5281/zenodo.3581028
                     
                     1
                     42
                     221447
                     13.1
                  
                  
                     
                        al-Zuhūr
                     
                     Cairo
                     1910–13
                     
                        10.5281/zenodo.3580606
                     
                     4
                     39
                     292333
                     25.6
                  
                  
                     
                        Lughat
                           al-ʿArab
                     
                     Baghdad
                     1911–14
                     
                        10.5281/zenodo.3514384
                     
                     3
                     34
                     373832
                     35
                  
                  
                     total
                     
                     
                     
                     41
                     645
                     c.6166783
                     
                  
               
            

               The Presentation Layer
               TEI XML is certainly not simple and comes with a steep learning curve.
                  Bidirectional XML with left-to-right tags and right-to-left text is not
                  particularly accessible to readers and editors either, even if specialized
                  XML-editing software would better support it (Figure 5). However, TEI is both
                  sustainable and credible as an underlying format, and the direction of a script is
                  only relevant if rendered on a two-dimensional surface for human readers and
                  editors. 
               
               
               
                  Example of bidirectional XML from the beginning of
                     . The colored arrows indicate reading direction. The reading order
                     is indicated by the numbers below the errors.
                  
                  Screenshot of XML interface
               
               
                              
             
               Presenting facsimiles and text side-by-side for the validation of the latter with
                  the help of the former is core to OpenArabicPE’s claim of credibility. Therefore —
                  and in order to make the editions accessible to readers with as little overhead as
                  possible — we adapted the TEI Boilerplate to our needs (Figure 6).TEI Boilerplate is available at http://dcl.slis.indiana.edu/teibp/. TEI Boilerplate
                  is based on the idea of directly rendering XML files in a user’s web browser by
                  using the built-in support for XSLT (eXtensible Stylesheet Language
                  Transformations). This application of XSLT allows users to transform TEI XML into HTML
                  on-the-fly and to tailor the structure and content of this HTML to the specific
                  project needs. The HTML representation can then be styled with CSS and interacted
                  with through Javascript, just like any other webpage  . Our heavily modified adaptation of the TEI Boilerplate stylesheets
                  adds support for right-to-left scripts; the side-by-side view of page images and
                  text; a table of contents; browsing to neighboring issues; stable links to
                  articles, sections, and paragraphs; and machine-actionable bibliographic metadata
                  on the article level, and the necessary support for the specific
                  structural requirements of periodicals. Finally, we added a simple system to
                  provide multiple localizations, and most parts of the (simple) interface are
                  available in Arabic .
               
               
               
               
                  Webview of , which renders the XML from
                     Figure. 5.
                  
                  Screenshot of a webpage, rendered from the xml in figure 5
               
               
             
               The most obvious advantage of rendering XML files locally on the reader’s computer
                  is the removal of dependencies on backend servers and Internet connections.
                  Editions can be downloaded, distributed through USB keys, and run locally.
                  Generating ad hoc and on-the-fly reading copies also removes the need to actively
                  generate, maintain, and upload multiple derivative versions of our editions and
                  guarantees that human readers will always see the latest version.
               Linking to digital facsimiles already available on the Internet is the preferred
                  option from our project’s point of view, as scanning, maintaining, and hosting
                  large files is prohibitively expensive. If we were to produce our own
                     facsimiles, I would recommend uploading them to the Internet Archive, which
                     also provides basic IIIF support since 2015 .
                  But these facsimiles tax the readers as linked online facsimiles require stable,
                  fast, and affordable Internet connections; loading our webview for a single
                  periodical issue of 56 pages requires 8MB even though IIIF allows us to limit the
                  quality of images to grayscale and a width of 800dpi. A simple parameter setting,
                  therefore, allows users to switch off the loading of online facsimiles altogether.
                  Downloading images once and serving them locally would be the preferred option,
                  but it would most likely violate user agreements, licenses, and copyright
                  depending on vendors and jurisdictions. Nevertheless, such downloads are rather
                  trivial as links to the digital facsimiles are an inherent part of the TEI XML
                  files’ <facsimile> node.
            

               The Infrastructure
               Editions and tools are maintained on GitHub, a staple of the open-source software
                  development and digital humanities communities since 2008  
                  . Built upon the open-source version control system .git,
                  originally developed for the Linux kernel, GitHub provides an ever-evolving
                  infrastructure for collaborative editing, including issue trackers and wikis for
                  documentation. In this environment, each edit to our editions is transparently
                  documented and credited to an individual contributor with their email address and
                  a timestamp. GitHub also hosts the webview of our editions directly from the code
                  repositories through GitHub Pages. Most importantly, GitHub is free to use as long
                  as all code repositories are openly accessible to the public. Students and
                     teachers have access to private repositories and additional features otherwise
                     reserved for paying users through GitHub’s education program. Proof of
                     eligibility is based on institutional email addresses. This means that
                  any reader spotting an error or omission can contribute their corrections or
                  comments. The only threshold to participation is registering a free GitHub account
                  and continued support for GitHub by Microsoft, which bought the platform in 2018 (see below).
               Full-text search across the entire corpus is a core feature most users would
                  expect to see implemented. There are at least three distinct aspects to this
                  feature, none of which are easy to implement in a static environment. First, users
                  want any search to be aware of our corpus’ structural mark-up. That is, any search
                  should be able to return hits on a specific structural level, such as a volume,
                  issue, section, or article. Second, users will want to see keywords in context
                  (KWIC) to evaluate a potentially large number of hits and because we are used to
                  hegemonic search interfaces. Third, we expect search engines to be smart in the
                  sense that they are aware of linguistic peculiarities and allow for some
                  orthographic and morphologic variance.
               Distributing digital corpora of hundreds of periodical issues without a backend
                  severely restricts the ability to search and browse across issues. String search
                  on plain-text files, such as XML, is, of course, a basic functionality of any
                  personal computer’s operating system and there are plenty of free and open
                  solutions to leverage additional power for fine tuning queries through XPath or
                  regular expressions (RegEx). For an expert user, this solution will satisfy the
                  first two demands once they download the entire corpus. We will also gradually
                  change our encoding scheme to one TEI XML file per article for each periodical
                  issue once it is completely marked-up, in order to set a more useful default item level for
                  file based search operations (these files will then be compiled into issues upon
                  rendering by the webviewer). However, most users will not readily have the skills
                  and tools for taking advantage of this approach. As a result, we have also turned
                  to Google’s Programmable Search Engine and Search Console. This requires a Google
                  account linked to the editions’ URLs, which, for various political and legal reasons, might not be an option for other projects. There are at
                     least two issues here. The first is practical access to Google services. Some
                     countries, such as China, ban their citizens from using Google or prevent
                     access to its services for anyone within their IP range, while others, such as
                     Iran, are blocked from accessing Google due to, for instance, U.S. sanctions.
                     There are also perfectly good political reasons for objecting to using a
                     platform whose business-model is built upon creating and monetizing highly
                     specific behavioural profiles of individual users.  Once set up, the
                  Programmable Search Engine causes Google to crawl and index all editions and
                  provides a basic Javascript snippet to integrate a project-specific Google search
                  box into any website. Google’s spiders are not aware of the TEI XML or its
                  structure as they crawl the HTML page generated by the webview, but the
                  Programmable Search Engine provides KWIC and all the bells and whistles of
                  Google’s algorithmic power. Moving to one file per article will again improve the
                  granularity of this approach.
               Browsing and searching bibliographic metadata, on the other hand, can be easily
                  implemented. The free and open reference manager Zotero is another staple of the digital
                  humanities community and beyond. Among its features, Zotero allows users to share
                  an unlimited amount of bibliographic references for free through a feature called
                  Groups. Zotero also provides a well-documented API for uploading, updating, and
                  accessing all data beyond the user interface. This allows us to build and maintain
                  a bibliographic index by hosting references to all articles in our corpus in a
                  project specific Zotero Group. Each reference links to the relevant section in the
                  periodical editions through a stable URL.This includes stable BibTeX cite keys for referencing the periodicals in academic writing. See our Zotero Group at https://www.zotero.org/groups/OpenArabicPE. Readers can,
                  therefore, use both Zotero’s web interface and the standalone client as a port of
                  entry to the entire OpenArabicPE corpus.
               
                  Facilitating Re-use Through Licenses
                  Within the academic framework in which we are operating, we depend on explicit
                     licenses to facilitate the use and re-use of our data and tools. For an
                        introduction to the conceptual critique of copyrights see .
                        For a specific application to TEI XML files see .
                     We share all scripts with permissible MIT licenses whenever possible, and we
                     assume that the content of periodicals published across the Eastern
                     Mediterranean before 1920 is in the public domain even under the most
                     restrictive definitions (i.e., U.S. copyright law) — an interpretation that is
                     explicitly shared by U.S.-based vendors serving digital facsimiles. The
                     enormous amount of human labor required for digitizing cultural artifacts, on
                     the other hand, tends to be actively hidden by vendors and users. Within
                     academic historiography, for instance, extensive use of digital surrogates
                     instead of the physical artifact and reliance on their affordances remains an
                     open secret: everybody does it but only few acknowledge this practice. This is
                     evidenced by a search on JSTOR for references to the URLs of works from al-Maktaba al-shāmila in academic texts, which returned a
                     grand total of only 16 journal articles and book chapters, some of which are
                     shared with the 11 hits of a search for al-Maktaba
                        al-shāmila (c.f., ). Reasons for this omission range from a distrust of
                     the digital, vaguely inspired by Walter Benjamin’s ideas on the loss of aura
                     through mechanical reproduction of an artifact , to
                     perseverance of the established order of things and, ultimately, deception. Licenses will not solve
                     dishonest citation practices, but retaining copyright of our own editorial
                     contributions in the form of a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
                     International license is at least a reminder that all contributors need to be
                     transparently credited for their work.
               
            

            The Challenges of Bootstrapping
            As has become clear above, the main advantage of bootstrapping is its reliance on
               open and free-to-use external services, tools, and data. This is also its greatest
               weakness, as all these services, tools, and data are beyond our control. Every one of
               these dependencies will eventually break. The only question is when they will do so.
               Our main mitigation strategies are open and widely supported standards to prevent
               lock-ins and loss of data, and a minimal software stack to keep the number of
               potential breaking points as small as possible. Mitigation strategies also depend on
               the evaluation of the relative importance of threats and components for the
               overarching goals of our project.
            The data layer is at the core of the project. Once modeling and editing of a
               periodical issue in TEI is complete, this part of the data layer will remain fairly
               stable. This stability is documented by versioned releases of our editions at GitHub.
               Such versioned editions protect users from the inevitable content drift of digital
               editions and ascertains that a referenced edition hasn’t been changed in the meantime
               . GitHub, however, is a commercial platform owned by Microsoft since
               2018. Like any other commercial platform, they might change their business model or
               go out of business altogether at any point in the future.
            GitHub and competing platforms for distributed version control are, therefore, no
               solution for sustainable, long-term access. Long-term preservation and accessibility
               require costly continuous maintenance, which is out-of-reach for projects, such as
               ours, which cannot afford to pay running costs for years to come. Publicly funded
               data repositories, on the other hand, guarantee the integrity and availability of
               data for the foreseeable future. Zenodo is an open and free-to-use, E.U.-funded
               research data repository originally developed by the European Organization for
               Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva. In addition to its core service of providing
               long-term archiving of digital data, Zenodo registers versioned Digital Object
               Identifiers (DOI) and integrates with various Open Science infrastructures, such as
               scholarly aggregators of metadata or Open Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID) for
               unambiguously identifying contributors. Zenodo also integrates with GitHub by
               automatically archiving each release of data and tools and recording all contributors
               as found in the .git repository. This makes it a perfect choice for our
               GitHub-centered workflow.
            The combination of platforms for distributed version-control with public repositories
               provides the necessary accessibility and sustainability of our data layer. But our
               editions’ claim to credibility builds on the linkage between textual editions and
               digital facsimiles. These links to externally hosted facsimiles are the most volatile
               component of the data layer, and we already encountered three major instances of link
               rot. Two were caused by vendors moving servers and changing protocols: The British
               Library moved the Endangered Archives Programme to IIIF in 2017 and Arshīf al-majallāt al-adabiyya wa-l-thaqāfiyya al-ʿarabiyya moved to a new
               domain in 2019, while HathiTrust removed the facsimiles of Princeton’s copy of al-Haqāʾiq (vol.1, 1910) from the public domain without any
               explanation in 2016. My inquiries about the legal basis for this decision have
                  not been replied to. Such link rot inevitably requires a lot of manual
               labor to figure out the patterns in new URLs (if any) and to write the necessary
               scripts to update all TEI files. Derivative formats, such as bibliographic metadata,
               although part of the data layer and preserved on Zenodo, can easily be regenerated
               from the main TEI files whenever changes to the infrastructure or updated standards
               necessitate it.
            The World Wide Web and web browsers are fluid environments that will gradually break
               the presentation layer. As this presentation layer depends on specific versions of
               software, standards, and infrastructures, its functionality and looks cannot readily
               be preserved and archived. TEI Boilerplate was the only viable option to render TEI
               files in the browser without a backend in 2015, and it still works. All major
               browsers continue to support XSLT transformation but with two limitations. First,
               JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) has, in many cases, superseded XML as an exchange
               format for serialized (structured) data, and XSLT support is limited to version 1,
               which was superseded by XSLT 2 in 2007 and XSLT 3 in 2017. If browsers continue
               to support XSLT, it won’t be further developed. Second, browser vendors tighten the
               screws on security. Running XSLT transformations on local files is considered
               attempted cross-site scripting and, consequently, is aborted by Google’s Chrome
               browser. The Firefox browser will transform local XML files but only with remotely
               hosted XSLT. At the time of writing, only Apple’s Safari allows for rendering our
               editions without any Internet connection. In the meantime, the TEI
               community has spawned new and exciting infrastructures for presenting TEI-based
               editions to human readers. Based on the TEI Processing Model ,
               the TEI Publisher provides a flexible publication and editing framework
               as long as one has access to hosted server space. The Javascript-based CETEIcean, on the other hand, has
               matured into an alternative to TEI Boilerplate with the full support of the TEI
               consortium  . All future
               developments of OpenArabicPE’s webview will therefore move to CETEIcean.
            Hosting the webview is not a challenge in itself. There will always be services that
               provide hosting for the small amounts of data that our digital editions contain
               (Table 2) for free. They are, however, of varying convenience. Data might need to be
               copied from the code repository to the hosting provider. In this regard, GitHub pages
               is certainly the most convenient solution. It allows us to directly serve the TEI
               files from any branch of the code repositories, ensuring that the presentation layer
               always renders the latest version of the data layer. Switching providers will
               introduce a major instance of link rot for users of our editions. At a bare minimum,
               all URLs pointing from the bibliographic metadata to the editions will need to be
               updated. Renting a project specific domain, such as openarabicpe.org, will protect
               against such basic link rot for a small monthly fee, but it might require a credit
               card with the ability to transfer USD abroad, which is not necessarily available to
               projects across the Eastern Mediterranean. We have therefore decided to stick with
               the default domain provided by GitHub (openarabicpe.github.io).
         

            Conclusion
            This paper introduced our project, Open Arabic Periodical Editions, as a concrete
               response to the multiple layers of inaccessibility for the textual cultural heritage
               of the predominantly Arabic speaking societies of the Eastern Mediterranean. We
               demonstrate the possibility of bootstrapping existing data, tools, and
               infrastructures into a framework for producing and distributing open scholarly
               periodical editions. This framework addresses the constraints of material that
               resists digitization and operates within the socio-technical affordances of a
               particular region of the Global South. The problems and practical approaches outlined
               above are, to a large extent, not specific to digital editions of Arabic periodicals
               or the particular environment in Lebanon. All tools, workflows, and infrastructures
               can be readily adapted to other literary genres in different scripts and languages
               with very little effort. Documenting our approaches and workflows is a major, ongoing
               contribution to this effort.
            With regards to project specific outcomes, OpenArabicPE has the potential to
               radically alter and influence an emerging field of Arab Periodical Studies by making
               this material accessible for computational methods . The editions have
               been used as the necessary ground truth in initial efforts to train genre-specific
               models for machine-learning approaches to OCR with very promising results, in
               collaboration with Sinai Rusinek. Planned collaborations for improving
               layout-recognition algorithms will help to eventually remove the dependency on human
               transcribers and bring the digitization of the rich Arabic textual heritage on par
               with at least the smaller Western languages.
            Beyond building infrastructures without the help we can’t get , 
               OpenArabicPE highlights how minimal effort is frequently needed to improve
               existing infrastructures. Often, adding basic support for the @xml:lang and @lang
               attributes to XML and HTML environments with a little CSS snippet significantly improves their
               usability. Lobbying browser vendors to include a few lines to this end in their
               default CSS seems to be a worthwhile and achievable goal. In less optimistic terms,
               OpenArabicPE contributes to laying open the brutal neocolonial character of our
               contemporary knowledge infrastructures and digital economies. Character and text
               encoding standards, natural language processing and named entity recognition,
               ontologies, thesauri, and gazetteers (whether part of the semantic web or not) have
               all been developed without consideration of or input from the majority of human
               societies. OpenArabicPE is part of larger communities of practitioners that gravitate
               towards, but are in no way limited to, the Right To Left conference at the Digital
               Humanities Summer Institute (DHSI), the Digital Humanities Institute-Beirut (DHIB),
               the Islamicate Digital Humanities Network (IDHN), the Digital Orientalist, or the
               Historical Middle East Data Alliance. Together, we are raising attention for the
               needs of Arabic-centered scholarship and right-to-left scripts more generally within
               the larger digital humanities community.For more information, see the Right To Left conference at https://dhsi.org/dhsi-2021-online-edition/dhsi-2021-online-edition-aligned-conferences-and-events/dhsi-2021-right-to-left/; Digital Humanities Institute-Beirut (DHIB) https://dhibeirut.wordpress.com/; the Islamicate Digital Humanities Network (IDHN) https://idhn.org/; Digital Orientalist https://digitalorientalist.com/; and the Historical Middle East Data Alliance https://github.com/Hist-ME.
         
