Title:  Circling around texts and language: towards
                        
Volume:  010
Issue:  3
Date:  17 June 2016
Abstract:  
                In this paper we introduce the syntagm pragmatic modelling
                    as a productive way of contextualising research in Digital Humanities (DH). We
                    define pragmatic modelling as a middle-out approach
                    (neither top down nor bottom up) that combines formal and experimental modelling
                    techniques with an effective use of language. Furthermore, in order to elucidate
                    a pragmatic understanding of model building, we reflect on
                    texts (considered here as objects) and modelling (or strategy of analysis) in DH
                    research (and teaching). This paper does not identify a new practice or
                    approach; rather it offers an explanatory framework for existing practices. As
                    the paper explains, this framework goes beyond existing ones and allows us to
                    think about modelling in a more integral way. Drawing on this framework, we
                    reveal how DH modelling practices challenge epistemological and linguistic
                    restrictions, by, for example, problematising the adoption of terminology
                    belonging to the domain of computer sciences. Reflections on metaphorical
                    reasoning are used to exemplify how polarities and some rigidities DH research
                    could find itself embedded in are overcome in practice. We conclude by
                    advocating the importance of a diachronic and historical analysis of the role of
                    metaphors in DH to further explore the relation between theory and practice as
                    well as to develop models of modelling integral to DH research.
            
Full Body Text: 
Circling around texts and language: towards pragmatic
                    modelling in Digital Humanities

                1. Introduction
                DH or humanities computing in its former vest  is
                    being institutionalized and is an example of how cross-border fertilisation,
                    namely interdisciplinarity, is possible 
                    . DH scholars and professionals are making use of a
                        blended style reflected both in their language, by
                    adopting expressions to account for new scenarios, and in their research and
                    teaching approaches, often integrating computational methods and terminologies
                    with modes of discourse associated with more established
                    scholarship in the humanities 
                    . DH is surely a field in rapid evolution, where
                    open questions are numerous and self-reflexivity is not new (see for example
                        ). Modelling is widely agreed to be a central
                    activity of DH; as the discipline is institutionalised to a greater degree, new
                    opportunities and challenges are being opened up, not least to understand the
                    act of modelling far better than we have done in the past. In particular, the
                    sharing of empirical practices and methodologies across borders makes DH
                    somewhat comparable to the techno-sciences; For an overview of models in
                        science see in particular . For an in depth
                        discussion and examples of the use of analogical modelling in science, see
                            
                        . For an overview on modelling in information
                        science see . Note that we use the term
                        techno-sciences, as McCarty does in his work, to be inclusive towards
                        engineering and to recognise the profound role of computing in contemporary
                        science. it also anchors humanities scholarship to a practical
                    dimension that renews its 15th-century roots of empirical studia humanitatis. Considered within an historical
                        perspective, empirical approaches in humanities research have an
                        independence to claim: 
                            Sadly modern humanists often
                                believe that they are moving towards science when they use an
                                empirical approach in studying texts, art, music, or the past. They
                                are mistaken. Scholars using empirical methods are returning to
                                their roots in the 15th-century studia
                                    humanitatis when the empirical approach was invented —
                                and not since disappeared.
                            
                         This paper will make a contribution to this discussion by
                    asking the following questions: other scholarship in the humanities and
                    techno-sciences has passed/passes via the experimental and the formal; in what
                    way is the experimental and the formal done in DH different and similar? Where
                    do DH modellers position their models in the polarity between texts/objects and
                    theory/practice? Is modelling in computing going to lift our way of seeing, and
                    therefore thinking, to another level of analysis? 
                To address these questions our argument will engage with two interrelated
                    concepts: 
                        text: dynamic cultural objects (material documents as well as
                            immaterial objects) Modelling of texts intended in this way makes
                                it akin to what in the philosophical debate is described as
                                fictional models (we will return to this under section 3). 
                            contingent to the contexts of production and reading, expressed in a
                            wide range of manifestations from linear to discontinuous narrative,
                            from manuscripts to printed editions, encompassing hybrid
                            modalities;
                        modelling: a DH-specific research and teaching activity, but
                            also connected to multifaceted conceptualisations of model building as
                            used and understood by other disciplines and practices.
                     Modelling in DH 
                    
                     is informed by modelling as rooted in computer
                    sciences and therefore in mathematical reasoning. It is also directly
                    interconnected with work on texts , the privileged
                    objects of humanities research. Here the perspectives that it can grant are
                    multifaceted and not limited to ways of seeing patterns of similarity across
                    them . It should be specified that it is modelling
                        activities that we are focusing on here, rather than the models
                        themselves. In McCarty’s  words: By modeling I
                            mean the heuristic process of constructing and manipulating
                                models, a model I take to be either
                                a representation of something for purposes of study, or a
                                design for realizing something new. These two senses follow
                            Clifford Geertz's analytic distinction between a denotative model
                                of such as a grammar describing the features of a language, and
                            an exemplary model for such as an architectural plan (Geertz
                            1973: 93). The premise of our argument is that in
                    describing their modelling activities DH researchers tend to privilege a
                    symbolic analysis of texts instead of a pragmatic one. The former view on text
                    focuses on partitioning it into descriptive chunks or components, be they
                    material or conceptual, while the latter, as we intend it here, calls for an
                    integrative approach where the use of language in understanding and
                    manipulating texts is given a prominent place. By using
                            pragmatic we subscribe to a functional perspective,
                        which favours the use of language over other aspects. By
                        focusing on use, a pragmatic perspective is also integrative in that it aims
                        at encompassing the full complexity of the cognitive, social, and cultural
                        functioning of language . 
                
                By reflecting on modelling practices in DH research, this paper shows how
                    pragmatic modeling combines theoria cum praxis.
                    In doing so, the paper discusses a selection of significant literature as well
                    as some examples across different disciplines and approaches. We will begin by
                    setting out our pragmatic understanding of modelling.
                
                    1.1. A pragmatic understanding of modelling
                    In this section we will frame DH modeling activities by engaging with recent
                        work on model building . Our focus is on what
                        Kralemann and Lattmann call the Act of the Interpreter or End of the model or Pragmatics. We aim to highlight how that
                        aspect of pragmatic modelling might need further attention in a DH context
                        with respect to the two following elements: flexibility of language and
                        fuzzy polarities (in particular object vs. model). By using the term
                        pragmatic modelling we intend to emphasise an understanding of the act of
                        modelling as anchored to theory and language. Kralemann and Lattmann explain
                            the semiotic structure of
                            the model relation as following: 
                            [...] in the context of an
                                intentional act (i.e. the pragmatics), a subject chooses a set of
                                objects Oi=1,...,n (i.e. the extension of the model) and a theory or
                                language (i.e. the intension of the model), which together determine
                                the semantics of the model, and an object Omod the attributes of
                                which act as the syntax of the model on the basis of a
                                representational relation between themselves and the semantic model
                                attributes: in the context of a theory and with respect to the
                                respective end, Omod becomes a model of the objects Oi=1,...,n 
                            
                        
                    Their theory of models as icons in the Peircean sense acts as a generic
                        framework to contextualise the creation and use of models in the sciences,
                        humanities and, we could even say, life. To exemplify how this applies to DH
                        (in line with established understandings of modelling), one could think of a
                        researcher who is modelling a set of historical documents (her objects). In
                        doing so she must engage with a theory of text and hence with an
                        understanding of textual features relevant to her historical research. In
                        her modelling activity, the researcher maps the theory of text and scholarly
                        language she uses to describe and understand her documents to a digital
                        model of her texts. She may use, for instance, a formalisation of the widely
                        adopted Ordered Hierarchy of Content Objects (OHCO) For a recent
                            discussion on the OHCO model as empirical observation of the publishing
                            process naturalised as a theory of texts see . model combined with a Text Encoding Initiative
                        (TEI) document model. Our researcher chooses a hierarchical model of text
                        (the OHCO model) which she presumably thinks will allow her to map some of
                        her understandings of the historical documents under study to a pre-defined
                        structure (e.g. a TEI schema) and to process those data in some automatic
                        form (e.g. to create indexes of certain selected elements, to perform
                        combined searches or specific content analysis). However, in the modelling
                        process itself she might question deeply the OHCO model as well as the TEI
                        categorisations, reflecting on her own theory of the historical documents at
                        hand and realising the constraints of both theory and model with respect to
                        her objects of interest. She will most likely go back and forth in her
                        modelling efforts to match – based on her knowledge and scholarly language –
                        what she would like to elicit in the document (e.g. the organisation of the
                        diplomatic formulas, the occurrence of names of witnesses in certain
                        locations in the document, the abbreviations occurring in the date clauses)
                        with the formal hierarchical structure proposed by one or more of the TEI
                        guidelines chapters on the encoding of primary sources. Once this mapping
                        reaches a certain stability and she is able to actually process that model,
                        her interpretative activity will likely have to zoom in and out of these
                        manifestations (e.g. between single cases and emerging patterns). She will
                        often puzzle over exceptions that will allow her to iteratively refine the
                        original mapping or require a total rethinking of categories and of the OCHO
                        model being adopted. Single components or parts of the model itself (e.g.
                        the specific schema adopted and its syntax, the technology, the versions of
                        the model at x moments in time) cannot account for
                        the complexity of model
                            relation as described above by Kralemann and Lattmann. Within
                        such a reductive analysis of modelling practices, the contextual and
                        relational construction of the semantics of the model as well as its
                        pragmatic end are lost. 
                    A pragmatic understanding of modelling, as we understand it here, and as
                        practiced in DH research, can facilitate the recognition that modelling
                        operates within relational and dynamic cycles which are elicited via
                        negotiations over the use of modelling languages (e.g. by renaming
                        categories of analysis or adopting neologisms). The interplay (usually
                        referred to as mapping) between the object of analysis (texts in this case)
                        and the model, as well as across different levels of the interpretative
                        process (e.g. close and distant reading, symbolic/syntagmatic and
                        semantic/paradigmatic levels of text analysis), exemplify some of these
                        dynamic aspects.
                
            

                2. Modelling in DH
                Models and modelling - pervasive in scientific empirical practices – have become
                    part of the methodological approaches of DH research. Thus the question is: in
                    what way is DH rhetoric and practices not only attracted by but borrowing from
                    the techno-sciences? What model of modelling can be considered
                        adequate to DH? To this end, it is necessary to point
                    out which are the distinctive features of modelling in the humanities. If
                    modelling acts as understood from a semiotic tradition are used to make sense of
                    our cultural objects (mainly but not only texts), they are meaning-making
                    practices and hence in themselves objects of study for the humanities. Indeed,
                    as stated below, the modelling process is often recognised as part of what is
                    being modelled. In this respect it is interesting to note how this applies to
                    natural and literary languages as well as markup languages: 
                        [...] by its nature the TEI is
                            designed to handle not only the modeling of that data, but also the
                            markers of transcriptional, editorial, and interpretative
                            self-awareness: the non-transparency of the modeling process is itself
                            part of what is being modeled (and again, I would claim that this is a
                            distinctive feature of humanities data modeling).
                        
                     To address the questions above we will reflect on objects, practices and
                    languages of modelling in DH.
                
                    2.1. Texts as complex and open objects
                    Texts are or at least have been so far the privileged objects of modelling
                        activities in DH. In explaining why DH belongs to an English
                            department and so in the context of English studies, Kirschenbaum
                            explains the prominent DH interest for texts ascribing it to five
                            factors: its processability compared to other media like images or
                            audio; the long
                                association between computers and composition; the
                            convergence between the
                                intense conversations around editorial theory and method in the
                                1980s and the widespread means to implement electronic archives and
                                editions very soon after; the much- promoted belle-lettristic project
                                around hypertext and other forms of electronic literature that
                                continues to this day; the openness of English departments to
                                cultural studies, where computers and other objects of digital
                                material culture become the centerpiece of analysis; the
                            growing interest in e-reading devices and distant reading methodologies.
                                 Here we chose to
                        focus on some interrelated aspects of the study of texts, which seem to us
                        particularly relevant to exemplify their complexity and openness with
                        respect to modelling in DH: dynamicity,
                            multidimensionality, historicity, and
                        processuality. 
                    First, we highlight dynamicity Our use of
                            dynamicity combines the notion of variants of material texts with an
                            overarching principle of fluid textuality and the sociology of texts
                            theory. With respect to the former, for instance, Burdick et al. state: 
                                Fluid textuality refers
                                    to the mutability of texts in variants and versions whether
                                    these are produced through authorial changes, editing,
                                    transcription, translation, or print production. In a
                                    fundamental sense, then, texts have always been fluid and
                                    modular. But the advent of word processing drew intensified
                                    attention to this aspect of textuality
                                
                            . The most recent and comprehensive reflections on the dynamic
                            aspects of textuality connected to interpretations and modelling
                            activities in DH can be found in ; he defines
                            texts as 
                                dynamic autopoietic
                                    things
                                
                            : 
                                How, then, are traditional
                                    texts marked? If we could give an exhaustive answer to that
                                    question we would be able to simulate them in digital forms. We
                                    cannot complete an answer for two related reasons: first, the
                                    answer would have to be framed from within the discourse field
                                    of textuality itself; and second, that framework is dynamic, a
                                    continually emerging function of its own operations, including
                                    its explicitly self-reflexive operations
                                
                            . And further: 
                                Organizing our received
                                    humanities materials as if they were simply information
                                    depositories, computer markup as currently imagined handicaps or
                                    even baffles altogether our moves to engage with the well-known
                                    dynamic functions of textual works
                                
                            . as an aspect in the study of texts which emerges
                        particularly in the relationship between models and objects as well as
                        models and interpretations. DH researchers have engaged with linear texts
                        all the way towards discontinuous narratives, for instance as structured in
                        relational databases. In addition, texts as objects being modelled in DH
                        research are not only or mainly verbal and encompass hybrid modalities such
                        as maps . Indeed, dynamic aspects of texts as
                        modelled in DH research and connected to the nature of cultural artefacts as
                        such could be exemplified in a variety of ways. Researchers engaged in
                        scholarly digital editing, for instance, have attempted at modelling the
                        whole range of material incarnations of texts and the associated
                        interpretative processes from manuscript witnesses to printed editions, from
                        diplomatic transcriptions to critical editing. Hence, often within one and
                        the same digital editing project, textual models do not sit still; they
                        shift along multiple axes with respect to their objects and interpretations.
                        The models themselves change shape. So, the axis of textual sources vs.
                        models of analysis and interpretation of those same sources is mobile; for
                        example, during the modelling process the sample of sources being selected
                        might reveal new important features to model – such as a late pagination
                        within a codex under study originally not included in the encoding model -
                        which in some cases might also challenge the previous knowledge of those
                        sources such as the biography of that codex. The axis between the textual
                        models and the reading interfaces being generated out of them is also
                        mobile; while developing an interface to a digital edition, the DH modeler
                        might realise that some features of the original encoding model are not
                        refined enough to allow for certain visualisations or specific manipulation
                        of the data. These two axes illustrate the interplay of
                                model of vs. model for as
                            described, for example, in  and .
                    
                    Secondly, we mention multidimensionality as an aspect of
                        the study of texts that emerges from the relation between objects and
                        interpretations. With this respect, we refer to Sahle’s pluralistic model of
                        text 
                         which states that the definition of text (e.g.
                        text as semantic and intentional vs. text as version containing specific
                        graphemes; text as complex visual sign vs. text as linguistic utterance;
                        text as material document vs. text as work or rhetorical structure) depends
                        on how we look at it, on the aspects we are most interested in making
                        explicit in our modelling efforts and the tacit knowledge invested in those
                        efforts. This is why the TEI standard aims to account for many models of
                        texts and is a mobile guide in itself.
                    Next we turn to historicity, which is the aspect via which we put models in
                        relation to their historical interpretations. The concept of historicity is
                        useful to argue that, usually, in DH, modelling acts are also and
                        necessarily meta-modelling activities because they explicitly engage with
                        non-neutral objects, that is with objects mediated by prior interpretative
                        activities even if not always passing via computational
                            formalisations. On the historiographical aspect to modelling see
                            also . Therefore, our
                        models of texts also embed historical understandings, categorisations and
                        definitions of those texts. It is evident that this statement does not
                            apply only to modelling in the humanities. However, while the expression
                            of the molecular model or of the evolutionary theory have their own
                                historicity, the meta-modelling role in the
                            sciences is much less prominent and necessarily embedded in modelling
                            activities: 
                                If that past model has
                                    changed, or is inconsistent, or incoherent, or unintelligible,
                                    we may be able to correct it, or we may need to incorporate it
                                    and model its difficulties and historicity as well, depending on
                                    what we are trying to accomplish.
                                
                            
                    
                    The last aspect we mention concerns the processuality of the study of texts
                        located at the interface between objects and subject’s interpretations. This
                        concept aims at highlighting a further connection between the reading (and
                        hence also modelling) of texts and our being human. How we read, interpret,
                        engage with texts is intimately situated in the performative and eventful
                        process of creating and confirming our own identity .
                    In conclusion, what this brief encounter with texts aimed to highlight is a
                        reiteration of how entangled any DH modelling process is with the cultural,
                        historical and personal engagement we have and had with these complex and
                        open objects.
                
                
                    2.2. Middle ground: modelling practice and languages
                    In philosophy of science there has been a lively debate around theorisations
                        of models and their position in the middle between theory and data or
                        objects (e.g. ). Models as used in
                        experimental settings, including computer simulations, are often
                        conceptualised as 
                            mediators between theory and
                                material systems
                            
                        . Hence, also computer simulations, as a special type of model, can be
                        perceived as links 
                            between theory and
                                experiment
                            
                        . In a simplified view of experimental settings theorised within such
                        frameworks, a rather stable physical system exists; any new knowledge
                        acquired during an experiment is mediated by models of that system (models
                        of materiality) via a causal connection. 
                    Without aiming at defining experimental practices in the techno-sciences,
                        this paper dwells on how they are commonly perceived and how DH practice
                        relates to them. Flanders and Jannidis state for example that 
                                In computer science,
                                    among both theorists working in the academy and those working in
                                    industry doing practical data modeling, most regard data
                                    modeling as a description of a real and objective world (which
                                    includes the possibility of assessing the correctness of data
                                    models) while only a minority views it as a design process.
                                    However, in digital humanities there seems to be a general
                                    understanding that a data model, like all models, is an
                                    interpretation of an object, either in real life or in the
                                    digital realm. Michael Sperberg-McQueen in his closing keynote
                                    to the workshop stated this position clearly: modeling is a way to make explicit
                                        our assumptions about the nature of a text/artefact.
                                    Furthermore, most digital humanities researchers assume that
                                    data modeling is primarily a constructive and creative process
                                    and that the functions of the digital surrogate determine what
                                    aspects have to be modeled.
                                
                             These perceptions and relations explain the borrowing from
                        the techno-sciences we aim to unpack and also suggest directions towards a
                        model of modelling integral to DH research. In the case of computational
                        models, for example, a physical system is represented by a simulation model,
                        which is the result of a 
                            discretizing method
                            
                         passing via various mathematical models of that system. For
                            example, (ANSYS) offers a comprehensive software suite that spans the
                            entire range of physics, providing access to virtually any field of
                            engineering simulation that a design process requires. CAD (Computer
                            Aided Design) suites are another example of systems to draw objects
                            independently from their assumed representation scale, implying a high
                            level of abstraction from the object. Such modelling systems are of
                            course also applied in the humanities but this paper aims to focus on a
                            wider interpretation of modelling embedding processes and
                            language. Now even if this is a simplified view which does not
                        take into account that a pure empiricism where objects and theories are
                        entirely separate entities has been questioned by scientists,
                            philosophers For example, Morrison argues that direct materiality
                            can be seen as a myth in empirical sciences too when she states 
                                Without models there is
                                    not measurement
                                
                             to say that models are sine qua
                                non. Transposed to a computational simulation context, she
                            sees materiality not in the machine (the computer) itself but in the
                            simulation model. and of course by the framework of quantum
                            physics, No doubt the underpinning concepts of uncertainty,
                            instability, the role of the observer and of conscience, the many worlds
                            etc. in quantum physics bring to the fore all sorts of interesting
                            bridges between the humanities and the techno-sciences which are beyond
                            the scope of this paper. what is interesting for our analysis is
                        that computer simulations in a techno-scientific context seem to be
                        perceived as adding a level of immateriality (or better
                            fictionality) to experimental settings, while in DH
                        they tend to be perceived as adding an element of materiality to humanistic
                            interpretation. See for instance the vision proposed by Svensson
                            (2012): 
                                The digital humanities
                                    need to be materially and technologically grounded in order to
                                    facilitate the often intertwined practical, expressive and
                                    critical work associated with the field
                                
                            . Beyond empirical and evidence-based humanities, this view is
                            also connected to design practices, as argued, for example, by Burdick
                            et al.: 
                                The methodologies of
                                    Digital Humanities are robust precisely because they place
                                    lasting pedagogical value in the creative, generative and
                                    experimental process of design-based research
                                
                            . The latter resonates in particular with respect to the
                        popular claim of DH as evidence-based humanities - or what we could call a
                        Cartesian approach to the humanities - as well as to the criticism towards
                        DH as a new positivistic approach to scholarship . 
                    History of culture and science can be read as progressively distancing and
                        detaching human life from the world of nature via the meditation of tools
                        and technologies. Interesting the position of Floridi  and his intellectual project in which
                            philosophy is seen to mediate and contribute to harmonise physis and techne. For an overview on objects as subject of
                            scientific enquiries see . This is a
                        process that can be summarised as a dialectic tension between two
                        polarities, that of physis and of techne. Philosophers tried to explain and
                        mediate this process, but the dichotomy between objects and thoughts, models
                        and objects, theories and practices, explanans and explanandum,
                        observer and observetur has become
                        pervasive and intrinsic to the development of Western thought. So we ask:
                        does the fuzziness of the two polarities of objects and models emerge in a
                        new vest in a DH context? This polarity is theorised in philosophy of
                            science as well as in more generalist approaches like the one in  outlined above and more or less implicitly
                            inherited by DH research. Above we saw this with respect to
                        objects (texts); here we also see it contextualised with respect to the
                        language we use, whether intended as modelling language, language of
                        representation or language as vehicle of theories and methods. That
                        modelling practices and language are tightly connected is not new. This is
                        also the case for modelling in DH (our italics): 
                            You may find you have
                                to name things; you may have to reify
                                them, not in the social science sense of making them … beneath
                                attention but in the AI [Artificial Intelligence] sense of making
                                them into things that you can address and talk about and think
                                    about. That’s one of the reasons for modelling in
                                general. One reason why do [sic] we care about making our
                                assumptions and fundamental beliefs explicit? So that we can
                                    look at them and say, Well, actually I don’t like that one! Could we do
                                    without that one? Can I build a system that doesn’t rely on that
                                    assumption? If you don’t ever surface your
                                    assumptions, you’re never going to be able to think
                                    about building that system, let alone build
                                    it. And you might want to build it, because our
                                assumptions turn out to have teeth.
                            
                        
                    What a pragmatic understanding of modelling enables us to acknowledge though
                        is that the opportunities enabled by modelling (e.g. emergence of patterns
                        of relation, behaviour, and shape) are rooted not only in a demonstrative and literal language but also
                        in a metaphorical one 
                        . In the context of modelling, language operates
                        at different levels; for our purposes we could identify at least two: (1)
                        functional and (2) conceptual. In the former case, a language is used to
                        describe a model in descriptive yet operational terms; an example is, for
                        instance, how effectively we apply genealogical terminology (e.g. parent,
                        ancestors, siblings, children) to navigate the hierarchical structure of an
                        XML document or to describe any arboreal organisation of knowledge. On the
                        other hand, in the case of metaphorical language, the terminology being
                        chosen and the relevant metaphorical models being applied organise the
                        modelling processes themselves. Below we provide some examples of what this
                        means in practice.
                    DH scholarship has been reflecting on the limits of adopting uncritically one
                        language of computer sciences. Starting from semantic data modelling and the
                        widely adopted yet controversial term of ontology, Pasin and Ciula,
                        stated that DH approaches seem to privilege a pragmatic rather than a
                        realist understanding of the term in light of the fact that ontologies for the humanities must
                            support diversity and variety of viewpoints;
                            thus they cannot adhere to an underlying model which neglects
                            multiplicity in favor of a monolithic vision of the world. The
                        authors promoted the pragmatic 
                            concept of an ontology as the
                                    agreement reached by multiple parties
                                (e.g., programmers, scientists, collaborators, librarians) with the
                                aim of accomplishing some objectives (e.g., data exchange between
                                applications, communication between people, integration of disparate
                                representations). Using a metaphor, ontologies are
                                    contracts, they are the currency used
                                to perform some valuable operations. Thus, their importance is
                                ultimately related not to their truth or beauty, but to the ease
                                they bring to the collaboration among people. To use a less
                                    commercial metaphor an ontology is a
                                    compromise or a point of contact between specific
                                and possibly divergent models. The issue is therefore not only to
                                identify commonalities between projects, for instance, but also to
                                agree that the compromises so found wonʼt diminish the value of the
                                underlying idiosyncratic models, the specificity of any single
                                project or interpretation. We believe that in the humanities this
                                agreement is not necessarily reachable once for all or hoped for,
                                because it may imply the negation of the interpretative efforts that
                                make a work or a project unique and the negation of the evolutionary
                                nature of scholarship. However, we also think that the possibility
                                to make two incommensurable categorical systems communicate could be
                                a challenge worth pursuing.
                            
                         Some modelling attempts in DH have embarked on dedicated efforts to
                        problematise terminology. For example  developed
                        refined formalisations of concepts for cultural heritage information
                        systems;  tackle the complexity of spatio-temporal
                        concepts in humanities and arts;  discuss how
                        concepts of difference and personhood are flattened and smoothened out while
                        cherry-picking extant semantic web ontological models for research in the
                        humanities;  call for a rigorous analysis of what
                            datasets in
                        multidisciplinary contexts are for libraries, publishing, and data curation. 
                    Other DH scholarship has also ventured in creative attempts at establishing
                        neologisms. Short and Bradley , for example,
                        discuss the choice of name for the prosopographical model they developed and
                        used in various DH projects – factoid - as possibly ironic but mirroring the historian’s worry
                         that what they recorded as assertions in
                        the historical sources under study are not the same as facts. Pasin
                            and Bradley  reflected further on this model
                            and its developments spread over thousand of years in its conceptual or
                                fictional incarnation and over a decade in its
                            digital form: 
                                Multidimensionality,
                                    complexity, and non-linearity are just a few among the many
                                    characteristic features of narratives that could not be easily
                                    reduced to the unambiguous abstract language of databases. As a
                                    result, downplaying or eliminating narratives about people in
                                    virtue of a systematic use of formal structures often causes
                                    historians to worry [...]. It is precisely in this context that
                                    the ‘factoid’- based prosopography was first developed. [...]
                                    the factoid model has been used in a number of prosopographical
                                    projects that, taken as a whole, span across almost two thousand
                                    years of history. This would not have been possible unless this
                                    conceptual framework was general enough to allow this degree of
                                    reusability; however, it is also true that each single project
                                    required a number of extensions to the model. [...] our factoid
                                    approach can show that formal structuring if designed correctly
                                    need not impose, as Veltman implies, a single perspective on the
                                    data it models, but is capable of accommodating a range of views
                                    from the different sources.
                                
                            . The name is therefore the face of a very much
                        context-aware approach to history, but, as explained by Pasin and Bradley,
                        it becomes also a metaphor structuring the corresponding digital resources
                        in very practical terms: 
                            During the data
                                    acquisition phase, factoids provided historians with
                                both a guiding metaphor (helping them conceptualize the broader
                                approach being used) and a usable structure for the data entry work.
                                Secondly, within the data storage context,
                                factoids proved to be a practical, flexible, and sustainable schema
                                for designing databases. Thirdly, during the data
                                    presentation phase, the factoid notion has been used
                                with success to the purpose of building user interfaces that are
                                simple yet rich in the way they combine and organize information
                                about people and make it available to the historians using our
                                online resources.
                            
                        
                    These cases cast light on the trade-offs of projecting historical lexicons in
                        new contexts. They are also evidence that, in DH modelling practices,
                        language is not purely observational, but correctable and ambiguous. A model
                        is not an addition to a theory; the non-univocal character of scholarly
                        language has to be recognised. In this perspective, the relationship across
                        borders of disciplines is also to be considered as a translation, which
                        establishes a sort of metaphorical relationship. As the result of an
                            intercultural marriage between digital and
                        humanities, DH is a realm of grafting across disciplines. Its scholarship
                        requires adaptable models that are able to grasp such specificity of
                        language as well as models that emerge from the specificity of its theories
                        and objects of analysis, models which emerge out of a modelling process not
                        directly linked to its observational contexts. Without diminishing the value
                        of formal and functional languages at the interface between human and
                        machine communication, what is therefore of interest to us is the strong
                        intrinsically metaphorical component of the DH modeler’s use of language
                        (discussed below as modeler’s talk). 
                    In the continuous effort This effort is what McCarty calls 
                                struggle
                                
                             after Flanders . DH
                        researchers undertake in embracing and fighting a pragmatic model of model
                        building, a constant resistant dialectic between conceptual expansion and
                        formalisation takes place. When examined from a diachronic and comparative
                        perspective, it is also interesting to note that this effort finds parallel
                        approaches in the history of use and functions of metaphors around the
                        organisation of knowledge. See, for example, how metaphors structure
                            and conceptualise some key concepts in philosophy, in particular in the
                            work of the German philosopher G. W. Leibniz .
                
            

                3. The place of DH
                So where the middle ground is or where models sit depends on where the modeller
                    stands. How DH practices can use the lens of computing to make critical
                    scholarship depends on how imaginative our act of modelling is. According to
                    Godfrey-Smith, it is the modeler’s talk
                    which fictionalises models and makes them become objects independently of how
                    they are expressed and of where they lie on the continuum between analytic (or
                    descriptive) models adhering to physical objects, on one hand, and schematic (or
                    idealised) models, on the other. He states: 
                        Richly realistic novels are
                            akin to elaborate computer simulations. Spare and schematic fictions are
                            akin to abstract analytic models. Parables are like narrative
                            algebra
                        
                    . Both models and stories are
                    used in the techno-sciences and the humanities and both are to be contextualised
                    in space and time: 
                        Fictions do not have the
                            same role in all of science. They are a particular kind of tool, and
                            their role changes over time and space. Since WWII, model-based science
                            has probably become more prominent, and more recognizable as a distinct
                            strategy rather than an ingredient in a blend. (This would make some
                            sense of the earlier tendency to see fictionalizing as either everywhere
                            or nowhere.) Thinking and talking of model systems as imaginary concreta may have become more noticeable,
                            too. This is perhaps especially due to the role played by computers.
                            Computers have turned attention away from analytical methods to some
                            extent. They also make it possible to model more causal detail, and are
                            powerful tools for visualization.
                        
                    
                Modelling practices in DH are very well positioned to reveal how choices in model
                    building are made on the basis of flexible principles and strategies potentially
                    open to creative reasoning. , for instance,
                    discusses how assumptions that are tacitly embedded in the code of software
                    designed for DH research 
                        represent rules and choices
                            that could have been different as a result of different scholarly
                            reasoning and argument
                        
                    ; equally tacit, the model behind the code is designed, tweaked, and tuned in a continuous
                        communicative and discursive feedback cycle between developers and
                        researchers. In comparison to other contexts, in DH models
                        and stories coexist and are not in opposition. Indeed, with
                    respect to modelling theorised in computer sciences, the challenge in DH is to
                    shift the lens of computing up the scale, to embrace the experimental nature of
                    modelling via, for example, computational coding and to see how it can scale up
                    to do critical scholarship with/via it. Below we attempt to outline some general
                    principles on how this can be achieved.
                
                    3.1. Middle out method: metaphorical reasoning and pragmatic
                        modelling
                    The pragmatic take on modelling, as outlined above, implies some equilibrium
                        between the two polarities (observation/objects/literal language, on one
                        hand, and theory/model/metaphorical language, on the other) and overcomes
                        the misleading dichotomy between observation of the objects and theorisation
                        (hence modelling) of those objects. A nomologic-deductive process in
                        building models which distinguishes sharply between theory and observation
                        has been surpassed in DH theory. With respect to this but mainly focusing on
                        visual languages in DH, Drucker argues that: 
                            all data have to be understood
                                as capta and the conventions created to express observer-independent
                                models of knowledge need to be radically reworked to express
                                humanistic interpretation.
                            
                        
                    Linguistic tools and metaphors On the linguistic and creative power of
                            metaphors, see  and . Note that  offer a conceptualisation of metaphors as
                            meta-models. enable us to move forward the theoretical reflection
                        as framed so far. In this respect, metaphorical reasoning exemplifies a
                        specific strategy that can guide modelling in DH to move away from the
                        dichotomy between bottom-up (models emerging from particulars) and top-down
                        (models imposed on particulars) approaches. We argue that pragmatic
                        modelling brings into focus a middle-out method which acts at the crossing
                        point between data and models adapting itself to specific textual
                            contexts. Three interrelated properties belonging to
                        pragmatics (adapted from ) can be associated
                        with this method and explain how metaphorical reasoning functions: 
                            Variability - the range of choices in the use of language cannot
                                be seen as static in any respect;
                            Negotiability - such choices are not made mechanically or
                                according to strict rules or fixed form-function relationships, but
                                on the basis of highly flexible principles and strategies, thus also
                                implying the indeterminacy and unexclusiveness of the choices being
                                made;
                            Adaptability - such negotiable choices can be adapted based on
                                specific needs and contexts according to a variable range of
                                possibilities. 
                        
                    These properties characterise pragmatics not merely in terms of its
                        interpretative function in reading a specific communicative domain, but as a
                        cognitive, social and cultural study of language (and communication) as
                        anticipated at the beginning of this paper. The awareness of the value of
                        pragmatics in modelling acts contributes to making rigorous practices open
                        to a creative and imaginative dimension. In this context, metaphors often
                        function as models to integrate the interpretation of theories, especially
                        when there are not terms or concepts to be used that are directly related to
                        the observed facts/objects, in other words when there is an indirect or
                        remote relation between observer and observatur, explanans and
                            explanandum. This relation
                            assumes different characteristics in the empiristic and neo-empiristic
                            tradition. For a detailed and critical discussion on this point and for
                            an overview of the realist and formalistic approach toward metaphors in
                            science as well as the role of analogy see . For an interesting review of the features
                            and functions of scientific metaphors and related literature see . For an example on the use of metaphors in
                            understanding the complexity of biomolecular objects see . In these cases, metaphors compensate
                        or fulfill a linguistic gap, the
                            inadequacy of the ordinary language for scholarly
                        purposes. 
                    Metaphors have been largely used by scientists in building experimental and
                        theoretical sciences, in representing and describing a domain, and in
                        promoting understanding in scientific investigation. Scientific metaphors
                        are pervasive in science from antiquity to our time, from Aristotle’s De Partibus Animalium, to the early modern
                        scientific attitude to modelling as a partnership with craftsmanship and
                        engineering; from the notion of the world machine, of God as artisan or
                        architect and the world as his handicraft, to Darwin’s tree of life, from the mind-computer to
                        the protein-protein interaction as network in more recent science. Metaphors
                        often act through different pragmatic mechanisms
                        directly related to the properties listed above: from transposition - moving
                        concepts from a context to another (variability), to corrections and
                        interpretations due to new contexts (negotiability), to its reformulation
                        (adaptability to new contexts). Metaphors describe novelties, help in
                        understanding and interpreting theories but should not be reduced to be
                        simply the language of a model . In this sense,
                        the use of metaphors is a strategy to guarantee a non-rigid, descriptive
                        approach to modelling. This allows the preservation of the
                            openness of a middle-out pragmatic approach to
                        modelling as a DH context of study requires.
                    In DH research, the use of structuring and modelling metaphors is more and
                        more evident. The metaphorical lexicon certainly pervades the DH discourse,
                        where terminology and metaphors are intertwined (e.g. surfing, navigating,
                        artificial intelligence, computer machinery, etc.). Moreover, metaphors are
                        not only linguistic entities; an interesting range of metaphors in DH is
                        used for structuring concepts at a macro-level, for example, in the use of 
                            ecosystem
                            
                         to stand for research environment  or the
                        cartography/landscape metaphor where the aim of the research is to extend the cartographic
                            metaphor beyond visual analogy, and to expose it as a narrative model
                            and tool to intervene in complex, heterogeneous, dynamic realities, just
                            like those of human geography
                        . Metaphors are also used to organize content and
                        visualise knowledge and data  or to conceptualise the
                        main features and aims of a research project, for instance in the use of
                            discovery in the Steve project , where the social tagging is conceived to lead to new ways to describe
                        and access cultural heritage collections. A metaphor is the
                            agreement in the framework of scholarship online
                        promoted by ; metaphors design the process-orientation
                        and cross border approach of the review platform for European history (Recensio.net). Furthermore, metaphors
                        are used to structure the knowledge embedded in some research projects,
                        highlighting for example their innovative aspects, as in the Discovery
                        project (
                            You can travel through the
                                territory at will but can also design new maps and author guidebooks
                                for others to read and respond to
                            
                        ) or making emerge the interrelated work space as formal arena as in
                            . 
                    In a pragmatic understanding of model building theory and object are
                        complementary; the model takes a middle position operating within a
                            middle-out approach. The model preserves its
                        representational characteristics vis à vis
                        the object – for instance its intentionality and extensionality as explained
                        in section 1.1 - but the reality such a model organises at a conceptual
                        level is not based on a purely descriptive language nor in a projection or
                        interpretation of properties. As argued in  for mathematical modelling. The
                        model has its syntax, grammar, and semantics but within a processual
                        consideration of the use of language (a non-static perspective according to
                        the pragmatic properties listed above).
                    Bringing to the fore the metaphorical language element allows DH modellers to
                        also give prominence to the openness and complexity of their objects of
                        analysis. So within a pragmatic understanding of modeling any model is
                        primarily pragmatic because it privileges the specificity of the objects and
                        the contexts of use (of the humanities), but also because its pivot lies in
                        the manipulability of the models themselves, in terms of their negotiability
                        and flexibility.
                
            

                4. Conclusions
                In conclusion, departing from open and interdisciplinary conceptualisations of
                    objects of analysis (such as texts, Section 2.1) and of certain explorative and
                    epistemological strategies of analysis (such as modelling, see 2.2) we have
                    attempted to show how a pragmatic framework can be used to contextualise DH
                    research (under 3.1). Such a framework is useful because it emphasises the
                    fallacy of rigid polarities (object vs. model; model vs. theory) and the
                    prominent role of language in the central activity of modelling in Digital
                    Humanities. What we call pragmatic modeling is not a new
                    approach but rather a more adequate explanatory framework for existing practices
                    that combine formal and experimental modelling techniques with a constructive
                    use of language.
                Indeed, this de-dichotomisation reveals that modelling practices are constrained
                    by the language they are embedded in. In order to overcome this, we attempt to
                    show how metaphorical language facilitates cohesion and coherence within theory
                    and practice. Therefore, we draw attention to the role metaphors assume in
                    organising and structuring knowledge in DH and within its modelling activities
                    in particular, where the dichotomy between theory and objects is very nuanced. 
                What we subscribe to is a sort of deflationary
                        account Godfrey-Smith argues for a 
                            deflationary
                                view
                            
                         where we give account of the real achievement of a field without
                        using the ontology embodied in the practice (e.g. that models are
                        representing the real world). Such deflationary views appear in the way we
                        talk (hence the connection to language) about e.g. fictional models: Scientists in the field get used to discussing
                            how such systems behave, get used to talking of what is true or false of
                            them -- get used to treating a fictional model system as an object in
                            itself. An outsider might come along and re-interpret this talk as a
                            collection of claims about deductive relations, conditionals, and so on,
                            giving a deflationary account of model systems as objects. But inside
                            the field, it does not seem like this; there it feels like the fictional
                            model system has a life of its own. of the modelling
                    practices in DH. Indeed, on one hand, we take the insider’s perspective by
                    accounting for these practices and by treating our models as independent objects
                    to study and manipulate, but on the other hand, we enact the outsider’s critical
                    perspective of self-reflexivity by highlighting the metaphorical nature of the
                    DH modeler’s talk. 
                In this paper we attempted to problematise some of the established conceptions
                    and practices around modelling in DH; however, each issue around model-building
                    would need further analysis both at the theoretical and practical level. For
                    instance, it would be useful to corroborate our work with a diachronic and
                    historical analysis of the role of metaphors in DH and build a map of
                    DH-specific as well as wider thematic metaphors. In order to further explore the
                    relationship between theory and practice within DH models of modeling, it will
                    be important to develop appropriate ad hoc
                    guiding frameworks (based on case studies designed around the needs of specific
                    contexts of modelling). Eliciting a pragmatic awareness and giving prominence to
                    a metaphorical language seems to us a promising way forward to explore such
                    relationships.
            

                Acknowledgments
                We would like to thank Øyvind Eide for his stimulating questions and feedback.
                
            
