Title:  Collaborative Knowledge Creation and Student-Led Assignment
                    Design: Wikipedia in the University Literature Class
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  02 October 2017
Abstract:  
                
                This case study outlines how writing for Wikipedia can benefit students in an
                    undergraduate literature class by having them undertake scholarly research, read
                    unmediated texts, and write for a real-life audience. In keeping with the
                    collaborative spirit of Wikipedia, the rubrics provided here were primarily
                    created by the class as a whole. Estill demonstrates how this assignment
                    encouraged students to question received notions of literary canon and to engage
                    critically with Wikipedia itself. Perhaps paradoxically, writing for Wikipedia
                    gave students ownership of their writing and research. Ultimately, this
                    assignment facilitated students to become experts on understudied topics and
                    helped them learn about how to do literary research.
            
Full Body Text: 
“But my other professors told me not to use Wikipedia!” my class chorused, upon
                hearing that we were going to be writing Wikipedia entries. In an unscientific straw poll conducted through a show
                of hands, they all admitted to using the online encyclopedia despite their
                professors’ warnings. I would like to thank Diane Jakacki, Sarah Potvin,
                    Kailin Wright, Emily Murphy, and Shannon Smith for their insightful advice that
                    helped make this a better paper. In 2010, Alison J. Head and Michael B.
                    Eisenberg demonstrated that 52% of university students used Wikipedia
                        always or frequently when
                    undertaking research related to their courses. This figure rises to 75% when we
                    include students who occasionally use Wikipedia .  This article explores the benefits of and
                rationale for having students in a literature class write Wikipedia articles
                    This paper builds on the extensive scholarship by scholars on the value of
                    writing for Wikipedia in the composition class. See especially .: in this case, students in a third-year
                Renaissance Drama class analyzed existing Wikipedia articles about early modern
                plays, devised the rubric for how their articles would be evaluated, adopted and
                researched a play, presented their work to the class, and had the option of
                publishing their writing on Wikipedia. Ultimately, being part of the assignment
                design process and writing for a public audience led students to undertake primary
                research, to question received ideas of literary canon, and to take ownership of
                their writing. This research-based writing project relies on the digital humanities
                principle of having student-scholars leverage digital publication in order to
                participate in social knowledge creation that benefits both the students and the
                larger (often academic) community. 
This is not the first article about using Wikipedia as a pedagogical tool. For years,
                advocates have touted Wikipedia’s usefulness in composition classrooms 
                . The Wikipedia Education
                        Program that encourages 
                    educators and students around the world to contribute to
                        Wikipedia… in an academic setting
                    
                . As their site explains, the WEP is run by Wikimedia chapters,
                        affiliate organizations, and dedicated volunteers worldwide
                    . The Wikipedia Education Program offers
                instructors guidelines on How
                        to Use Wikipedia as a teaching tool, with sample assignments
                and case studies by professors who have successfully had students write, edit,
                expand, or translate Wikipedia articles. Professors who ask students to write for
                Wikipedia agree that having an actual public audience for their writing galvanizes
                students to research more thoroughly and to write better .
                Recent academic interventions have focused on the need for clearly theorized and
                inclusive (of race, gender, sexuality, language, and more) approaches to this
                digital platform 
                
                . Indeed, as Amanda I. Seligman argues, writing for
                encyclopedias is a scholarly and valuable pursuit .
                Erin Glass points out that the benefits of integrating NPS [Networked
                    Participatory Scholarship] in higher and graduate education are clear; yet
                too few undergraduate literature classes take this approach . This case study serves as an example and template of how writing for Wikipedia
                can be productively incorporated into an undergraduate literature course.
With over three hundred classes that have used the Wikipedia Education program, and
                many others classes that were not officially affiliated with the program that also
                wrote articles, why do we need an article about Wikipedia in the university
                literature classroom? Because discipline-based Wikipedia editing initiatives have
                been very successful pedagogically. The American Sociological Association has had
                more than 3,300 students write and edit Wikipedia articles, with three goals: 
                    (a) to develop communication skills for general audiences;
                        (b) to discover the importance of logic, strength of argument, flow and
                        clarity of writing, and the need to cite the appropriate literature; and
                        (c) to experience the significance of accuracy in scientific writing
                    
                . As outlined below, by writing for Wikipedia, literature students can gain
                general and transferable research and communication skills, while also considering
                the nature of digital texts (particularly hypertext and ontologies) and literary
                texts (with a focus on canon and textual studies). Furthermore, the assignment
                outlined here takes the collaborative nature of Wikipedia’s platform one step
                further: students collaboratively created their own learning goals by choosing the
                rubric on which their Wikipedia articles would be graded.
Writing for Wikipedia in a literature classroom engages students to question the
                literary canon, to consider the role of editors and editions, and to undertake
                research using primary and secondary sources. As is often the case with writing
                Wikipedia articles, this research and writing helped students develop a sense of
                mastery of the material and provided exigence for real-world writing. The stakes of
                defining a literary canon and understanding editorial interventions are always high,
                but especially so when confronting Renaissance Drama, that literary period and genre
                dominated by Shakespeare. 
Almost ten years ago, Michael Best surveyed information about Shakespeare studies on
                Wikipedia, and found that, predictably, Wikipedia does a good job of dealing with
                    the facts about [Shakespeare’s] life and works, and provides some good starting
                    places for further studies in the main articles, yet, 
                    as links take the intrepid explorer into the byways of
                        Early Modern minor writers the quality becomes more uneven
                    
                . Best concludes by exhorting Shakespeare Newsletter
                readers to 
                    take the plunge and wade into Wikipedia waters to update,
                        improve, and extend the information Wikipedia is making available to our
                        students, and to the world
                    
                . A decade later, Best’s call to action still holds true: minor
                    writers and anonymous works are often entirely overlooked. As Matthew
                Steggle notes, 
                    Wikipedia’s coverage of the Renaissance varies considerably
                        from article to article and even within articles
                    
                . In writing Wikipedia articles about these lesser-known plays, my students
                responded to a genuine need — they were not writing the traditional paper for an
                audience of one, the professor. The professor-as-audience is, furthermore, someone
                who presumably already knows the material, whereas those reading a Wikipedia article
                are actively seeking new knowledge. Writing for Wikipedia means students have to
                consider what readers might know before coming to that particular article; they
                learn to consider audience and rhetorical situation in concrete ways that improves
                their writing.
 Before the digital age, scholars attempted to make early modern plays accessible by
                editing and publishing editions that would not, like the original playbooks, be
                safeguarded in rare book rooms. Digital projects followed this model, making works
                findable and searchable in even more ways. Early digital projects began with
                canonical texts: for instance, Best founded the Internet Shakespeare Editions (ISE) in 1996, to meet the demand for scholarly, edited,
                online versions of Shakespeare’s plays . In 2015, Brett D.
                Hirsch launched Digital
                        Renaissance Editions (DRE), a
                    kindred project that moves beyond Shakespeare’s plays to
                publish works by lesser-known or anonymous authors, including John Redford, Walter
                Mountfort, and Richard Edwards 
                . As Steggle has argued, it is not just editions,
                    but also bibliographical data that lead to canon development . Some of the strongest digital resources for
                    researching Renaissance drama have begun to challenge notions of canonicity by
                    offering inclusive (if bounded) content, such as the Database of Early
                            English Playbooks (DEEP) and
                    the forthcoming Compendium of Renaissance Drama
                        (CORD) . Wikipedia has traced a similar trajectory:
                the earliest and most detailed entries deal with canonical authors and plays. I
                contend that Wikipedia entries not only reflect the current literary canon but also
                help to shape it. As a first stop for undergraduates, graduate students, and even at
                times professors , Wikipedia offers at-a-glance
                information that can be used as a starting point: and without even a
                    stub (a short placeholder article that needs to be
                expanded), overlooked works are absent from the literary landscape and commonly- and
                communally-held cultural narrative Wikipedia presents. Although Wikipedia
                    might lack write-ups about Renaissance playwrights and their works, these are
                    often listed (without links) in the List of Years in
                        Literature page, which links to specific pages such as
                        1607 in literature. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_years_in_literature.
                Without conscious interventions such as this that seek to expand the canon,
                Wikipedia and other digital projects will only reinscribe our existing canon . For more on the (often lost) potential of digital
                    projects to expand canon, see 
                    .
 Many undergraduate literature students have never heard the term
                    canon. They have not questioned why there are entire
                courses listed in the university catalogue about Shakespeare, yet none on Ben Jonson
                or Mary Sidney. Students instinctively want to begin any written assignment with
                    William Shakespeare is the greatest writer of English literature (or
                words to that effect), while instructors help students see the historical reasons
                the Bard has been positioned over other writers. Finding and researching
                understudied plays for Wikipedia helped students start to question the shape of the
                English literary canon and consider how anthologies and university course catalogues
                reify canon. On the value of teaching canonicity, see , , and . On the
                    canon of early modern drama in particular, see 
                    and .
            
 In the spirit of Wikipedia, students collaboratively created the rubric on which
                their assignment would be graded. I determined that a portion of their grade would
                be established by their presentations and their pre-research. The bulk of the
                pre-research was a short Wikipedia Analysis, where they
                analyzed existing articles about Renaissance plays and evaluated what made the
                articles most useful (see Process Elements in the rubric in
                Appendix A). I encouraged students to read the Wikipedia pages about the plays we
                were reading that semester. Some of the questions they considered were: What
                    should every Wikipedia page about a Renaissance play have? What headings? What
                    information? and What kind of notes are most useful? What sources are
                    cited? When prompted to suggest which articles would make good or bad
                templates, the response was almost unanimous: lots of plays we read that semester
                had strong Wikipedia pages (such as The Spanish Tragedy
                and A Chaste Maid in Cheapside), but The Tragedy of Mariam, the only play we read by a female
                author, had an inadequate page. This led students to discuss the treatment of women
                writers both historically and today. Positioning women’s writing in relation
                    to the changing early modern literary canon is an ongoing scholarly concern.
                    Consider collections such as  and . Reading the well-written write-ups,
                furthermore, gave students valuable background information that allowed them to
                engage with the canonical texts we studied in deeper ways. Much of the information
                on a Wikipedia page about a Renaissance play will appear in a modern introduction to
                that play; reading either an introduction or a Wikipedia page can be a passive
                experience. Analyzing Wikipedia pages, however, encouraged students to think about
                the value and reasoning behind the information presented. Furthermore, as we
                discussed together in class, with its hyperlinking, Wikipedia can facilitate deeper
                research than a print introduction: students can be easily drawn into related fields
                of inquiry as they click through to new pages on (literally and figuratively) linked
                topics. 
After handing in their 300-500 word Wikipedia Analysis, students brainstormed in
                class what makes an effective Wikipedia page on a Renaissance play and what headings
                and content need to appear in the page. We grouped their suggestions into categories
                and finalized their rubric for the written component (see Appendix A). This
                assignment gave students ownership over their material in two ways: one, they were
                responsible for a play that nobody else would read; and two, they decided the
                desired outcomes for this assignment by collaboratively creating the rubric.
                    Having students behave as experts in both the genre of writing and the topic
                    they wrote on draws on Dorothy Heathcote’s drama in education technique,
                        Mantle of the Expert. Although students are not experts
                    when they embark on this assignment, in a university classroom, they can truly
                    become experts (whereas Heathcote anticipated an audience of younger students).
                    See .  Students determined that introductions
                to each play needed to contain some basic, key information (when available): the
                play’s title and alternative titles, genre, playwright(s), setting, initial
                performance information (date, company, theatre, patron, occasion), and initial
                publication information (date, publisher, location). This is the kind of information
                that students take for granted: they skim over it when reading a play’s
                introduction; they glance at it on Wikipedia. Finding this information when it is
                not made readily available, however, gave students the opportunity to undertake true
                scholarly research. Students also start to see the holes or slippages in the
                narratives we have of Renaissance theatre history: often, scholars cannot agree on
                where or when a play was first performed, let alone who wrote it.
 Before they could undertake their research, however, students had to adopt a play. I
                gave students a list of eighty-nine plays that had no Wikipedia pages (or, in some
                cases, stubs). For my list of plays and instructions on how to choose a play,
                    see Appendix B. I generated this list using DEEP.
                    As of this writing, some of these plays now have write-ups (including those by
                    my students).  As their guidelines read, There’s no Wikipedia page,
                    and you can’t read all of these... so what should you do? (see Appendix B).
                I suggested they pick two or three plays based on their title and do a little
                research on the play. I also advised choosing a play they could access in a way they
                would feel comfortable. In order to adopt a play, each had to locate an edition:
                some chose plays that can only be found on Early English Books Online (EEBO), Literature Online (LiOn), or in facsimile reprints of the first editions, whereas others
                opted to read plays that were recently recuperated by online publication (some
                edited, some not) in Early Modern Literary Studies or Risa Stephanie
                Bear’s Renascence Editions. As of this writing,
                    both Renascence Editions and Early Modern Literary Studies sites have not been maintained in
                    years, and so have broken links that the students needed to navigate in order to
                    find their plays, or, in some cases, turn to another resource.
                EEBO and LiOn are both
                subscription resources that we were fortunate to have access to at my institution,
                but they are not required for completing this assignment: HathiTrust, Google Books, and the Internet Archive are online repositories
                that have open-access editions of early modern plays: sometimes, even, facsimiles of
                the original publication. HathiTrust has some of its material freely
                    available, but some books are accessible only by users at subscribing
                    institutions.
            
As the plays my students adopted were generally under-studied, my students had to
                learn both new ways of reading and new research methods. For many, this was the
                first time facing an unedited early modern text: for students used to anthologies of
                Shakespeare, even the non-standard orthography could come as a surprise. Some
                students learned that act and scene breaks could be editorial. By comparing how
                plays have been historically treated (or ignored), my class began asking questions
                about scholarly editing, that is, about how the texts we read are mediated in ways
                we often take for granted. 
Beyond reading the play itself in order to write a summary, students had to undertake
                primary research to write the introductory paragraph about their play. As we had
                established, a good Wikipedia entry always gave a play’s initial publication, and,
                when known, details about the first performance, such as the company, theatre, and
                date. I devoted an entire 50-minute class and to how to research their plays.
                Although my students undertook research using primary and secondary materials, this
                assignment did not violate Wikipedia’s no original research
                policy, which all material in Wikipedia must be attributable to a reliable,
                    published source: it did, however, challenge the standard research
                undergraduates are asked to undertake. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:No_original_research and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Verifiability. I
                encouraged students to use both print tools such as the Annals
                    of English Drama
                 and the Records of Early English
                    Drama
                    Records of Early English Drama is a series
                    published by the university of Toronto. Many of their volumes are available as
                    pdfs from the Internet Archive: http://archive.org/search.php?query=records of early english drama AND
                        collection%3Atoronto. and online resources like the Database of Early
                        English Playbooks and the English Short Title Catalogue. In their
                assignments, students favored digital resources over print: none, for instance,
                cited The London Stage (a suggested resource about
                performance history). At the time this course was taught, The London Stage had not yet been digitized. It is now available
                    via HathiTrust: http://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/000200105
                    . All, however, learned to navigate The Database of Early English Playbooks, and many turned
                to The Oxford Dictionary of
                        National Biography and Gale’s Dictionary of Literary Biography. 
As a class, we looked at EEBO to find what the physical
                play-texts looked like. Upon finding that we had access to three digital facsimiles
                of Samuel Daniel’s The Tragedie of Cleopatra in quarto,
                my student who adopted this play exclaimed, I’m going to compare all three!
                The last portion of the research methods class was devoted to finding secondary
                sources, an important skill that would also serve them in good stead for their other
                university classes. Although scholars talk about digital natives, For a
                    discussion of the problematic understanding of digital
                        natives that proposes a more nuanced view of undergraduate
                    knowledge and preparation, see Erika E. Smith’s The Digital
                        Native Debate in Higher Education
                    . in this class period I was reminded that
                students do not actually have an innate understanding of how to search for things
                effectively. Searching, however, is not endemic to online sources, and students
                similarly needed guidance with how to search using print sources. Showing students
                how to find the information they seek and discern its value (rather than telling
                them the answers) empowers them to come up with even more exciting research
                questions. Furthermore, these research skills are foundational to writing a
                Wikipedia article. 
Equipped with the ability to use new research tools, students had two main parts of
                the assignment to complete: write the Wikipedia page, and present about their play
                in class. We all know the old adage that you learn something best by teaching. In
                this context, student presenters benefited from having an in-person audience to
                speak to as well as their online audience. As audience members, students learned
                about a variety of plays and genres that we would not have had time to all read
                together, including domestic tragedy, farce, roman history, and pastoral. Taken
                together, these presentations offered an overview of English Renaissance drama that
                no single anthology could provide. Indeed, students in this class gained a more
                realistic view of what was actually available to audiences in Shakespeare’s day, as
                well as the key genres that preceded and followed. 
For their presentations, I encouraged students not to give a plot synopsis. Some,
                however, could not resist the temptation, as they had put in quite an effort to
                learn all of the details of, in some cases, very intricate plots. Others, however,
                managed to keep to the main points we wanted to hear: the themes in the play, why
                this play is interesting (or not), and why this play has been neglected so
                    far. Each presentation was short, only 4-5 minutes, but it was followed by
                    3-4 minutes of discussion. The presenters prepared three questions for
                    discussion and also solicited questions from the class. When I teach this
                    assignment again, I will give a sample presentation on a play that we have not
                    read together in order to offer students some models for how to initiate a
                    discussion about a work that their audience has not read. Some of the best
                    techniques students used include linking their play to plays we read as a class,
                    aligning the play to historical events, or giving a short passage or paratext
                    (such as the title page) to discuss. For instance, one student who
                discussed Ben Jonson’s The Irish Masque at Court,
                taught the class about masques, those performances designed especially for the King
                or Queen; she also explained Ireland’s political turmoil in the early modern period,
                and, most importantly for this text, examined the English audience’s attitudes
                towards the Irish and the anticipated reactions to Jonson’s harsh portrayal of
                uneducated, ill-mannered, and ridiculous-accented Irish. Exploring non-canonical
                plays led to student-driven discussions that reflected on an array of primary
                sources and that truly supported classroom dialogue and critical thinking. 
During these presentations, I discovered that my students had taken the
                    adopt a play metaphor seriously. Some students felt
                protective of their plays and wanted to justify their play as worth studying. One
                student wrote about Cupid’s Whirligig, a city comedy by
                Edward Sharpham that nobody reads. As I was writing this article, I could not
                    remember who wrote this obscure play, so I did what everyone does: I googled it.
                    The Wikipedia page my student wrote was the first result. She expressed
                her shock that Cupid’s Whirligig was not regularly
                taught or anthologized. This possessiveness, born of truly caring about the texts
                they read, was a recurring theme in the presentations. Upper-level English majors
                were, some for the first time, grappling with ideas of canonicity because they had
                identified gaps in both in the curriculum and what seems like Wikipedia’s universal
                content. 
Reading non-canonical works, presenting their adopted play to
                the class, and writing for Wikipedia gave students an incentive to excel:
                specifically, writing for Wikipedia increased the exigency of their work, as they
                were addressing an actual lacuna. As Wikipedia advertises, writing in the classroom
                can be the end of throwaway assignments and the beginning of real-world
                        impact for student editors (emphasis in the original). These students created Wikipedia articles that, in some cases,
                actually contributed to a broader knowledge community.
I qualified my previous assertion about student contributions because I did not
                require that students publish their writing on Wikipedia. Asking students to share
                their work, even pseudonymously, is an ethical quandary. Posting on Wikipedia is
                different from, for instance, our course website: on a course website, I can protect
                all of the material by requiring a password and, even if the site were open-access,
                it would not get much traffic. As
                    Wikipedia acknowledges, it is one of the most popular sites on the
                internet. Ultimately, I required students to write a Wikipedia-style article, but I
                did not require them to post it to the online encyclopedia for credit.
                    Personally, I have had students request to have their written assignments
                    removed from publicly facing websites when they went on the job market; allowing
                    students the choice to publish their work (rather than requiring it) is
                    respectful of their privacy and ability to make decisions. HASTAC (Humanities,
                    Arts, Science, and Technology Alliance and Collaboratory) suggests that students
                    be encouraged to write under a pseudonym and not be required to publish their
                    work online because of legal ramifications, including America’s FERPA: Family
                    Education Rights and Privacy Act . Erin Glass
                    acknlowledges that privacy, control, and ownership are not yet
                        adequately addressed in relation to online student writing . Neither Glass nor this HASTAC post focuses on
                    Wikipedia, which allows students to publish pseudonymously. This assignment
                    does, however, participate in what Glass terms Networked Participatory
                        Scholarship by being 
                        open, peer centric, user-friendly (comparatively), and
                            enabl[ing] users to engage with exponentially larger networks
                        
                    . Some students creatively formatted their word document
                submissions, such as this entry on The Costlie Whore — a
                title I would not suggest Googling, as there is still no Wikipedia article on this
                anonymous play from 1632 (see Figure 1). Even though posting to Wikipedia was
                optional, about a third of my students gave it a try. Those students, on their own,
                created a Wikipedia username and learned enough about the wiki markup to upload
                their articles. Of those who chose to post to Wikipedia, not a single student
                    emailed me for technical help. On the course website, I provided Wikipedia’s
                    help documents for writing articles and creating a user account. The students
                    who wanted to learn the Wikimedia markup system had not used it before, but were
                    self-selecting and self-taught. See Figure 2 and Figure 3 for images of
                the opening of Wikipedia articles my students wrote about Johan Johan the Husband and The
                        Dumb Knight.

                A Wikipedia article submitted as a word document
                
            

                The opening part of the Wikipedia page on Johan Johan The Husband (February
                    2017)
                
            

                The opening part of the Wikipedia page on The Dumb Knight (February 2017).
                
            
Initially, some of the write-ups my students created and uploaded to Wikipedia were
                marked as orphans, that is to say, no other pages linked to
                them. Even though students were not required to upload their work to Wikipedia, we
                talked about how they should categorize their plays and where their articles should
                both link to and be linked from. They had to indicate what links they would include
                even if they handed in their paper in a word document. While most students were able
                to include appropriate links, many did not understand the “categories” of articles
                on Wikipedia, nor what the benefit of linking to your page versus
                    from the page might be. Uploading new pages to Wikipedia (and
                writing as if your work were to be uploaded) leads students to consider how to
                classify information. Exploring ontologies and taxonomies — those categories that we
                apply (1631 plays) or sometimes choose not to apply
                    (plays published in quarto) when creating a Wikipedia
                page — helps students approach disciplinary knowledge systems. Wikipedia’s categories
                makes assumptions about how users will navigate the pages and what might interest
                them; Wikipedia’s explicit organization can prompt students to interrogate implicit
                ontologies in literary studies.
Adding new Wikipedia pages about early modern plays includes other people beyond the
                classroom in the learning experience and can lead students to continue to learn
                beyond the short time they are in class. As the revision history of a page created by a student on Thomas Heywood’s
                    The Fayre Mayde of the Exchange demonstrates, a
                dozen Wikipedians read and edited the page (see Figure 5): most of the
                post-assignment edits involved normalizing the spelling to American, and, yes,
                sometimes adding or changing the categories. Beyond those Wikipedians who actively
                edited the text, there are the users who simply read this page and made no changes,
                which we cannot track. Perhaps most impressively, the most recent update to the page
                (15 November 2014, Renaissancefan) is from the same person who created it in 2012:
                no longer a student, this person is still engaging with the texts and ideas from
                their class. Although it might seem counterintuitive, writing for Wikipedia — that is,
                putting your work on the internet for all to use and change — can allow students to
                feel intellectual ownership. Renaissancefan is not just a consumer of knowledge
                shared by a professor, but an expert contributing to broader discussions.

                The opening part of the Wikipedia page on The Fayre Mayde of the Exchange
                    (February 2017).
                
            

                The complete revision history of the Wikipedia page on The Fayre Mayde of the Exchange
                    (November 2015).
                
            
With her Wikipedia page on The Fayre Maid of the
                    Exchange, Renaissancefan is participating in collaborative authorship.
                Steggle suggests that we can perhaps better understand models of early modern
                writing by engaging with Wikipedia: 
                    It is one thing to know that, in principle, Renaissance
                        drama is at home with co-authored, repatched plays; with plays that
                        plagiarize pieces of earlier plays; and with plays that change radically
                        from version to version. But to realize that we happily use Wikipedia
                        articles whose status is comparable helps us to see how well that might work
                        in practice.
                    
                 We might tell students about the highly collaborative practice of writing
                early plays for a public audience; this assignment helps students engage with the
                largest collaborative writing project ever undertaken. Of course, all collaborative
                modes of writing are not the same: an early modern playwright revising an older work
                is not the same as a student contributing to Wikipedia. That said, writing for
                Wikipedia can help students think of authorship models beyond the often fallacious
                idea of the single-author-genius.
Admittedly, writing about Renaissance plays on Wikipedia is a finite project. At some
                point in the future, all the plays listed in the Database of
                    Early English Playbooks could have complete entries. If and when that
                halcyon day comes, class projects in this field can move to new related topics that
                are not yet covered adequately, such as royal progresses and processions, acting
                companies and actors, and even manuscript sources for early modern drama. The future
                of digital pedagogy projects that promote editing Wikipedia is, at its heart, one
                that both defines and reflects future avenues for scholarship.
This article has demonstrated the concrete benefits of having students write pages
                for Wikipedia, including self-motivated learning, improved communication skills,
                writing for a real-life audience, and undertaking scholarly research. Some of the
                benefits to writing articles discussed here are field specific, such as reading
                unedited plays, considering notions of literary canon, and exploring how and what we
                study as literary scholars. Beyond the values that Wikipedia itself touts and those
                discipline-specific skills that students gained, this assignment fosters critical
                thinking about Wikipedia itself: what’s in, what’s out, and what these bounds
                suggest about our cultural values. Learning about Wikipedia prompts students to
                question how other, sometimes seemingly monolithic, sites are conceptualized and
                created, as manifested in our class discussions. Analyzing Wikipedia also promotes
                what might be called digital civic engagement: this kind of action can help make
                digital spaces more inclusive and representative, although this is currently an
                uphill battle. 
Even after writing their own Wikipedia pages, my class agreed that for final papers,
                Wikipedia was best used in the pre-research phase, and not cited in the
                bibliography. As I overheard one of my students comment to a classmate on the way
                out of class, this is more work than a research paper. Yes, doing scholarly
                research, reading unmediated texts, and writing for a real-life audience is work: it
                is the work we undertake as literary scholars. As the students in my Renaissance
                Drama proved, students are eager to learn to undertake real literary scholarship
                when we offer them the chance to gain and share their expertise by writing for
                Wikipedia.

                Appendix A: Rubric
                This appendix presents the Rubric used. I assigned the process elements and
                    presentation elements values. (CourseRoster was about joining our class wiki and
                    learning to participate in discussion.) My students developed the WikiProject
                        Written Component section of the rubric as well as the explanatory
                    information.
                Rubric (see below for clarification)
                Process Elements (Total: 15%)
                
                    CourseRoster: 3%
                    Adopt-a-Play: 2%
                    WikipediaAnalysis: 10%
                
                Presentation Elements (Total: 45%)
                
                    Handout: 15%
                    Presentation: 15%
                    Discussion Questions and Leadership: 10%
                    Participation 5%
                
                WikiProject Written Component (Total: 40%)
                
                    Intro Blurb: 5%
                    Synopsis (including Character List): 12%
                    Themes/Motifs: 5%
                    Other: 8%
                    References: 5%
                    Linking: 2.5%
                    Organization: 2.5%
                
                The Handout is the handout you give on the day of
                    presentations. Please make enough for the whole class (21 including the
                    instructor). This handout should include key points about the play, including a
                    brief (one paragraph) summary. Other key points include authorship, performance
                    venue, and when the play was written, performed, and published. Elements from
                    your handout can be taken from your WikiProject. You can also include other
                    useful information like character charts, timelines, plot graphs, etc.
                Please include at least one image on the handout: at minimum, please include an
                    image of the play's title page, which you can get from Early English Books
                    Online (EEBO, available through the UVic library page).
                Remember to add a bibliography of the play (are there multiple editions? Is there
                    an edition that is most useful?) as well as secondary sources (including online)
                    that were most useful to your presentation.
                The handout should include a glossary of unfamiliar terms both relating to and
                    used in the play.
                If you would like, you can also include some of your more salient discussion
                    questions.
                You can choose to do an online handout by creating a wiki
                    page/prezi/powerpoint for your presentation and including all of the above. You
                    can also choose a "mixed handout" that presents some material online and some
                    material on paper. If you choose to include a digital component, you will need
                    to send the link to me, which I will circulate to the whole class.
                Presentation
                Length: 4-5 minutes + 3-4 minutes of discussion. Total Length = 7-10 minutes.
                Key points to mention:
                
                    what genre is your play?
                    when was it written, performed, and published? (does it connect with any
                        interesting historical moments?)
                    where was it performed?
                    who wrote it?
                    what are the themes of the play?
                    why is this play interesting or important? (conversely, why not?)
                    why has this play been neglected so far? 
                    what information is presented and what information is omitted on the title
                        page? 
                
                Possibly relevant points to consider:
                
                    was it performed for a particular occasion?
                    was it dedicated to a particular patron?
                    does your play connect to any particular literary movements?
                    is there anything special about the way your play was published? (Is
                        there, for instance, a woodcut on the title page?) 
                
                The presentation grade will account for your "stage" presence (the clarity of
                    your discussion, the way you present yourself) as well as the content of the
                    presentation. Part of your presentation grade will also include the "interest"
                    factor: is your presentation interesting?
                If you would like to show youtube videos in class, you can set up a webpage on
                    the wiki with the videos (or do whatever you'd like).
                Part of your presentation grade will reflect the research, effort, and
                    preparation that you undertook. The content of your presentation should
                    introduce the class to a new play and hit the salient points above.
                Discussion Questions and Leadership
                You will hand in a page with your discussion questions at the end of your
                    presentation. You will need to come up with at least 3 questions about your
                    play, author, period, etc. You might consider giving a short piece of text (14
                    lines or less--even a couplet would be strong) and asking a question about a
                    particular textual moment.
                Class discussions, however, often go to places you don't expect so part of your
                    grade will be based on how well you navigate hard-to-charter waters.
                Remember to ask the group if we have questions for you: part of your grade
                    depends on your answers to our questions.
                Participation
                Your participation grade depends on your participation during other people's
                    presentations.
                
                    Do you listen carefully?
                    Do you have interesting questions to ask them at the end of their
                        presentations?
                    Do you thoughtfully answer the discussion questions the presenter
                        asks?
                
                Intro Blurb
                Includes (if appropriate and if known; remember to organize your information)
                
                    a one-to-two sentence synopsis
                    title and alternate titles 
                    dates (performance/publication if known; who published)
                    setting of play (period/place) 
                    a mention of the play's genre 
                    author if known 
                    patron/occasion for performance 
                    company & theatre of initial performance
                
                Synopsis (including Character List)
                
                    Use subheadings
                
                Themes/Motifs
                This seems pretty evident
                Other
                This might include (but is not limited to):
                
                    Important Adaptations/Films/Performances
                    A broader discussion of the play's genre
                    Sources/Influences
                    Intertexts/Allusions
                
                References
                These should follow Wikipedia’s house style (follow other articles as a
                    template).
                This should include both the primary source (editions of the play), bibliographic
                    sources (like the Annals or Greg's Bibliography or the Database of
                        Early English Playbooks), as well as any secondary sources (that is,
                    literary criticism)
                Linking (Please note, this has been updated)
                
                    This includes the links you would want to have to other articles. What
                        connections/comparisons are you drawing?
                    This also includes how you suggest bookmarking your own page and the
                        categories you would like to include on your page.
                    Please also include a list of places you would add links to your page.
                        (This can be in a note to me at the end of your essay)
                    Remember: you might want to include target links to pages on Wikipedia
                        that do not exist. This is tantamount to suggesting a page be created. (You
                        can indicate this to me in a note in your word document or simply create the
                        links, which will appear red, on your Wikipedia page.)
                
                Organization
                What sections you choose to include, the order you put the sections, and the
                    general presentation of your information.
            

                Appendix B: Adopting a Play
                Below are the instructions my students used to find a play.
                How to Choose a Play
                There’s no Wikipedia page, and you can’t read all of these....so what should you
                    do?
                
                    See if any titles interest you.
                    Google them and make a shortlist of 4-8 plays that interest you.
                    See if there’s a modern edition of the play. This will make your life
                        easier.
                    Narrow your choice to just one and claim it for your own! (See below on
                        claiming your play).
                
                You can choose any of the plays below. You can also propose to write about a play
                    that isn’t on this list. If you choose to write about a play that is not on this
                    list, please send me an email with the title, date, and author (if known) of the
                    play you’d like to adopt. Then include a short explanation of why the wikipedia
                    article needs expanding or why this play should be considered.
                How to find a Modern Edition
                
                    Check SEEDIE, but be careful, because this site is in beta, so is not
                        complete (doesn’t have a lot of, say, anonymous plays, or even some by
                        canonical authors). 
                    Do a google book search. 
                    Search the internet archive for
                        edited versions.
                    Remember: some of these plays will be in the collected works. Some key
                        editions include The Oxford Middleton; G. B. Evans’s collection of works by
                        William Cartwright, etc.
                    An edition from the 19th century might be a good one, so long as it has
                        notes. (Grosart, for instance, has a good edition of the Samuel Daniel
                        plays).
                    There might be an edition online (especially at EMLS,
                            Renascence
                            Editions, Early Modern Literary Studies). 
                    Consider what will help you most. Do you need modernized spelling? Do you
                        want a print play to read rather than an online one? Do you feel comfortable
                        reading a play without notes?
                    And, sadly...there might not be a modern edition of some of the plays
                        below. If you’re up for it, you can get the play from EEBO and LiOn (via the
                        library) and use that copy.
                
                Getting Your Play
                
                    First, try the library. If we don’t have it, use inter-library loan. 
                    If you want to buy a copy, make sure that you’re not buying an OCR’d
                        version of the play; be sure you’re buying an edited version. (If you want
                        an OCR’d play, you can get that for free from Literature Online via the
                        library.) 
                    Consider: do you need a physical copy? Can you work with Literature Online
                        and Early English Books Online? 
                    You will be able to find a facsimile of your play (likely the first
                        edition, which could be difficult to read) via EEBO. 
                
                Plays that need reading and writing about! (in no particular
                        order)
                
                    John Heywood - The Four PP
                    John Heywood - Johan Johan The Husband
                    John Marston - Antonio and Mellida
                    Ben Jonson - The Irish Masque at Court
                    Ben Jonson - The Newcastle Entertainment (The Entertainment at
                        Blackfriars)
                    Thomas Goffe - The Raging Turk, or Bajazet the Second
                    Thomas Goffe - The Courageous Turk
                    Thomas Killigrew - The Pilgrim
                    Dekker, Chettle, and Haughton - Patient Grissel
                    William Davenant - The Just Italian
                    William Davenant - The Cruel Brother
                    William Davenant - News from Plymouth
                    John Denham - The Sophy
                    John Suckling - Brennoralt
                    Richard Edwards - Damon and Pythias
                    Thomas Middleton - The Masque of Heroes
                    Thomas Middleton - The Triumphs of Love and Antiquity
                    Anon - The Tragedy of Nero (not Chapman’s play)
                    George Wilkins - The Miseries of Enforced Marriage
                    Thomas Drue (Drewe) - The Duchess of Suffolk
                    Robert Greene - Selimus, Emperor of the Turks
                    Robert Greene - Alphonsus
                    John Day - Law Tricks
                    John Day - The Blind Beggar of Bethnal Green
                    John Day - Humour out of Breath
                    Samuel Daniel - Philotas
                    Samuel Daniel - Cleopatra
                    Thomas Dekker - The Whore of Babylon
                    Thomas Dekker - If This Be Not a Good Play, The Devil is in it
                    Anon - Look About You
                    Thomas Dekker and John Ford - The Bristow Merchant
                    Collaborative - The Mountebanks Masque
                    Mary Sidney - The Tragedie of Antonie
                    Nathaniel Richards - The Tragedy of Messalina, the Roman Empress
                    Anon - A Warning for Fair Women
                    Anon - Wiley Beguiled
                    Anon - The Wit of a Woman
                    Anon - Captain Thomas Stukeley
                    Jasper Mayne - The City Match
                    Jasper Mayne - The Amorous War
                    William Peaps - Love in Its Ecstasy
                    William Cavendish - The Variety
                    William Davenant - Love and Honour
                    Francis Quarles - The Virgin Widow
                    Anon - The Valiant Scot
                    William Cartwright - The Royal Slave
                    William Cartwright - The Lady Errant
                    William Cartwright - The Siege, or Love’s Convert
                    William Cartwright - The Ordinary
                    Henry Porter - The Two Angry Women of Abington
                    Thomas Kyd (?) - Soliman and Perseda
                    George Peele - The Arraignment of Paris
                    George Peele - The Love of King David and Fair Bethsabe
                    Edward Sharpham - The Fleir
                    Edward Sharpham - Cupid’s Whirligig
                    Anon (Heywood?) - Fair Maid of the Exchange
                    Lording Barry - Ram Alley
                    Thomas Tomkis - Work for Cutlers
                    Fulke Greville - Mustapha
                    Fulke Greville - Alaham
                    Robert Armin - The Italian Tailor and his Boy
                    Anon - Every Woman in her Humour
                    Gervase Markham and Lewis Machin - The Dumb Knight
                    Gervase Markham and William Sampson - Herod and Antipater
                    Thomas May - The Heir
                    Thomas May - Julia Agrippina
                    Thomas May - Cleopatra
                    John Mason - The Turk
                    Nathan Field - A Woman is a Weathercock
                    Nathan Field - Amends for Ladies
                    Anon - Two Wise Men and the Rest all Fools
                    Anon - Heteroclitanomalonomia
                    Robert Taylor - The Hog Hath Lost His
                        Pearl
                    Phineas Fletcher - Sicelides
                    Peter Hausted - The Rival Friends
                    Thomas Randolph - The Jealous Lovers
                    Richard Zouch - The Sophister
                    Anon - The Costly Whore
                    Thomas Heywood - A Maidenhead Well Lost
                    Thomas Heywood - The Tragedy of the Rape of Lucrece
                    Thomas Heywood - A Challenge For Beauty
                    Thomas Heywood - The Wise-Woman of Hogsdon
                    Thomas Nabbes - Tottenham Court
                    Thomas Nabbes - Covent Garden
                    Thomas Nabbes - The Bride
                    John Tatham - Love Crowns the End
                    John Tatham - The Distracted State
                    John Tatham - The Scots Figgaries, or a Knot of Knaves
                    John Tatham - The Rump
                
                Maybe Plays
                These plays have short Wikipedia articles. If you want to write about one of
                    these, send me a short email that explains why the Wikipedia article is lacking
                    and how you plan to improve it. Some of these (especially the Jonson plays) have
                    a lot of secondary criticism and so would be very challenging choices.
                
                    Thomas Goffe - The Tragedy of Orestes
                    John Marston - Jack Drum’s Entertainment
                    Jonson - Sejanus
                    Jonson - Catiline
                    Marston - The Dutch Courtesan
                    Marston - Sophonisba (The Wonder of Women)
                    Marston - Histriomastix
                    Marston - What you Will
                
            
