Title:  Editorializing the Greek Anthology: The palatin
                    manuscript as a collective imaginary
Volume:  014
Issue:  1
Date:  20 March 2020
Abstract:  
                
                The Palatine Anthology (PA) Project, coordinated by the Canada Research Chair on
                    digital textualities directed by Marcello Vitali-Rosati, collaborates with
                    several international partners, including Italian and French schools, in order
                    to establish a collaborative critical digital edition and a multilingual
                    translation of all the PA's epigrams. In particular, our project aims to further
                    develop this edition of the PA, thereby demonstrating the philological,
                    editorial and pedagogic challenges involved in compiling the diverse fragments
                    of this collection of Greek epigrams. Since its discovery in 1606 by Claude
                    Saumaise in the Palatina Library of Heidelberg in Germany , the PA manuscript (Codex Palatinus 23) has
                    considerably influenced literature and art. As we know it today, the Anthology
                    is the result of successive compilations, modifications, additions, and
                    rearrangements by the compilers. Meleager's collection is a collection of
                    epigrams compiled in the first century B.C., which represents the original
                    source of what is known today as the Greek Anthology . This collection, called The
                        Garland, was not randomly arranged, but according to a series of
                    particular organizational principles . 
                 The PA challenges the concept of an oeuvre – as a unified
                    and cohesive body of work –, insofar as it brings together 4 000 epigrams
                    written by more than one hundred different authors from over sixteen centuries
                    of literary production (from the Byzantine empire to the 10th century AD). If we cannot consider the Anthology
                    as a unified and cohesive work, how do we account for it in an edition? To these
                    questions, the digital environment presents tools and possibilities allowing us
                    to organize our research, and ultimately work towards finding some answers. In
                    an attempt to provide tangible solutions to the difficulty of assembling such a
                    fragmented body of work the PA Project harnesses digital tools. We have created
                    an open database searchable via an API that allows one to transcribe the
                    manuscript, propose translations, align translations, transcribe scholia, and
                    link epigrams both to each other and to external literary and artistic
                    references. We aim to demonstrate the importance of philological approaches to
                    texts; redefine the boundaries between scholarly and amateur practices; connect
                    contemporary readers and scholars with Classical texts; supplement the Perseus
                    project; and harness the potential of semantic web technologies. We aim to shed
                    light on the many ways to engage with textual objects, to conceive of a multiple
                    reception of the anthological imaginary . The
                    interface of our digital platform does intend for users to propose such reading
                    pathways and weak ties
                    , because it enables them to associate an
                    epigram with a reference (textual, iconographic, musical, cinematographic, and
                    others) and thereby demonstrate a collective engagement with the epigram . This demonstrates how collective imaginaries are able
                    to enrich our understanding of the anthological material. By enabling the users
                    to engage with this otherwise elusive literary object, the Greek epigrams, and
                    with a cultural object, our project enables contemporary readers to engage with
                    the digital possibilities in order to visualize a collective imaginary or topoï
                        , and to contribute to philological research on the
                    origins and influences of the PA . 
            
Full Body Text: 


                Introduction
                 Digital environments are characterized by a kind of writing wherein fragments
                    are constantly reorganized and reformatted in order to establish new structures
                    of meaning. Sentences and information are in fact intended to be recovered,
                    recontextualized, rearchived
                    (in French redocumentarisation)  in collages
                    or pastiches sometimes produced by algorithms. These new types of writing can
                    recall a long-standing literary form: the anthology, a tradition that Milad
                    Doueihi argues represents the spirit of contemporary digital culture . In this way, digital environments are
                    able to provide a new structuring of content, to such an extent that we believe
                    the anthological form bears a structural resemblance to the digital. The
                    anthological form in fact proves to be difficult to characterize and categorize:
                    its constitutive heterogeneity creates tensions relating to the idea of a
                    literary oeuvre as a unified whole. The first example of an
                    anthology is often identified as the Garland of Meleager, a collection of
                    epigrams composed in the first century BC which represents the primary source of
                    what is now called the Greek Anthology. This composition is, in itself, the
                    anthology of anthologies: it is the foundation of an anterior collection, that
                    of Simonides of Ceos (556-468 BC) dating from the 5th century BC. The Garland of
                    Meleager thereby constitutes the first collection of epigrams to be united in a
                    single volume, prevailing as the canonical model of the literary genre that is
                    the anthology. 
                 The Palatine manuscript assembles epigrams produced over the course of over
                    sixteen centuries, written by more than one hundred authors. Almost all
                    collections of Greek epigrams have been preserved through a single manuscript:
                    Codex Palatinus 23, kept at Heidelberg . Understanding
                    the diversity of such a collection becomes increasingly relevant over time. If
                    we cannot consider the Anthology to be a unified literary
                    work, how do we describe it? What are the possible ways that we can read a text
                    produced in antiquity? To answer this questions, we have initiated the project
                    of a collaborative edition of the Anthology which operates
                    outside of the confines posed by mainstream digital scholarly publishing. Within
                    this project, we consider that the characteristics of the digital environment,
                    new forms of writing, and notably the concept of editorialization discussed in
                    this article are best equipped to conceptually unravel the nature of the
                    anthological form, in particular via the establishment of an open and
                    collaborative edition. 
                 The collaborative approach thereby benefits from digitally open and
                    collaborative methods allowing an international community to read, interpret and
                    comment on the Palatine manuscript according to the theory of collective
                    intelligence . Since the Palatine manuscript is a
                    collection of heterogeneous texts, it is difficult to fully grasp the collective
                    values, beliefs, attitudes, and postures – herein referred to as collective
                    imaginaries or topoï – associated with the Anthology. In this way, traditional
                    publishing methods limit our capacity to interpret collective imaginaries –
                    common and perceived truths – associated with the text. Our
                    digital edition moves away from singular interpretations of the Palatine
                    Anthology (PA) and proposes to understand the plural meanings and possibilities
                    associated with reading the classical epigrams. 
                In this article, we will present the theoretical basis and editorial foundations
                    (observations regarding the contemporary editorial milieu) adopted by the PA
                    project, as well as the methodological and technical processes put in place to
                    meet the particular challenges posed by our objectives. Therefore, this article
                    aims to outline our academic posture regarding a digital approach to antique
                    literature, an approach which enhances both the interpretative possibilities –
                    for both scholarly and non-scholarly readers – of the Palatine manuscript. Our
                    main thesis is that the Anthology should not be considered a unified, uniform
                    and coherent body of work. Rather, it assembles various texts produced over many
                    centuries by numerous authors and thereby represents a dynamic and open
                    collective imaginary. Before clarifying this thesis, we will first describe the
                    problematic nature of the definition of the Anthology and then outline the
                    complex history relating to the publication of the PA. 
            

                Greek Anthology: a problematic definition
                 One of the first concerns a publisher encounters when he or she examines the
                    textual material of the Greek Anthology is how to define it. One could define
                    the Greek Anthology as a collection of epigrams compiled in the 10th century. In fact, the editions of this text are
                    based on the Codex Palatinus 23, a manuscript dating from around 940 AD, stored
                    in the Palatine Library of Heidelberg (leaflets can be found at the BNF under
                    the symbol Suppl. Gr. 384), discovered in 1606 by Claude Saumaise. This
                    collection is based on a previous Anthology, composed about a half a century
                    prior by Constantin Cephalas. To date, it is understood that most of the
                    epigrams found in the Codex Palatinus 23 derive from the work of Cephalas . Therefore, the Greek Anthology
                    fundamentally refers to the Palatine Anthology. Most current editions (Paton,
                    Waltz) enable us to understand the complexity of the corpus. Indeed, in addition
                    to the fifteen books of the Anthology that correspond to the division of the
                    Codex Palatinus 23 that can be found in the 1916 Loeb edition produced by Paton
                    (or in the 1972 Belles Lettres edition produced by Waltz), these two sets add
                    volume XVI under the title of Appendix Planudea. Maxime Planude had composed his
                    own Anthology in 1301 , and it includes some of the
                    epigrams of the Codex Palatinus 23 to which other epigrams not present in this
                    first manuscript were added. 
                We therefore consider the Greek Anthology an object reconstructed a posteriori by modern editors who, in
                    reconstructing the Greek Anthology, attempt to give a somewhat exhaustive
                    account of the Greek epigrammatic. But we must go back a little further in our
                    chronology to the work of Cephalas, whose work is based on earlier sources, the
                    most notable of which are the Garland of Meleager, the Garland of Philip of
                    Thessalonica and the Garland of Agathias of Myrina, dating from the 1st century BC, the 1st
                    century AD, and the 6th century AD, respectively
                        . In accordance with contemporary taste
                    during the Hellenistic period, Meleager, who composed the first collection of
                    epigrams together in a single volume (Anthologie Grecque.
                        Première Partie. Texte établi et Traduit Par Pierre Waltz 1928, XI),
                    says, to weave with these
                    texts a wreath of flowers
                    (literal translation of the Greek anthologia). In the preface of his
                    crown - which we find at the beginning of book IV of the Codex Palatinus 23 -
                    Meleager lists these poets by comparing each of them with a flower: 
                        
                            Μοῦσα φίλα, τίνι τάνδε φέρεις πάγκαρπον ἀοιδάν; / ἢ τίς ὁ καὶ τεύξας
                                ὑµνοθετᾶν στέφανον; / Ἄνυσε µὲν Μελέαγρος, ἀριζάλῳ δὲ Διοκλεῖ /
                                µναµόσυνον ταύταν ἐξεπόνησε χάριν, / πολλὰ µὲν ἐµπλέξας Ἀνύτης
                                κρίνα, πολλὰ δὲ Μοιροῦς / λείρια, καὶ Σαπφοῦς βαιὰ µέν, ἀλλὰ
                                ῥόδα
                            To whom, dear Muse, do you bring these varied fruits of song, or who
                                was it who wrought this garland of poets? The work was Meleager's;
                                he produced this gift as a keepsake for the illustrious Diocles. He
                                wove in many red lilies of Anyte, and many white lilies of Moero; a
                                few of Sappho, but they are roses.
                    
                
                 The material harvested by Meleager is composed of texts, the first of which can
                    be traced back to poets from the 6th century BC (eg
                    Sappho) or the 5th (Simonide, one of the first poets
                    to consider the epigram as a literary genre) up to Meleager himself, who inserts
                    into his work several texts from his hand .
                    Following the anthological contributions of Meleager, scholars continued over
                    the centuries to add new epigrams to the old material. The Anthology became a
                    growing compilation that surpassed the temporal constraints usually relating to
                    literary work. Some texts are, literally, epigrams. That is, they are short and
                    sometimes witty texts designed to be inscribed on objects, tombs or buildings
                        . Most epigrams are, however, poems that
                    appropriate the epigraphic format by subverting their function: they are not
                    real inscriptions, but poems that stylistically imitate the first inscriptions.
                    Indeed, it could have been as early as the 1st
                    century BC that the epigram became a recognized literary form. The popularity of
                    this form exploded during the Hellenistic period when great literary figures
                    like Callimachus and Asclepiades became prolific epigrammatists . We can only understand the meaning of this
                    literary form by considering it as a living and moving material, as an open
                    oeuvre, one which has resonated among many literary imaginaries across different
                    societies and throughout different periods in history, from archaic Greek
                    culture to Byzantine society. Over the centuries, epigrammatists have written
                    their own texts as per the tradition developed by their predecessors For
                        examples pertaining to the repetition of certain epigrammatic motifs, we
                        refer to the exemplary study of Tarán 1979.. 
                As a whole, the Anthology initially assembled texts from the 6th century BC, only to add, in the 10th century AD, more than a hundred poets - including
                    several anonymous poets - who wrote in the interim period, that is over the
                    course of sixteen centuries. The editorial history of the Anthology is, as we
                    will now outline, extremely complex and layered. 
            

                Critical editions of the Anthology
                 Since the discovery of the manuscript in Heidelberg by Claude Saumaise in 1606,
                    many critical editions of the Anthology have been published. 
                Claude Saumaise – who never achieved his goal of producing a critical edition of
                    the Palatine Anthology –, produced a collation of the P23 manuscript and
                    composed a set of critical notes. These notes were used for the first time at
                    the end of the 18th century, in order to conceive of
                    the PA prior to its edition. Thus, between 1772 and 1776,
                    Richard-François-Philippe Brunck produced the first complete edition of the
                    Palatine Anthology in his Analecta veterum poetarum
                        Graecorum, which he published in three volumes. In this edition , the epigrams do not follow the order of the original
                    manuscript. Instead, they are chronologically grouped according to the author's
                    name. Friedrich Jacobs took over Brunck's work a few years later and arranged
                    the epigrams according to the same structure, grouping them into 13 volumes
                    under the general title Anthologia Graeca sive, Poetarum
                        graecorum lusus ex recensione Brunckii. This is his first critical
                    edition of the Anthology, published in Leipzig between 1794 and 1814 . 
                Between 1813 and 1817, Jacobs edited a second critical edition of the Anthology,
                    this time arranged in three volumes . The first two
                    volumes include the epigrams of the Palatine Anthology, arranged in the order of
                    the Palatine manuscript, to which are added the appendix of Planude's epigrams,
                    as well as 394 pieces from the ancient authors. In the third volume, the
                    critical notes and indices have been arranged. This second edition was based on
                    the careful collation of the text, although its compilation was not based on the
                    Palatine manuscript, but rather on the copy of J. Spaletti .
                 Along with these philological works, critical studies of the Anthology and its
                    manuscript tradition continue to multiply. Johann-Friedrich Dübner integrates
                    such research in an edition published between 1864 and 1877, borrowing and
                    developing different aspects of Jacobs' organization method. He thus edited the
                    epigrams of the fifteen books of the Palatine Anthology, and added a Latin
                    translation, an Appendix Planudea, and an appendix gathering the epigrams of the
                    ancient authors, under the general title Epigrammatum
                        Anthologia palatina cum Planudeis and appendix nova epigrammatum veterum ex
                        libris and marmoribus
                    . 
                 It is precisely during the 19th century that
                    philology is endowed with stable scientific methods. 20th century philologists working on the Anthology claim to represent
                    these same critical currents. Two major critical editions then emerged: that of
                    WR Paton, published by the Loeb Classical Library in 1916-1918, and that of
                    Pierre Waltz, published in Belles Lettres and
                    continued, after the death of the philologist, by Jean Irigoin, Robert Aubreton
                    and Felix Buffière. This edition (1928-1980) comprises thirteen volumes. 
                WR Paton's edition relies on the manuscript of the Palatin Anthology as well as
                    that of the Planude Anthology, demonstrating how certain philological variants,
                    observed in the other sources, differ from the conceived text . It also includes the lemmata in the conceiving text
                    and accompanies its edition by an English translation of the epigrams. Pierre
                    Waltz also wished to include, in his edition of the Greek Anthology, not only
                    the epigrams of the Palatinus as well as those of the collection of Planude, but
                    also the epigrams drawn from the papyrus and the metric inscriptions. It
                    therefore takes into account the whole manuscript tradition of the Greek
                    Anthology, but prioritizes the Palatinus manuscript text in order to establish
                    the epigram texts contained in this collection. In the critical notes
                    accompanying his text, he comprehensively outlines the philological variants
                        .
                The UTET editions in Turin have recently published a last edition made up of the
                    work of Fabrizio Conca, Nario Marzi and Giuseppe Zanetto, published in three
                    volumes between 2005 and 2011 that propose an Italian translation of the text
                        . This complex and layered history – filled with
                    additions, republications, translations, and scholarly comments – demonstrates
                    the need for alternative editorial means of presenting the Anthology. 
                 These different critical editions all agree on the prevalence of the Codex
                    Palatinus 23, choosing it systematically as their main source. At the same time,
                    they wish to synthesize the Greek epigrammatic work, including the annex pieces.
                    Thus, philologists try to account for the character both of the abundant and
                    scattered collections of epigrams and their editorial work to show the
                    complexity induced by the anthological nature of these texts. 
                 Strangely, none of the existing critical editions systematically conceive the
                    text of the scholiaIt should be noted that in the critical notes
                        accompanying his edition, Pierre Waltz points out the most important scholia
                            . despite their
                    abundance in the Palatine manuscript. These scholia play a fundamental role in
                    the text, especially when we consider the anthological form: scholia organise
                    and enable a rich set of internal references by building intertextuality within
                    the anthological material. They relate epigrams that mention the same characters
                    (for example, a scholium may inform the reader that two love poems were written
                    to the same person) or connect the epigrams of the same author. Let us take, for
                    example, the scholia attached to the epigram 5.19 τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἔρωτ (α) ἀλλόκοτον: while the same author
                    refers to this epigram, it also contains intertextual ties to another epigram.
                    They also provide precise information on the composition and constitution of the
                    anthological corpus, specifying the sources of the textual material. For
                    example, the very first scholia of Book IV explain that the first poem of the
                    book is the preface to the Garland of Meleager, but it also gives us a number of
                    biographical details. It is still the scholia that teach us that the source of
                    the Codex Palatinus 23 is the Anthology of Constantine Cephalas. Last but not
                    least, scholia establish thematic links between different epigrams, thus drawing
                    a relating of topoi whose influence has proven vital in both artistic and
                    literary history. We understand, therefore, how scholia – a feature heretofore
                    neglected by publishers of the Anthology – complement our understanding of the
                    contents and meaning behind the texts, as well as the essence of the
                    anthological structure. This approach proposes that we understand the
                    anthological structure as a format which supports and displays an entire
                    literary imaginary. 
            

                The anthological imaginary
                 In our project, we consider that the Anthology should not be considered as a
                    coherent and self-contained literary work but as a document relating to a
                    dynamic and open collective, literary imaginary: as an open text, the PA
                    performs via its intertextual structure and contemporary readers ought to be
                    able to appropriate this structure through referential associations. This
                    hypothesis is the reason for our pursuit of a new, digital means of presenting
                    the Anthology, and it draws on three considerations: 
                         As the above described history of the Anthology demonstrates, the
                            form – or genre – has evolved over centuries and is thus,
                            intrinsically, a continually evolving collaborative work. 
                         In terms of content, it is fundamentally characterized as
                            heterogeneous (in terms of its form and themes, in particular). 
                         The purpose of the Anthology is to refuse semantic closure — that is,
                            to enable the works that it compiles to continue to find new meanings,
                            to establish links with one another over time according to various
                            methodologies and approaches. 
                    
                
                 By examining the history of the Anthology, its philogical complexity, we observe
                    that it is less a unified work (or a unit), than the outcome of a
                    stratification of texts. Over a hundred poets across more than sixteen centuries
                         have contributed to its creation. In fact, in
                    terms of content, the Anthology is essentially heterogeneous, testifying to the
                    personal preferences and subjectivity of each contributor. Alongside the few
                        real inscriptions (here we adopt reference to the
                    etymological origin of the term epigram) appearing in the Anthology,
                    there are innumerable epigrams created from scratch to integrate into the
                    Anthology, which is therefore transformed in literary play. On the formal plane,
                    the elegiac couplet (the epigrammatic privileged form) coexists with other
                    metrical forms (iambic trimmers, dactyl hexameters, etc.). The range of themes
                    is spread from erotic epigrams to Christian epigrams, bearing witness to
                    developing societal tastes and concerns over time. 
                The texts establish a dialogue with one another over time. This dialogue, which
                    weaves in and out of the work, complements the Anthology's structural
                    heterogeneity . Thanks to the scholia in
                    particular, we observe the highlighting of topoi that not only reappear
                    throughout the manuscript, but have also had a strong resonance in literature,
                    from medieval troubadour songs to contemporary music and Hollywood movies.
                    Consider, for example, the topos of the Carpe diem, very present in Hellenistic
                    epigrams like those of Asclepiades (see AP 5.85), later taken up in the Odes of Horace, and whose traces are also found in the
                    poetry of Ronsard (Sonnets for Hélène) and Laurent
                    de Médicis (The Triumph of Bacchus and Ariadne), in
                    the songs of Brassens (Saturn), or even in the
                    movie Dead Poets Society. Thus, the Anthology
                    essentially refuses any closure and, on the contrary, encourages a continual
                    expansion and development of the text and its references. Even today, the
                    Anthology remains an open text that internally refers to other pieces present in
                    the manuscript, while also echoing external texts potentially related to the
                    material of the Codex Palatinus. 
                 The material of the Anthology still inhabits our literary topoi far beyond the
                    explicit references made to its texts. To publish them implies an attempt to
                    account for its circulation over a millennium, the diversity of the material
                    involved as well as the richness and heterogeneity of the references between the
                    texts. 
                 For a modern reader, we believe that it is important to be able to represent the
                    various (internal and external) connections that the works of the Anthology
                    establish with one another. In other words, in order to edit this rich and
                    complex anthological imaginary, we must be able to represent and do justice to
                    the plurality of meanings possible. But how do you represent to a modern reader
                    such richness and complexity? The traditional methodologies and experiences of
                    scholarly publishing do not seem appropriate to harness and express the
                    complexity of the Anthology. Indeed, while it is quite possible to contextualize
                    the text of the Palatine manuscript and to make a critical edition of it, it is
                    very difficult to give an account of the overall cultural value of this
                    material, and in particular of the impact it has had on collective imaginaries
                    over the centuries. In other words, we could, of course, make a critical edition
                    of the Codex Palatinus, but it is impossible to do this in the case of the Greek
                    Anthology because this work abounds in references, contexts and implications.
                    The interpretative limits of the Anthology are endless. 
            

                Editorialization: an open, collaborative, and interactive solution to editing
                    the Anthology?
                 How does one publish the anthological imaginary? In order to answer this
                    question, it seems appropriate to refer to the theory of editorialization. This
                    theory proved to be useful in understanding how the dynamics of production and
                    the circulation of contents, in a digital environment, help us interpret and
                    propose an edition of an object such as the Anthology. Editorialization then
                    became a founding principle of our editorial approach. 
                 The term editorialisation has come to be used
                    in the last decade by French-speaking scholars to refer to the production and
                    circulation of content in digital environments . However, it is sometimes difficult to grasp the exact meaning that
                    researchers attribute to this concept. To give a precise definition, we can say
                    that: 
                         Editorialization is the set of dynamics that produce
                            and structure digital space. These dynamics can be understood as the
                            interactions of individual and collective actions within a particular
                            digital environment. 
                        
                     In other words, editorialization is an open and collective process, which
                    produces contents and visions of the world that organize our relationship to
                    reality.
                 In this sense, the theory of editorialization can help us to understand the
                    essence of the Greek Anthology as an alternative to traditionnal edition.
                    Indeed, this textual material is an open and collective process, which is not
                    unified but has nevertheless played a large role in forming and transforming the
                    social imaginary relating to literature. The arrangement of editorialization
                    mechanisms found in the Codex Palatinus is one possible way to understand
                    anthological culture . The following three aspects of
                    the concept of editorialization have proven to be the most relevant in
                    fulfilling our goal: 
                         Editorialization is not a closed process, but an open and dynamic
                            one, where content that circulates in digital environments can always be
                            used, modified and reused, to fulfill another function. This is exactly
                            what characterizes the process of conceiving the PA prior to its
                            edition, as we have analyzed it. 
                         Editorialization is a collective process, as is the Anthology, and
                            because neither has a single author, the result is textual material made
                            up of a multiplicity of voices and hands. 
                         Editorialization is a process that cannot be controlled because it
                            frees itself from its own instigators and goes beyond the objectives
                            leading to its creation in the first place. 
                    
                
                 It is on these theoretical foundations that we have built the collaborative
                    publishing project of the Anthology. We have specifically designed a digital
                    environment in which scholarly publishing is conceived as a form of
                    editorialization: an open process, based on the interaction between different
                    teams of researchers and other contributors (a contributive model) and which
                    invites each participant to appropriate the textual material and modulate it or
                    use it according to his or her own needs and wishes. These interactive
                    priorities move well beyond the scientific requirements of a traditional
                    scholarly edition. 
            

                Methodology and technical aspects
                From a methodological and technical point of view, we decided to set up a digital
                    infrastructure that best reflects the theoretical hypotheses previously
                    described. The desire to leave the canonical paradigm of scholarly publishing
                    led us to make three strategic choices:
                    
                        Create an open database queryable via API. 
                        Allow a free structure of data (that allows data to be structured in
                            many ways), to avoid imposing a predetermined epistemological approach. 
                        Encourage communities to collaborate on heuristic and editing tools.
                        
                    
                
                 The choice of an open database, searchable by an API, participates in the very
                    nature of the anthological model, which ultimately relies on an aggregation of
                    fragments selected by an author or a compiler. In the same way, we chose to
                    structure data in JSON rather than XML / epidoc. This decision may seem to break
                    the rules of the digital critical edition, but we believe that it stimulates the
                    appropriation and reconfiguration of the contents, in harmony with the spirit of
                    the Anthology. The static structure of the JSON, unlike the tree structure of
                    the XML / epidoc, allows the contributor/editor to reorganize data according to
                    different paradigms of interpretation. 
                 Finally, just as the poets of the Anthology have done over the centuries, our
                    model aims to stimulate exchanges and interactivity between contributors. We
                    have created a digital editorial environment based on a collaborative and
                    interactive logic, in order to establish a community of contributors. In
                    particular, we have launched a vast educational project, in partnership with
                    secondary schools teaching the Ancient Greek language. Supervised by their
                    teachers, several groups of pupils translate the Greek text and publish it
                    online. This project has many educational advantages: 
                         language learning; 
                         text analysis; 
                         learning digital publishing tools. 
                    
                
                 In addition to being a unique learning opportunity for the secondary student,
                    the work produced by this less scholarly community facilitates the task of the
                    scientific community by supplying usable contents for research. In addition,
                    this collaboration is based on a strong epistemological positioning, since it
                    erases the boundaries between the work of the scientific community and the
                    contribution of novices. This part of the project resonates entirely with the
                    theoretical and methodological positioning recommended in the Digital Classics
                        
                    . As explained above, the very idea of
                        truth of the text - that is usually based on a critical
                    or genealogical approach - is not, in the case of our editorial project, an
                    objective to be achieved. On the contrary, we seek to bring out the pluralities
                    of perception of the textual material - because it is this plurality, at the
                    origin of the collective imaginary woven by and around the Palatine Anthology,
                    which constitutes, according to us, the essence of this text. 
                 Thanks to its multiple tables, our database should allow us to pursue and
                    complete the philosophy specific to the anthological genre, highlighting not
                    only the intertextual connections - as an hypertextual relation, the possibility
                    of any text of a return to another older text , but
                    also the networks of references built through the centuries, between the
                    anthological texts and any other cultural or artistic object . On our contributive platform, we find different
                    translations. For example, we include a word-by-word translation faithful to the
                    literal meaning of the text as well as a literary translation prioritizing its
                    more poetic and figurative connotations. The translations are provided in
                    several languages, mainly English, French and Italian. These different
                    translations emphasize the importance of the appropriation of textual material.
                    The Anthology and its contents have also proven capable of crossing time and
                    space: its temporal and spatial circulation was enabled during the Hellenistic
                    period by the fact that the Greek, as ‪Koiné
                        dialektos, ‬was a universal language. That is to say that we deem
                    it essential that translations be included so that the text may continue to
                    circulate across several academic disciplines and places. 
            

                Description of the editorial infrastructure
                 Our infrastructure can be described according to three aspects: 
                         The relational database; 
                         The API; 
                         The different displays made from the API. 
                
                
                        The database is built from the notion of entity, the epigram, in a
                            repository aligned to the Perseus URIs (Uniform Resource Identifier)
                            which constitutes the textual unit. Each entity corresponds to an
                            epigram, understood as an anthological fragment and not as a textual
                            manifestation attached to a specific manuscript or edition. This entity
                            then takes shape in various textual manifestations. In our database, we
                            can therefore associate each entity with several pieces of information
                            and, first and foremost, with text versions of the epigram. Our
                            epistemological model leads us to consider the different versions of the
                            Greek text in the same set of possible translations. All these versions
                            can be aligned with each other, thanks to a software editor that we have
                            developped and which allows us to compare the Greek texts and the
                            different translations. Each entity can be attributed to one or several
                            authors, and can be tagged by keywords, which include information on the
                            themes of epigrams, on literary genres, on the characters mentioned, or
                            on the reading path established by users. Each entity can also be linked
                            to one or more scholia, either the original Greek or a modern
                            translation. Entities can also be associated by any API users with
                            iconographic material or other texts that echo with the corresponding
                            epigram. This possibility allows us to underline as previously defined
                            the weak links between the text and artistic works,
                            in order to enrich the anthological material. If we go back to the
                            example mentioned above, we can insert, in the database itself, the
                            links between the epigram of Asclepiad - which evokes the topos of
                                Carpe Diem - and the famous Ode of Horace or the poem of Laurent de
                            Médicis. Finally, each entity can be aligned with the facsimile of the
                            corresponding manuscript. 
                         The database is exposed in JSON through an API, which makes it
                            possible to carry out queries to display the data, as well as to enrich
                            a preexisting entry. 
                         The API obviously allows several forms of appropriation of textual
                            material. As an example, in the case of our project, we propose a
                                scientific display, which makes it possible to
                            visualize all the information available on the base, a public display,
                            which offers a navigation by thematic reading paths (these paths being
                            conceived of in order to narrativize a group of epigrams), and finally,
                            a Twitter bot which posts epigrams on the social network, associating
                            them with the corresponding image of the manuscript. 
            

                Expected benefits
                 Our project is currently in its third year of development. We have since
                    witnessed the enthusiasm of various communities (scholarly, educational,
                    contemporary readers) involved in the editorial activity of this project. The
                    project thereby resonates beyond the academic sphere. The potential for
                    appropriation of the Greek Anthology by contemporary readers is therefore very
                    strong and proves the vitality of this material in contemporary culture. This is
                    a work of the Digital Humanities. We adopt, in particular, the approach
                    prescribed by the Digital Classics as it relates to the critical
                    editorialization of ancient texts. We thereby wish to promote, through the use
                    of digital tools, an appropriation of such texts by contemporary readers 
                    . Given its current development, we can identify four
                    expected benefits of the project: 
                         Although our project is primarily an experiment in Digital Classics
                            and our publishing model is a prototype, we are convinced of its
                            potential as a reusable model for other projects because it develops and
                            improves the preexisting philological approach and embraces the nature
                            of the anthological form. 
                         By opening the users of the API to the world of Greek epigrams and
                            related literary or artistic objects, our project enables contemporary
                            readers to not only appreciate, engage with, and enjoy ancient texts,
                            but to participate in contributing and in developing collective
                            understandings of these texts. In addition to being exposed to new
                            meanings associated with the Greek Anthology, users are able to
                            demonstrate how literary topoi develop and adapts across centuries. The
                            API imitates the notion of a collective imaginary because both insist on
                            plural meanings, development, dialogue and the mutual influence of
                            ideas. 
                         By renewing the classic philological approach, we have shifted the
                            boundaries between scholarly practices and those of the novice, both in
                            terms of production and dissemination of editorial content. The
                            boundaries between scholar and novice now must undergo reconsideration. 
                         It goes without saying that our project not only contributes, but
                            also promotes the advancement of knowledge, therefore serving the
                            interests of the scientific community. The role that the novice plays in
                            our approach takes into account the way in which our database can also
                            be structured in scientific ways. In particular, our project contributes
                            to improve the Perseus database (our partner) by contributing further
                            information, as it will collect, in xml / epidoc format, all the texts,
                            translations and alignments produced, as well as other relevant
                            information, thanks to queries on the API (at the moment, Perseus does
                            not have, for instance, French, English and Italian translations of the
                            epigrams, nor the Greek text of the scholia) .
                            In addition, the project contributes to the production of semantic data
                            thanks to the alignment of our data with linked data repositories . The API queries Wikidata ad hoc to
                            retrieve existing data (for example, information about an author or a
                            city). All the data collected on the platform will then be reinserted on
                            Wikidata via the API. 
                    
                
                 In accordance with the principles of the Digital Classics and Digital Humanities
                        , we are contributing to encyclopedic
                    projects by playing an active role in the pooling of knowledge. 
            
