Title:  To tree, or not to tree? On the Empirical Basis
                    for Having Past Landscapes to Experience.
Volume:  012
Issue:  3
Date:  19 November 2018
Abstract:  
                This article provides an overview of some of the complex issues involved in
                    reconstructing and visualizing past landscapes. It discusses the importance of
                    empirical data and introduces some of the terminology necessary for
                    understanding methods which are often considered more in the domain of the
                    natural sciences than humanities. Current methods and practices are put in the
                    context of environmental archaeology, archaeological theory and heritage
                    management as well as related, briefly, to the broader context of archaeological
                    theory, practice and research data infrastructure. Finally, some examples and
                    pointers for the future are given in the hope that the article may provide a
                    point of reference for those looking to gain an entry point into the study of
                    past landscapes, and understand their relevance in archaeological
                    visualisation.
            
Full Body Text: 


                Aims
                Our intention with this point of view paper is to help refocus an increasingly
                    abstract and theoretically orientated Digital Humanities (DH). We will present a
                    critical perspective on some of the problems and potentials relating to the
                    visualisation of past (primarily non-urban) landscapes, with particular emphasis
                    on the use of empirical evidence, from a combined environmental and
                    archaeological point of view. We will outline some of the major challenges
                    associated with reconstructing past landscapes from data, and give some examples
                    of recent attempts to create platforms for addressing some of these issues. We
                    will also briefly discuss the importance of landscape visualisation in the
                    context of heritage management.
            

                Introduction and some terminology
                Visualization can mean many things to many people. Here we choose to limit
                    ourselves to the Oxford English Dictionary  definition
                    of [t]he action or fact of visualizing;
                        the power or process of forming a mental picture or vision of something not
                        actually present to the sight; a picture thus formed. For
                    archaeologists, the only things present to the sight are
                    the remains or results of past human activities and natural processes; any
                    modern day landscape is the product of its history and geology. It could be said
                    that what archaeologists are most often trying to understand - (loosely
                    speaking) the nature of past human activities and their contexts - are
                        never
                    actually present to the sight, and thus that visualization
                    is an intrinsic part of archaeology. In this paper, we focus primarily on the
                    visualization of prehistoric, non-urban landscapes, rather than archaeological
                    sites or structures, and the prerequisites for being able to do this. We use the
                    term environmental reconstruction almost synonymously with visualization,
                    the former being the more common expression for any form of quantitative or
                    qualitative expression of an understanding of a past landscape, or wider
                    archaeological site context. Whilst there is an increasing interest in the
                    incorporation of multi-sensorial experiences in archaeological reconstructions
                    (especially sound, see e.g. ), we will limit the
                    discussion to the more established visual attributes which are more easily
                    quantifiable through palaeoenvironmental data. Although yet to be verified
                    scientifically, it is the opinion of the authors that the word
                        reconstruction has become a somewhat loaded word in DH discussions,
                    and we would like to emphasise that we in no way advocate the recreation of
                    static, absolute and fully accurate reproductions of the past. Our use of the
                    term implies a more diachronic (2D or 3D) simulation of archaeological and
                    environmental interpretations based on the interrelationships between the
                    different (and often few) materials studied by archaeologists and
                    palaeoecologists. Absolute certainty is against the nature of the scientific
                    method, and any form of reconstruction is always accompanied by an implicit set
                    of error margins and notions of transience (see, however,  for a discussion of problems with this approach in
                    relation to Earth Systems science and climate change). In this respect, our
                        environmental reconstructions are close to those
                    commonly employed in Quaternary Science (see ).
                We use the term archaeology also in its broadest meaning - as a holistic science
                    incorporating all of its various sub-disciplines, but also any methods
                    incorporated to enable it to answer complex questions on the nature of the past.
                    We therefore refer to archaeologists as practitioners of this
                    holistic science, and ignore the tendency of real world archaeologists to label
                    themselves within often highly specific sub-fields (although we will name some
                    of these affiliations for the purpose of illustration; for an overview of
                    archaeology as a discipline, see ). Similarly, we
                    somewhat provocatively lump palaeoecologists (Quaternary scientists) involved in
                    environmental reconstruction into this super-discipline, as they essentially
                    undertake the same work as environmental archaeologists, but tend to be less
                    reluctant to investigate times and places which lack any evidence of human
                    activity. Palaeoecologists are those who collect data on past landscapes, using
                    methods which study a variety of sources, from the properties of the sediments
                    themselves to fossil pollen and insects. These sources, which some find
                    analogous to artefacts and other archaeological materials (i.e. ecofacts; ), are commonly referred to as proxy data
                        sources, due to their use as proxies for past environmental change.
                
            

                Theory, history and practice
                There have been numerous attempts to inject a post-structural approach to
                    visualizing past landscapes into archaeology. In the early 1990s, a number of
                    archaeologists began emphasizing the importance of subjective experience in the
                    process of understanding the existence of prehistoric peoples in their landscape
                    contexts (e.g. ; see 
                	 for
                    a critique). These authors were perhaps influenced by the perceptual geographers
                    of the previous decades (e.g. , ; ) as much as their contemporaries in archaeology
                    and anthropology (e.g. ) and geography (e.g. ), and characterized a rising tide of post-modern
                    landscape archaeology riding in the sea of post-processual archaeology (see ). Although perhaps not intentionally, such work
                    spurred on a habitual partitioning of academic practitioners of archaeology into
                    the schools of the theorist and the scientist; the
                    latter denoting specialists in the objective, empirically orientated
                    archaeological sciences Note that we in no way intend to suggest theory is
                        not science! and the former tending away from this into the use of
                    more conjectural arguments to describe the past (see 
                    for a collection of contemporary narratives and  for
                    further discussion). Despite this dichotomy, a large number of archaeologists,
                    including a large and fundamentally pragmatic body residing outside of
                        academia Archaeology is to a large degree professionalised, with
                        consultancy or contract archaeology, as well as museums, representing the
                        larger part of archaeological excavation and data acquisition
                        internationally. , have maintained the archaeological tradition of
                    acquiring and using whichever theories and methods were most appropriate or
                    accessible for solving the questions at hand (but see  for some thoughts on potential problems and possibilities resulting from the
                    separation of academic and commercial archaeology). As a result, there are now
                    increasingly large amounts of empirical data available, in a vast array of
                    archives, from which past environments can be modelled (see e.g. ). 
                A number of environmental archaeologists were engaged in, or later reflected
                    over, these discussions (e.g. ), but many more
                    continued to work in the tradition of the natural sciences, follow in
                    hypo-deductive or inductive methodologies. Having theoretical frameworks for the
                    interpretation of evidence from the past is, of course, extremely important, and
                    concepts such as modern analogues, taphonomy, representivity and statistical
                    significance are just examples of the multiple aspects of these. When it comes
                    to populating landscapes with human actions, cultures and societies there are
                    naturally other requirements, including social theory, agency, supply and demand
                    and many other concepts, but these are outside the scope of this paper. 
                Archaeology has, in the words of Matthew Johnson, moved beyond the site ; the site being the accepted term for the
                    geographical location of evidence for past human activity, or archaeological
                    remains (see  for an environmental archaeology
                    orientated discussion). After early forays beyond the trench that would perhaps
                    better be described as sites-based rather than
                    landscape-based (e.g. ), recent developments within
                    archaeology and heritage studies have begun to consider the environment not
                    simply as a Cartesian container of archaeological features but as a human
                    artefact in itself . This is a conceptualization
                    that converges with the generally more spatially orientated, yet less
                    anthropocentric, approach to landscapes expressed in Quaternary science. The
                    Anthropocene concept of the geological age of humanity is perhaps a culmination
                    of these perspectives on the importance of humans as active parts of a landscape
                    (see both  and  for
                    Anthropocene discussions from both sides of the convergence).
                The idea of representing the material record as a collection of points has been
                    under sustained criticism in the past two decades (see, for instance,  for an overview of these critiques). The notion that
                    cultural activity only took place where traces of cultural activity are present
                    misses the point that being in the landscape is an all-encompassing engagement
                    with the environment, and that traces of this engagement extend beyond
                    recognizably anthropogenic features. The points, in a sense, can be thought of
                    as spatially scattered fragments lacking a conjoining context. Depending on the
                    nature of the evidence preserved at these points, environmental archaeology may
                    provide the potential to reveal certain aspects of this landscape context
                    through proxy data sources. The landscape itself also tells a different story to
                    that found in historical archives . Clark, Darlington
                    and Fairclough (ibid.) have argued that
                    landscape is a medium of understanding the past, a 
                        pathway into our memories
                        
                    . It is also seen as a medium to manage issues 
                        where people and land come
                            together
                        
                    , and to combine the efforts of academic disciplines and governmental
                    bodies traditionally scattered across several research domains.
            

                Heritage management and landscapes
                Approaches to landscape in archaeological and heritage governance have broadened
                    significantly in the past decades, particularly in Europe and with regard to the
                    conceptualization of landscape. The broadening of scope began in the late 1980s
                    and continued to develop throughout the 1990s, led by the initiative of English
                    Heritage (now known as Historic England). The agency acknowledged the
                    theoretical issues in protecting only sites on a list such as the Historic
                    Environment Record (HER) and began to argue for approaches moving beyond the
                    site itself. Initially, the focus was still on monuments (now in their landscape
                    context), but then moved to the historic and archaeological dimension of the
                    entire landscape, whether site-based or not . 
                A similar development can be seen in the process leading to the European
                    Landscape Convention (ELC). Initially, the aim was to define and list Heritage
                    Landscape Sites ; essentially a register of the
                        best components of the landscape, based on various
                    criteria mostly concerned with aesthetics and closeness to a supposed
                        natural origin with little signs of obvious change,
                    while undervaluing other types of landscape and ignoring entirely certain types,
                    such as industrial landscapes .
                    Successive iterations of Council of Europe recommendations moved away from this
                    representative bias toward recognizing the heritage value of the environment in
                    its entirety, through the interim step of 
                        cultural landscape areas
                        
                     and reaching its most comprehensive form in the European Landscape
                    Convention charter . 
                The charter states that landscape is 
                        an area, as defined by people, whose
                            character is the result of the action and interaction of natural and/or
                            human factors
                        
                    . There is much to unpack in this pithy definition. The term
                        area denotes a move away from thinking of cultural resources in
                    terms of point-based registers, the traditional method of defining heritage in
                    spatial terms  and toward what may be called an
                    area-based landscape conceptualisation. In order to do this we require: (1)
                    reliable and extensive multi-proxy palaeoenvironmental data (i.e. several lines
                    of evidence, see  for an explanation of these
                    concepts), (2) reliable theories, methods and tools for processing,
                    interrogating, analysing and helping to interpret these data, and (3) suitable
                    tools and practices for presenting the visual representation of the plurality of
                    results which may result from 2. Although 3 is often the focus of technology
                    driven visualization projects (see  for some Swedish
                    examples), the results risk, without sufficient weight in 1 and 2, becoming
                    simply narratives with little scientific value as opposed to narratives backed
                    by scientific data.
                The second clause acknowledges that landscape has been argued to be a way of
                    seeing (cf. ); a matter of perception and hence not
                    amenable to strict and objective criteria based on expert
                    analysis. Inherent in the definition is the notion that landscape cannot be
                    adequately described without accounting for those who experience it, and the
                    many cases of conflict and dispute over value and meaning of places with
                    heritage designations exhibit the degree to which perceptions of landscape can
                    differ (see, for example ). 
                Although it would be misleading to see the ELC as panacea for all issues relating
                    to managing the historic environment, the framework has the potential to capture
                    some of the ambiguities and entanglements of landscape. As Bender notes, landscapes refuse to be disciplined. They
                        make a mockery of the oppositions that we create between time (History) and
                        space (Geography), or between nature (Science) and culture (Social
                        Anthropology) (Bender; quoted in ). Attempts at reconstructing landscape must consider this to a degree, and in
                    particular consider ways to address multiple perceptions and valuations of
                    landscape, as well as providing affordances for multiple – and contesting -
                    interpretations of landscape. Finally, inherent in this way of seeing landscape
                    is the key element of uncertainty arising from perceptions from multiple
                    perspectives, incomplete data sources and the degree of uncertainty ever-present
                    in the interpretations of complex systems such as palaeolandscapes.
                Aspects of the ELC are clearly influenced by anthropocentric concepts of
                    landscape, but there has been debate for some years on the nature of the
                    natural, i.e. pre-human, landscapes, and their use as baselines for conservation
                    and re-wilding. Accepted concepts of woodland stability,
                    based on evidence from the fossil pollen record, have been challenged both
                    theoretically (e.g. ) and empirically as more lines of
                    evidence have been investigated (e.g. ; ). More often than not, the combination of
                    different proxies in multi-proxy analyses leads to a less clear picture, serving
                    to illustrate both the different strengths and weaknesses in the data sources
                    the true complexity of landscapes (e.g. ).
            

                Collecting data on past landscapes: Can’t see the wood for the trees or can’t
                    see the trees for the wood?
                In order to visualize a landscape at any point in the past, we require empirical
                    data on the nature of the environment at that point in time. In general,
                    archaeology has only access to snapshots of time, as made available through
                    sampling or excavation. These samples may contain traces of the past in the form
                    of organic remains (fossils), chemical or physical properties which in some way
                    reflect the nature of the environment in which they were deposited: proxy data
                    sources. For example, pollen from a tree may be blown into a lake and, as time
                    passes, subsequently be covered by more sediment (Figure
                        1). If sampled, the presence of this tree’s pollen will allow us to
                    deduce the presence of the particular tree species in the past environment of
                    the lake. By analysing and dating multiple sediment layers, the palynologist
                    (pollen analyst) can start to build a picture of changes in the prominence of
                    different species of plant in the landscape around the lake over time. The
                    proportion of pollen from different plants is, however, dependent on a large
                    number of factors (e.g. number and density of plants, plant age and health,
                    hydrology, human activity) and it is a far from simple task to create a
                    visualisation of the most probable landscape from these
                    data. By using multiple proxies, such as fossil insects and soil properties, we
                    can enhance the complexity of the picture beyond just the vegetation, but we can
                    never escape from a plurality of possible reconstructions. 
                
                    The deposition of proxy environmental evidence (e.g. pollen, plant
                        macrofossils, insect remains) in a lake. To illustrate the variability of
                        representation, the size of the arrow indicates the relative amount of
                        pollen entering the lake from different vegetation types and distances. A
                        prehistoric settlement, here represented by a tent, elevated storage hut and
                        hearth, will most likely only be detectable by the presence of small amounts
                        of charcoal from burning. The actions of the settlement’s inhabitants,
                        however, may be indirectly represented through any impacts they had on the
                        surrounding landscape. Changes in the composition of the vegetation over
                        time will be represented by changes in the fossils deposited in the lake as
                        sediments accumulate. Reading this archive allows us to reconstruct
                        environmental changes over time, although transcribing this point source to
                        spatial variation is a complex task (see text).
                    
                
                Palaeoenvironmental landscape reconstruction relies on the ability of the
                    available evidence, and the methods available to analyse it, to represent a past
                    landscape. It is largely a question of using many detailed, and often indirect,
                    pieces of information to construct a whole. Variation in theory and methodology,
                    as well as implicit variability catered for in a methodology, will allow for
                    these pieces to be put together in practically innumerable combinations.
                    Deciding which combinations produce the more probable reconstructions is not
                    easy, and has led to disagreements between ecologists and palaeoecologists, and
                    even between different groups of palaeoecologists on how the evidence represents
                    different aspects of the landscape. This is particularly well illustrated by the
                    continuing debate on the nature of mid-Holocene (roughly 6000 years ago)
                    woodlands, regarded by many as representing the last woodlands truly unaffected
                    by human activity. Until recently, the majority of palynologists agreed on these
                    having been closed canopy woodland, and more or less continuous over much of
                    Europe (see e.g. ), an interpretation which has had
                    much influence on natural/pre-industrial baseline
                    orientated conservation strategies. The ecologist Franz Vera (2000) hypothesized
                    an alternative landscape history, with a more dynamic cycle of open and closed
                    forests driven by large grazing animals, and challenged the representivity of
                    the pollen data. The evidence from palaeoentomology (fossil beetle analyses) is,
                    however, inconclusive, and there is much debate on how the fossil remains of
                    woodland insects should be interpreted . Problems
                    of representivity are common to the use of all proxy data sources, and methods
                    have been developed for mathematically translating raw data counts into broader
                    implications. In palynology (pollen analysis), there are algorithms for
                    translating fossil pollen data, through the use of modern calibration data, into
                    landscapes of probable vegetation (e.g. ; ). These methods are complex, reflecting the
                    difficulty of the task, and have the capacity to provide multiple outcomes with
                    an indication of their relative probability of being close to the truth.
                    However, 
                        all models are wrong, some are
                            useful
                        
                    , and these reconstructions should be considered as tools
                    with which to explore and understand the past rather than devices for providing
                    definitive answers. Similarly, the BugsCEP software for fossil insect analysis
                         allows users to produce no less than 16
                    different reconstruction models from the same dataset (see Figure 2 for examples). These are exported by the
                    software as bar graphs and raw data, and used in combination with a detailed
                    understanding of the ecology of the species behind the reconstruction to
                    construct a narrative, often supported by the use of photographs of equivalent
                    modern environments. 
                
                    Two of the 16 potential environmental reconstruction figures, for one
                        sample, produced by the BugsCEP fossil insect analysis software . The upper row of bars, A, uses only the
                        presence of species (essentially the alpha diversity) to calculate the
                        importance of different landscape elements in the sample's catchment. The
                        lower row, B, includes the numbers of individuals of each species, and in
                        this case suggests a higher prominence of grazing animals than A (see  for the context of this figure, where Roman
                        well deposits were used to interpret the contemporaneous landscape of
                        Sherwood Forest, UK, and compared with other sites). The choice of method is
                        up to the discretion of the user, and will depend on the context of the
                        samples, the quality of the data, and the purpose of the study. It would be
                        possible to produce a more realistic and widely understandable landscape
                        image from the results behind this figure, but this would most likely be at
                        the risk of losing the important details in the statistics.
                    
                
            

                Where did all the soil go?
                From a heritage management perspective, climate change, and especially erosion,
                    is one of the most serious threats to cultural heritage today . Sites are simply disappearing as they are washed
                    into the sea or eroded from river banks globally The Scotland's Coastal
                        Heritage at Risk project (http://scharp.co.uk/) provides numerous examples of how coastal
                        erosion is destroying sites in Scotland, as well as providing a platform for
                        community engagement in the monitoring of these sites. (see  for a broad summary of the implications of climate
                    change for cultural heritage and  for a more up to
                    date overview of the situation in the Arctic). Erosion, and the resultant
                    deposition, are physical processes that have been active throughout the history
                    of the Earth. They are, however, an often neglected component of landscape
                    change over archaeological timescales, despite having significant implications
                    for changes in the value of land and water over time. There is evidence that
                    many areas of the world have experienced major episodes of sediment movement in
                    prehistory, most likely associated with cultural activities such as
                    deforestation, the introduction of slash and burn agriculture or the deep
                    cutting plough. As a consequence, many potential upland archaeological sites
                    have been lost and many lowland sites buried under metres of sediment.
                    Similarly, the geomorphology of landscapes has changed as sediments have been
                    eroded from higher areas and deposited in lowlands or water bodies. Using modern
                    day Digital Elevation Models (DEM’s) as the basis for landscape reconstructions
                    can therefore be misleading. If one is to understand the archaeology in its
                    contemporary landscape context, a more specific understanding of past sediment
                    movements is essential. At the time of writing, no significant models
                    incorporating sediment fluxes have been produced and integrated into
                    archaeological landscape models. However, we now have the technology to
                    facilitate this and are on the verge of creating the transdisciplinary sciences
                    necessary to integrate the full range of skills required for implementation.
                    Advances in the field of deposit modelling, most often used in the
                    context of heritage management and subsurface risk assessment, may also provide
                    key insights (see  for an overview). 
            

                Visualisation platforms and landscape interpretation
                The recent development and introduction of game engines and virtual reality
                    platforms in the cultural heritage sector presently allows archaeologists to
                    visualize accurate and multi-temporal interpretations of the past. The
                    introduction and diffusion of instruments for 3D acquisition such as laser
                    scanning or image-based 3D reconstruction techniques, together with the
                    development of more powerful and user-friendly geo-database systems, makes it
                    possible to integrate and display, at different scales, all the materials
                    retrieved during an investigation together with the information obtained by the
                    specialists described above . These systems allow
                    for a deeper understanding of the relationships and dynamics which characterized
                    and determined the development of ancient landscapes and sites by potentially
                    providing researchers and scholars with powerful simulation environments for
                    testing different hypotheses and interpretations of the past. Open access,
                    multi-proxy palaeoecology database systems, such as SEAD (http://www.sead.se; ) and Neotoma (http://www.neotomadb.org) provide sources from which data could be pulled into
                    landscape modelling software. Linking in this way would not only ensure a
                    connection between visualizations and source data, but could also facilitate
                    experimentation with multiple reconstructions whilst maintaining research
                    transparency. In fact, Neotoma already includes open code and tools  that could be implemented in a GIS based model, and
                    SEAD has an API (Application programming interface) framework for providing data
                    to other systems, including Neotoma.
                Since its introduction, 3D modelling has been perceived by many archaeologists as
                    an instrument through which researchers would be forced to formulate complex
                    interrogative questions, by providing the potential for multiple solutions to
                    the problem of reconstruction . During its early
                    years, three-dimensional visualization was considered as an opportunity for
                    simulating and discussing the past by looking at data from completely new
                    perspectives 
                    . Despite these great expectations, the development of
                    this new approach in the archaeological sector was strongly limited by factors
                    such as low availability of computational resources, and lack of knowledge on
                    how to apply these new instruments to more traditional field practices.
                    Consequently, three-dimensional simulation environments were primarily adopted
                    for communicating with the general public. Museums, more than other
                    institutions, have initiated numerous experimental programs where different
                    typologies of technologies have been tested and evaluated (see https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/v-mustnet-how-museums-will-look-future
                    ). The Ename 974A project represents a pioneering example, having
                    developed an on-site virtual reality installation called TimeScope in 1997. This
                    system allowed visitors to obtain an idea of the past appearance of a
                    Benedictine abbey and an early medieval fortress located in Ename, Belgium by
                    superimposing multiple 3D interpretations of the archaeological structures on
                    top of the building foundations visible on site . 
                The diffusion of a three-dimensional visual approach in support of archaeological
                    practice and interpretation is still at an early stage. However, the exponential
                    dissemination and availability of powerful computational resources, as well as
                    new instruments for 3D recording and visualization, have allowed archaeologists
                    to start experiencing the use of three dimensional data to a larger scale.
                    Several research projects have started incorporating 3D modelling techniques, as
                    part of their archaeological practice, in order to experience the third
                    dimension for visualizing complexity rather than clarity 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    .
                Today virtual environments are used more and more as discussion spaces, where
                    interaction (Human-Human, Human-Machine) and interpretation are supported by
                    different datasets interlinked by a temporal and spatial structure. In the last
                    decade the European Community, under the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7
                    2007/2013) and currently under Horizon 2020 (2013/2020), has supported several
                    projects where 3D acquisition instruments, 3D models and 3D visualization
                    platforms have been developed and/or employed for the communication and study of
                    archaeological landscape and sites. Projects such as Arcland (http://www.arcland.eu/), 3DIcons (http://3dicons-project.eu/) and
                    Ariadne (http://www.ariadne-infrastructure.eu/) are among the many examples
                    where 3D visualizations have been discussed in relation to archaeological
                    practice.
                An early example of best practice which goes in this direction can be recognized
                    in the The Giza project. Developed by Harvard University, this project focused
                    on linking traditional archives, created in the last two centuries by different
                    teams working on the Giza Plateau, with a realistic three dimensional
                    visualisation of the site . The system
                    functions as a large 3D repository where data produced as a result of different
                    field investigation campaigns are published in relation to the three dimensional
                    structures. Virtual characters were incorporated into the platform in order to
                    study the use of the space in antiquity. Moreover, by using this visualization
                    system, researchers were able to reconstruct the chronological deposition
                    sequence of the equipment retrieved in the burials as well as recognize a number
                    of previously unnamed tombs .
                Another ground-breaking research project, where a game engine platform has been
                    developed and used to analyse the ancient landscape, is MayaArch3D (http://mayaarch3d.unm.edu/). In
                    the framework of this research activity, an online repository called QueryArch3D
                    was developed. This platform allows for the simulation of the relationship
                    between landscape and architecture by providing researchers with the capability
                    of accessing georeferenced maps, three dimensional models, and virtual
                    environments. This application makes it possible to visualize a multitude of
                    bi-dimensional as well as three-dimensional data concerning the eighth-century
                    Maya kingdom of Copan, Honduras. Through the system, users can link and
                    visualize together three-dimensional data at different levels of detail 
                    . Moreover, it is also possible to use the platform
                    to combine the analytical capabilities of Geographic Information Systems with a
                    powerful 3D visualization in order to perform real-time analyses by assembling
                    different types of dataset .
            

                Conclusions and room for improvement
                The reconstruction of past landscapes is complex, both theoretically and
                    practically, and the importance of reliable primary data and methods for
                    interpreting these cannot be overemphasized. How these reconstructions are
                    visualized has important implications for the perception of the past, not least
                    with respect to landscape management policies and in interdisciplinary
                    scientific discourse. The growth in the availability of palaeoenvironmental
                    data, coupled with more readily available topographic data and GIS modelling
                    techniques, is in the process of enabling a plethora of new approaches which may
                    use and misuse these data and reconstructions. 
                The possibility of merging and visualizing the results of different studies of
                    ancient landscapes exponentially increases the capacity of new platforms for
                    producing more realistic and complex scenarios of the past. Through the use of
                    3D model libraries, these systems have the potential to allow the rapid
                    visualization of complex ecosystems using the information provided by
                    environmental archaeologists 
                    including multiple variations originating from the same data.
                    Although there have been significant developments in the visualization of
                    different levels of certainty in urban or structural reconstructions (e.g. ), these have yet to have been successfully applied
                    to broader landscapes. However, the creation of new analysis and visualization
                    tools, as well as the capacity to import or link to more and more datasets, will
                    hopefully encourage the scientific community to consider these instruments as a
                        sandbox where all the information retrieved during a
                    landscape investigation can be visualized and interrogated at multiple levels
                    and in the same space. In this sandbox they will be able to discuss,
                    collaboratively and from multiple perspectives, new interpretations and push the
                    frontiers of integrated landscape archaeology forward. Nevertheless, the
                    relevance of visualizing woodland, a tree, or not a tree, for any point and
                    place in the past will always remain entirely dependent on the collection of
                    empirical data through field and laboratory based analyses.
            
