Title:  Introduction to the 
Volume:  012
Issue:  3
Date:  19 November 2018
Abstract:  
                
                This is the guest editors' introduction to the Digital
                        Humanities Quarterly special issue on Digital Technology in the
                    Study of the Past.
            
Full Body Text: 


                Introduction
                 Digital technology is transforming the assemblage and dissemination of
                    historical information. Museums, libraries, archives, and universities
                    increasingly modify their digital research infrastructures in order to make data
                    open and available (see ; ; ; cf ). The imminent
                    assessment and representation of historical data has admittedly challenged the
                    boundaries of historical knowledge and generated new research questions 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    . The process of reconstructing, visualizing and
                    rendering historical data has equally developed together with technology . This is the case in both academic and heritage
                    contexts and in less immediately obvious popular uses, such as the increasingly
                    significant presence and use of history within videogames . Regardless of specific context, as this collection
                    of articles shows, the process of digitally capturing and representing
                    historical data is often analogous to and determined by the digital platform
                    used. 
                 Scientific visualisation emerged in the fifteenth century as an important method
                    through which to record, to transport findings by turning them into inscriptions
                    that could be then shared and analysed .
                    Digitally reconstructing is the active part of what has been termed as a
                        knowledge representation
                    
                    . This is in effect a visual manifestation of the physical and digital
                        archive documentation, and a process of knowledge acquisition and
                        evaluation, with visualizations and reconstructions composing a
                    research method and a series of questions - a process of extracting information
                    while simultaneously developing a model . Reconstructions are occasionally 
                        frowned upon as inherently
                            inauthentic imitations of real monuments, i.e those that have survived
                            the test of time
                        
                     (cf ). While the ocularcentric
                    tradition of visual cues is dominant within humanities research 
                     more immersive platforms open up new
                    sensory possibilities. It is commonly believed that intangible artefacts, such
                    as dancing or soundscapes for example, leave no traces or evidence, meaning they
                    cannot be reproduced in their entirety (see ). However,
                    this special issue argues that the lack of evidence is in fact present in any
                    historical research, sensory or not, as western intellectual tradition has shown
                    a marked preference for vision as the figure of knowledge (see ). 
                 First conceived at the international conference Challenge
                        the Past / Diversify the Future The conference was funded by
                        Riksbankens Jubileumsfond and was a collaborative effort of the Department
                        of Conservation and the Centre for Digital Humanities (University of
                        Gothenburg), Visual Arena in Gothenburg, as well as Humlab, the Digital
                        Humanities Laboratory at the University of Umeå. The event was hosted by the
                        Centre for Critical Heritage Studies at the University of Gothenburg.
                    , individual contributions examine both the opportunities and challenges
                    that digital technology poses in the study and dissemination of the past. Five
                    articles focus on the processes that lead to visualizing/rendering intangible
                    historical data within the disciplines of classical studies, environmental
                    archaeology and historical science more generally. Intangible is often
                    defined by large initiatives (UNESCO) as the term that replaced folklore
                    as referring to aspects of cultural heritage that are non-physical, estimated,
                    incorporeal, unembodied, and disembodied. In this special issue, in using the
                    term intangible, unless otherwise stated, we mean the historically
                    invisible or complicated to render by digital means, the incomplete and the
                    intangible in cultural or environmental, social or ecological terms. 
                 Beyond reconstructions, and because of innovative digital tools,
                    visualizations/renderings for historical disciplines can, more generally, vary
                    from simple graphs to word clouds and geospatial, time-interactive maps. Early
                    digital visualisations have accordingly provided insight into aspects of urban
                    development and have facilitated critical discussions of the application of
                    digital tools within the context of museology, conservation, urban planning, or
                    the narratives of digital heritage . Early digital
                    visualizations also made evident how existing digital tools and related models
                    carry assumptions of knowledge as primarily visual, thus neglecting
                    interactivity with the user/observer or, for example, sensory data. As it
                    emerges from this special issue, current technological developments, such as
                    augmented, mixed, or even virtual reality, can inspire new modes of
                    representation that call for new scientific questions and methods/solutions. 
                 Joshua L. Mann’s paper, How Technology Means: Texts,
                        History, and Their Associated Technologies, begins from the premise
                    that technologies used to study and represent the past are not hermeneutically
                    neutral: the main question that the author aims to explain relates to the ways
                    in which associated technologies convey meaning. Mann examines textual history,
                    using biblical texts as a case study. The thrust of this study is that older,
                    future and contemporary textual technologies may capture or obscure material
                    history. The author examines and compares the non-digital book and its familiar
                    digital counterparts. Further, the article considers ways in which augmented
                    reality and virtual reality have already been used and might be used in future
                    to render historical texts. New technologies then appear to trespass the
                    boundaries of previous book technologies in capturing a text’s history. In
                    conclusion, the author makes practical suggestions in relation to reading,
                    studying, or producing digital textual objects. 
                 Helen Slaney, Anna Foka and Sophie Bocksberger’s piece, Ghosts in the Machine:a motion-capture experiment in distributed
                        reception, similarly tackles the question of digital reconstructions
                    of classical antiquity as the sensory turn in historical
                    scholarship moves beyond vision. The article concentrates on kinaesthesia, or
                    the sense of self-movement in Roman Pantomime. The article concludes that
                    kinaesthetic engagement can also contribute to formulating conceptions of the
                    ancient past, and that virtual reality is an ideal tool for fashioning this analogical
                        relationship. The objective is recreating Roman Pantomime to examine
                    how the dancers’ kinaesthetic translation of ancient data pertaining to orchēsis would be affected by the additional factor
                    of digital interaction. Motion Capture and the creation of 3D avatars of the
                    dancers is discussed thoroughly, while resulting videos enable each dance piece
                    to be analysed from any angle in the context of a virtual ancient theatre
                    environment. The authors conclude that this experiment inspired both questions
                    of a humanistic and of a technological nature. 
                 Eleni Bozia’s Reviving Classical Drama: virtual reality and
                        experiential learning in a traditional classroom discusses how a
                    scholar and a student are to perceive Classical Drama, the theatrical place, the
                    distances between the actors, the chorus, and the audience, the logistics of the
                    performance, and the cultural aspects at play. Bozia advocates the use of mixed
                    reality as a way to promote experiential learning. Mixed reality promotes
                    traditional edification methods, virtually recreating a stage, with the Magic
                    Mirror Theater, a web application designed to help students understand Classical
                    Drama. The author first makes an account of all the attempts at reviving the
                    circumstances of performance in the actual physical place; then it discusses a
                    mixed-reality environment as an ideal solution for the study of ancient drama,
                    allowing the user to be in the theatrical space, and
                    experience the performance. 
                 Claudia Sciuto, in Recording invisible proofs to compose
                        stone narratives, focuses on how the history of human-environment
                    interaction is embedded in stone. Sciuto discusses how the intangible life story
                    of an artefact is partially registered in its primary material properties and
                    its physical alteration from contact with other bodies. The article concentrates
                    on two methods: chemical imaging and portable spectroscopy; these quick and
                    non-destructive remote sensing techniques can be used to collect empirical data
                    and track production and use of stone artefacts over time. With the Mobima
                    project carried out by an interdisciplinary team of archaeologists and chemists
                    at University of Umeå, Sweden as a case-study, the author first reviews Near
                    Infrared Spectroscopy as a method for geochemical characterization of stone
                    artefacts and as a tool for provenance studies. The author concludes by making
                    an account of archaeometry as a new method with multiple purposes, from rock
                    paintings to medieval stone walls to soil composition and pedagogical training.
                    The digital tools have been adapted to the specific purpose of each study,
                    offering reliable support for understanding geologic materials and their
                    context. 
                Finally Philip I. Buckland, Nicolò Dell'Unto and Gísli Pálsson’s contribution,
                        To tree, or not to tree?: On the Empirical Basis
                        for Having Past Landscapes to Experience, provides an overview of
                    some of the complex issues involved in reconstructing and visualizing past
                    landscapes. Empirical data, as the authors argue, creates the need for
                    humanistic terminology that is borrowed by the natural sciences. The authors
                    analyse this from the perspectives of environmental archaeology, archaeological
                    theory and heritage management as well as relating this, briefly, to the broader
                    context of archaeological theory, practice and research data infrastructure. The
                    article provides a point of reference for those examining past landscapes,
                    understanding their relevance in archaeological visualisation.
                Taking into consideration that the process of digitally rendering the past,
                    indeed, ought to be documented, explicit and transparent in order to be
                    scholarly validated 
                        , all contributions describe
                    and analyse the thought processes and further activities around conceptual
                    rendering methods they have used within research projects. Contributions here
                    discuss the complexities of landscape studies (see Buckland et al. in this
                    issue); how provenance tracked and visualized may reveal past conditions and
                    uses of stone artefacts (see Sciuto in this issue); how the sensory may be
                    re-experienced and reflected upon within a virtual reality Roman pantomime
                    performance (see Slaney et al. in this issue); how conceptual 3D renderings may
                    be further implemented as an experiential learning tool in the classroom (see
                    Bozia; Slaney et al. in this issue); and the possibilities that new technologies
                    may open for the study of old texts (see Mann on biblical texts). Individual
                    contributions here focus precisely on interactive and embodied renderings of the
                    past, including attempts to experience the past rather than just gaze upon it
                    (see Slaney et al; Bozia in this issue). New forms of digital ekphrasis (see
                        ) are shaped with technology, making technology
                        good to think with, to paraphrase Levi Strauss. Visualizations appear
                    affected by our interpretative choices concerning the (often incomplete) data at
                    hand and digital technologies with limiting rendering capacities. 
                Contributors and editors agree that regular and canonised assessment of the
                    processes of visualization/rendering the past is deemed pivotal for any
                    scholarly activity . Visualizations evidently can
                    lead to novel epistemological questions through the process of making, the
                    real-life applications for pedagogical and public dissemination purposes, and
                    the feedback on what technology can and cannot do at this moment. This
                    collection of articles then, rather than concentrating on the properties of
                    digital representations as such, encourages historians to think in terms of
                    transduction, the conversion of energy from one form to another. Ultimately, new
                    possibilities can be found for creative research and expressions which integrate
                    affective history with more traditional modes of understanding . To grasp the importance of how technology may
                    interrupt the flow of information, the following articles target visualizations
                    in order to discuss technology as fragmented in its mediation of an already
                    fragmented past. In this light, the ultimate aim of this collection is to
                    reflect upon the validity of technology as a digital research infrastructure for
                    the humanities where ideas may be realized, communicating the past
                    to a large and diverse audience and inspiring new questions in the process of
                    making. With this issue we aim at foregrounding the role of digital, historical
                    visualizations. This research strand takes as its starting point the digital as
                    a resource to formulate a critique of our understanding of the past. 
            
