Title:  Coca-Cola: An Icon of the American Way of Life.
                    An Iterative Text Mining Workflow for Analyzing Advertisements in Dutch
                    Twentieth-Century Newspapers
Volume:  011
Issue:  4
Date:  8 January 2018
Abstract:  
                
                This article analyses advertisements to shed light on the ways in which the
                    Coca-Cola Company tried to shape the Dutch perception of an American way of
                    life, and by extension provided the discursive building blocks for the
                    construction of a mental map of America. Since the National Library of the
                    Netherlands (KB) digitized its newspaper collection, we could analyze newspapers
                    using both computational and traditional means. The central question this
                    article addresses is: Did Coca-Cola advertisements in Dutch newspapers
                    communicate themes that represented the American way of life? Using two separate
                    workflows, we demonstrate how we combined computational and traditional methods
                    in an iterative and transparent manner. These workflows are systematic
                    descriptions of how we used computational tools to answer this paper’s central
                    research question.
            
Full Body Text: 

                1. Introduction
                In 1938, the American newspaper editor William Allen White famously described
                    Coca-Cola as the 
                        sublimated essence of all
                            that America stands for — a decent thing, honestly made, universally
                            distributed, conscientiously improved with the years
                        
                    . Ever since, scholars have described Coca-Cola as the quintessential
                    representation of American values, ideas, and practices, or rather as the
                    American way of life. For many European businesses, states, and consumer groups
                    the American way of life was a model they sought to mimic . This model based on cultural ideas,
                    policies, and practices emerged onto the European market in the twentieth
                    century alongside American businesses and American consumer goods . According to Richard Pells, in the eyes of
                    European consumers no other 
                        export served as a more potent
                            symbol of the American way of life than Coke
                        
                    . Greg Castillo, however, rightly points out that scholars should not
                    approach American products, such as Coca-Cola, as ironclad vehicles of an
                        American way of life. He argues that they need to be studied as
                        indeterminate signifiers within their local context separated from
                    their original U.S. context . This is
                    precisely what this article sets out to do: to analyze to what extent Coca-Cola
                    functioned as a symbol of an American way of life within the Netherlands. 
                The specific interpretation of an iconic brand such as Coca-Cola within a
                    national context can, according to Douglas Holt, reveal the 
                        collective anxieties and desires of
                            a nation
                        
                    . Mark Pendergrast, in other words, underlines that the local
                    interpretation of Coca-Cola has functioned as 
                        the best barometer of the
                            relationship with the US
                        
                    . Hence, Dutch newspaper discourse not only offers a lens on the local
                    framing of Coca-Cola and its symbolic connotations but also on the position of
                    Dutch consumers vis-à-vis the United States.
                The United States had a strong cultural, economic, and political presence in the
                    Netherlands throughout the twentieth century. The Dutch perception of this
                    American presence vacillated between bouts of anti-Americanism and
                    pro-Americanism. In the interwar period (1919-1939), as American cultural
                    products such as movies appeared in the Netherlands, Dutch interest in American
                    culture grew, despite anti-Americanism voiced by intellectuals such as Johan
                    Huizinga 
                    
                    . After the Second World War, 
                        the attention of the Dutch
                            population was actively focused on America, the new model
                            country
                        
                     (see also: ; ). Especially when it came to new
                    consumption patterns, scholars point out that the Dutch perceived America as a
                    guiding country 
                    
                    . The Vietnam War incited a new kind of
                    anti-Americanism in the Netherlands. The U.S. politics of war mustered up fierce
                    protests in the late 1960s and early 70s 
                    
                    . Amid anti-American protests, youth did
                    not 
                        reject American mass culture, even
                            as they attacked the excesses of consumerism
                        
                    . This illustrates that Dutch feelings of anti-Americanism were not
                    unequivocal, rather they were marred by ambivalence. Little is known, however,
                    about how American consumer goods, such as Coca-Cola, contributed to the Dutch
                    attitude toward the United States. 
                We analyzed advertisements to shed light on the ways in which the Coca-Cola
                    Company shaped the Dutch perception of an American way of life, and by extension
                    provided the discursive building blocks for the construction of a mental map of
                    America . Since the National Library of the
                    Netherlands (KB) digitized its newspaper collection, we could analyze newspapers
                    using both computational and traditional means. This archive contains over
                        600,000 digitized newspaper editions between 1890 and 1990. Or 76,201,582
                        documents, which comprise articles, advertisements, personal announcements,
                        and captioned illustrations. Advertisements provide a valuable source
                    of information which 
                        fully reflects the spirit of the
                            past, [as it] indicates development of certain industries, but also
                            covers all aspects of cultural and social life
                        
                    . Even though the principal motivation of advertisers was to sell
                    products, as Roland Marchand points out 
                        advertisers also communicated
                            broader assumption about social values
                        
                    . One of these social values was 
                        consumption as a way of
                            life
                        
                    . Scholars describe the ethic of consumption as constitutive of the
                    American way of life 
                    . Therefore, the central question this
                    article addresses is: in what ways did Coca-Cola advertisements in Dutch
                    newspapers communicate themes that represented the American way of life?
            

                2. Computational Tools for Cultural Historians
                The application of computational methods in humanities research has led to fierce
                    debates. These frequently focus on the practice of 
                        distant reading
                        
                    , which denotes reading 
                        the archive from a
                            distance
                        
                     and more specifically 
                        the automated search for
                            patterns
                        
                     in vast corpora of text. In these debates, we identify three groups of
                    scholars. One group heralds the merits or the bright sight
                    of distant reading (e.g. ; ); whereas another warns against the
                        siren call of such methods (e.g. ; ). Most
                    scholars, however, offer a more nuanced perspective and contend that we have to
                    move beyond the false dichotomy between traditional and computational methods.
                    They argue that computational methods are an addition to, not a replacement of
                    traditional, humanistic interpretation (e.g. ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). This is a view we share. Researchers can achieve
                        synergistic interaction by 
                        ‘rapid shuttling’ between
                            quantitative information and hermeneutic close reading
                        
                    . Moreover, we concur with Matthew Kirschenbaum: Digital Humanities is 
                        work (…). So let’s talk
                            about this work, in action, this actually existing work
                        
                    .
                 Within the field of cultural history, relatively few examples of actual digital
                    historical research have appeared 
                    . This is surprising since analyzing
                    texts is among cultural historians’ core business. Using words like
                        potential,
                    promise, and possibilities to address the prospects of digital
                    techniques, Cameron Blevins maintains, historians talk the talk, but rarely walk
                    the walk. Therefore, he urges historians to practice what they preach and start
                        doing digital historical research .
                    Others add that they should do so in an explicit manner: 
                        the creation of, interaction with,
                            and interpretation of data must become more integral to historical
                            writing
                        
                    .
                This article takes these pleas to heart. By means of two separate workflows, we
                    demonstrate how we combined computational and traditional methods in an
                    iterative and transparent manner. These workflows are systematic descriptions of
                    how we used computational tools to answer this paper’s central research
                    question. Workflow A (Figure 1) describes how n-gram analysis and full-text
                    searching are apt methods to construct a sub-corpus from a larger corpus of
                    textual data. Used in combination with close reading of specific documents,
                    these methods guide the construction of a sub-corpus. Subsequently, workflow B
                    (Figure 2) lays out how we explored a sub-corpus using AntConc, a corpus
                    analysis toolkit. Workflow B offers various strands of analytical information
                    derived from distant reading and shows how they directed close reading. In
                    answering the research question, we constantly moved back and forth between
                    these modes of analysis. 
                
                    Workflow A: constructing a sub-corpus
                    
                
                
                    Workflow B: analyzing a sub-corpus
                    
                
            

                3. Workflow A: Constructing a Sub-Corpus of Coca-Cola Advertisements
                Before being able to answer whether advertisements linked Coca-Cola to an
                    American way of life, it is necessary to answer the following questions. Did the
                    Coca-Cola Company advertise Coca-Cola in Dutch newspapers? If so, when and how
                    frequently? Answering these kinds of descriptive questions has changed
                    considerably with the advent of n-gram viewers and full-text searching as
                    instruments to query digitized archives. Researchers can now use single or
                    strings of keywords to trace specific words or concepts without having to
                    manually browse through the archive to find them (e.g. ; ). 
                 In our research the use of an n-gram viewers served two principal functions.
                    First, it helped to quickly locate specific words in a corpus, which aided the
                    construction of our sub-corpus. By inputting keywords in an n-gram viewer, the
                    tool produced an instant overview of the frequency of words in the corpus
                    relative to the total number of words in one year within the corpus. The graphs
                    generated by n-gram viewers enabled us to compare and trace n-grams to pinpoint
                    continuities and discontinuities in language. This made the mapping of ideas,
                    practices, and products within digitized sources more comprehensive and
                    rigorous. 
                The KB n-gram viewer offered a quick way to establish whether and when Dutch
                    newspapers wrote about Coca-Cola.
                        http://politicalmashup.nl/ The visualization produced by the
                    KB n-gram viewer (Figure 3) displays the occurrence of the n-grams
                        Coca-Cola, Coca Cola, and Cola. The N-gram viewer
                        does not represent the complete corpus, for instance, 1-grams that were in
                        the corpus less than two times – presumably frequently
                        OCR-errors – are not included.  Figure 3 shows that Coca-Cola
                    first appeared in this corpus in 1928. The digitized newspaper corpus does
                        not contain all newspapers, and the digitized newspapers contain frequent
                        OCR errors. Therefore, it is difficult to ascertain within 100% certainty
                        that this is actually the first mention of Coca-Cola. 
                    Thereafter, newspapers spent relatively little attention to the caramel-colored
                    beverage. After the Second World War, the number of publications steadily rose,
                    and then remained stable until 1974 after which Coca-Cola decreased and
                        Coca Cola sharply increased. Cola increased in tandem with
                        Coca Cola, which coincided with the growing popularity of soft drinks
                    in the Netherlands. In 1958, soft drink consumption in the Netherlands was ten
                    liters per capita. By 1968, this number had drastically increased up to fifty
                    liters per capita . In short, this graph
                    shows when and how often newspapers wrote about Coca-Cola.
                 Secondly, we used the KB n-gram viewer to compare the relative occurrence of
                    different consumer goods, which added context to the prevalence of Coca-Cola
                    (cf. ). For example, the visualization
                    (Figure 4) of the n-grams koffie (coffee) and
                            bier (beer) shows that coverage of these consumer
                    goods eclipsed that of Coca-Cola. This suggests that Coca-Cola was not a staple
                    good, whereas beer and coffee were. 
                 The information gathered from the visualizations produced by the KB n-gram
                    viewer necessitated critical interpretation. First, this particular viewer does
                    not offer the option to distinguish between colonial and non-colonial Dutch
                    newspapers, nor can users discriminate articles from advertisements.
                        Unlike the website www.delpher.nl,
                        which does allow users to differentiate between articles and
                        advertisements. Put differently, from this visualization alone, we
                    could not determine whether Coca-Cola appeared in advertisements, articles, or
                    both. Secondly, the KB erroneously digitized numerous newspapers editions twice,
                    most notably the popular Dutch newspaper De
                        Telegraaf between 1970 and 1978. This heavily skews the n-gram
                    visualization from the 1970s onwards. To overcome these objections, we turned to
                    full-text searching to further refine our sub-corpus. 
                
                    N-grams Coca-Cola, Coca Cola, and Cola
                        http://kbkranten.politicalmashup.nl/#q/coca-cola|coca
                        cola|cola
                    
                
                
                    N-gram Coca-Cola, Coca Cola, Koffie, and Bier
                        http://kbkranten.politicalmashup.nl/#q/coca-cola|coca
                            cola|koffie|bier
                    
                
                
                    3.1 Full-text searching 
                    After roughly establishing when and how often newspapers mentioned Coca-Cola,
                        we turned to full-text searching to assemble a sub-corpus of Coca-Cola
                        advertisements. We used the text mining tool Texcavator to query the
                        digitized newspaper corpus. This tool was developed as part of the research
                        project Translantis 
                        
                        . Using this tool, we filtered results based on
                        metadata such as article type (advertisement, article, personal
                        announcement, and captioned illustration), newspaper type (regional,
                        colonial, and national), periodization, and newspaper title. Furthermore, we
                        used wildcards, Boolean operators, and fuzzy matching to improve the
                        relevant number of hits associated with a query . As such, full-text searching enabled a more extensive
                        and advanced way of mapping the corpus than the n-gram viewer was able to
                            do. Unfortunately, this tool is based on the same faulty corpus as
                            the KB n-gram viewer. For the following steps, we first exported the
                            sub-corpus and removed the duplicate advertisements using a Python
                            script. 
                    
                     The first step in locating Coca-Cola advertisements involved determining
                        whether Coca-Cola actually advertised in Dutch national and regional
                        newspapers. Searching for Coca-Cola yielded numerous advertisements.
                        These were not only advertisements for Coca-Cola, but also for the soft
                        drink brands Fanta and Sprite. The Coca-Cola Company also produced these
                        drinks and was therefore mentioned. Moreover, the textual information
                            in advertisement was not always recognized as such during the
                            digitization of the newspapers. As a result, the recall of the querying
                            software is sub-optimal, i.e. instances in which the word Coca-Cola was
                            part of the image were more difficult to find by full-text
                            querying. Since we were only interested in the role of Coca-Cola,
                        we excluded these by altering our search query. Resulting in the
                            following query: +(“coca-cola” “coca cola”) -(“fanta” OR
                            “sprite”). We relied on probes of close reading to improve our
                        search query, which corroborates the interdependence between close and
                        distant reading. 
                     The refined search query found 2,905 advertisements in regional and national
                        newspapers published between 1890 and 1990. In the same period, 4,517
                        advertisements contained Cola without mentioning
                            Coca-Cola. +(“cola”) -(“coca-cola” “coca cola” “sprite”
                            “fanta”). This demonstrates that Coca-Cola advertisements formed
                        a large portion (39.1%) of the advertisements for Cola beverages.
                            (2,905 advertisements / 7,422 Cola advertisements) * 100 ≈ 39.1
                        Advertisements for Coca-Cola (n = 2,905) and Cola drinks — both Coca-Cola
                        and other brands — (n = 7,422) formed only a small portion of all the
                        digitized newspaper advertisements (n = 18,645,511); only 0,016% contained
                            Coca-Cola and 0,040% Cola. This shows that Coca-Cola was
                        the most dominant Cola brand, but in relation to the overall advertising
                        corpus the ads for Coca-Cola formed a relatively small portion.
                     The timelines in Figure 5 show the absolute and relative annual frequency of
                        Coca-Cola advertisements. The relative frequency expresses the number
                            of Coca-Cola advertisements per 100,000 advertisements.  In order
                        to compare the proportion — and thus significance — of Coca-Cola
                        advertisements between periods, we normalized the absolute frequency of
                        Coca-Cola to the total number of advertisements in the corpus. These
                        timelines show that the first advertisements appeared during the 1928
                        Olympics in Amsterdam when the Coca-Cola Company launched the beverage in
                        the Netherlands . This is the
                            first advertisement in this particular digitized corpus. OCR problems
                            might have obstructed the discovery of possible earlier advertisements.
                         Figure 5 also demonstrates that after 1929 the number of Coca-Cola
                        advertisements dwindled, and started to grow again around 1950. From the
                        1960s onwards, the relative number of Coca-Cola advertised stayed relatively
                        stable (green line) while the absolute number of advertisements (blue line)
                        mushroomed. These peaks in absolute frequency correlate with a general
                        increase of advertisements in the digitized newspaper corpus, which rose
                        from 163,666 in 1960 to 275,585 advertisements in 1980. After normalization,
                        these peaks slimmed down and suggest that the proportion of Coca-Cola
                        advertisements within the total corpus of advertisement did not change
                        substantially. 
                    Contextualizing these results by close reading shows that the majority of
                        advertisements in the 1970s consisted of job ads by the Coca-Cola Company or
                        advertisements authored by others, such as supermarket chains. The
                            presence of job ads is indicated by the occurrence of words such as ‘job
                            interview’ (sollicitatie*, n = 463), experience
                                (ervaring, n = 260), wage (salaris,
                            n = 181), and education (opleiding, n =
                            170). Even though this is an interesting find, the focus here is
                        on how the Coca-Cola Company advertised Coca-Cola. Close readings of
                        advertisements in the other periods exhibited that the majority of
                        advertisements in the sub-corpus were indeed advertisements by the Coca-Cola
                        Company. For this reason, the following analysis will focus on a sub-corpus
                        of Coca-Cola advertisements published between 1928 and 1970. In the next
                        workflow, we show how we analyzed this sub-corpus of Coca-Cola
                        advertisements. 
                    
                        Absolute frequency (blue) and relative frequency (green) of
                                Coca-Cola and Coca Cola in Dutch newspapers
                        
                    
                
            

                4. Workflow B: Analyzing Coca-Cola Advertisements 
                The analysis underlying this workflow consisted of three steps. First, we set out
                    to establish whether the Coca-Cola Company explicitly linked Coca-Cola to the
                    United States. Next, we used AntConc to discern two central themes in Coca-Cola
                    advertisements. Lastly, we examined to what extent these themes signified an
                    American way of life.
                
                     4.1 How American was Coca-Cola? 
                    We looked at the co-occurrence of references to the United States and
                        Coca-Cola to determine whether the Coca-Cola Company related its leading
                        drink to the United States. When calculating the frequency of these
                        co-occurrences, we used context words and a context horizon — two
                        functionalities offered by AntConc. Context words are words that must appear
                        within a set distance — a context horizon — to the search word. We set this
                        distance to ten words to the right and ten to the left of a search word. In
                        our case the context words included different ways of referring to the
                        United States as expressed by the search query: coca?cola. The
                            context words were ameri?a*, vereenigde staten,
                                verenigde staten, usa, u.s.a., and united
                                states.
                    
                    We used context words and a context horizon for two reasons. First, the OCR
                        software did not always correctly compartmentalize the advertisements in the
                        newspaper corpus during digitization. Especially in the case of classified
                        ads, the software grouped multiple ads as one single advertisement . There are instances where Coca-Cola and
                            America appeared in the actual newspapers in two separate
                        advertisements, whereas after digitization, they were indexed as one single
                        advertisement. A context horizon required the search word and the context
                        words to be in close proximity, which reduced faulty results produced by
                        composite advertisements in which the search word and context words would
                        often be further apart. 
                    Secondly, the co-occurrence of two words does not necessarily indicate a
                        relationship between them; it merely suggests the possibility of a
                        relationship. By setting a context horizon, we only looked for references to
                        America in the proximity of Coca-Cola. The proximity we selected is a
                        good indicator of a semantic relationship between words .
                    Using the context words and the context horizon, AntConc yielded not a single
                        document in which Coca-Cola and a reference to the United States
                        co-occurred. As this was an unanticipated result, we established whether
                            coca-cola co-occurred with america in advertisements
                        without being in each other’s proximity. This was the case in fifty-one
                        advertisements. We did a close reading of these advertisements, which
                        corroborated that the Coca-Cola Company did not explicitly advertise
                        Coca-Cola as an American product. It also confirmed that most of the
                        co-occurrences resulted from grouped advertisements, or from advertisements
                        in which the words were unrelated. This verified the advantages of setting a
                        context horizon and using context words. 
                    A full-text search for the phrase American Cola in the
                        entire corpus of advertisements produced sixty-six results.
                                +(amerikaanse cola
                            amerikaansche cola
                            american cola
                            cola uit amerika). Close examination of these articles
                        showed that from 1964 onwards, retailers and producers other than the
                        Coca-Cola Company occasionally presented Colas as American cola. For
                        instance, the American brand Royal Crown specifically branded its drinks as
                            real American Cola.
                            Royal Crown Cola advertisement,” Limburgsch Dagblad, December 20, 1966.
                        This shows that other brands explicitly promoted their Cola as American,
                        while the Coca-Cola Company refused to explicitly present its cola as an
                        American cola.
                    Overall, searching for co-occurrences offered an inkling of possible trends
                        in the corpus, in this case that the Coca-Cola Company did not explicitly
                        associate Coca-Cola with America or the United States. Moreover, these
                        searches also ruled out that advertisers used the phrase the American way
                            of life. If Coca-Cola advertisements depicted an American way of
                        life, or referred to the United States, they did so in implicit terms or
                        through visual content.
                
                
                    4.2 A Symbolic Depiction of an American Way of Life 
                    In the next step of the analysis, we examined whether Coca-Cola
                        advertisements included themes that might symbolize an American way of life.
                        For this purpose, we used AntConc’s clustering, concordancing, collocation,
                        and word frequency functionalities. We used clustering to detect common
                        phrases that contain specific keywords. Collocation was used to look for
                        words that co-occurred within a specified context horizon . We looked for collocates within a
                        window span of five words to the left and five to the right, and a minimum
                        collocate frequency of ten. We did not use the MI-score that is able to
                        calculate the strength of the collocation as it is not very useful for
                        analyzing advertisements, since these tend to be relatively short. AntConc’s
                        concordancing option allowed us to quickly determine the context in which
                        the discovered words and phrases appeared. Moreover, we turned to the word
                        frequency functionality for a list of all the words and their frequencies
                        within the corpus. 
                     In order to keep track of possible changes within advertising discourse, we
                        divided the sub-corpus of Coca-Cola advertisements into four ten-year
                        periods: 1928-1937 (n = 220), 1938-1947 (n = 53), 1948-1957 (n = 372), and
                        1958-1967 (n = 414). Collocation analysis demonstrated that the relatively
                        small set of advertisements between 1938 and 1947 contained no collocates
                        that were of historical relevance. Therefore, our analysis focused on
                        1928-1937, 1948-1957, and 1958-1967. See Appendix A for a list of the
                            collocates.
                     From the list of collocates from all three periods, we discerned two themes:
                        the drink’s international and local connotation of the drink, and
                        Coca-Cola’s refreshing and invigorating taste. 
                
                
                     4.3 Coca-Cola: Not an American, but a Glocal Brand 
                    The first element in Coca-Cola advertisement was the international character
                        of the drink, as expressed by the following words: world,
                            countries, and international.
                            wereld, landen, and
                                    internationale. Advertisements in the
                        interwar period put more emphasis on this theme, as evinced by the higher
                        relative frequency of these words in this period. Figure 6 shows how the
                        international aspect of Coca-Cola appeared during its introduction in the
                        Netherlands in 1928 and 1929, and then virtually disappeared from
                        advertisements until the 1950s. When the drink re-appeared in the 1950s the
                        international aspect more clearly was part of Coca-Cola’s brand identity. As
                        early as 1929, one advertisement read: Coca-Cola quickly conquered the
                            entire world. In Europe, Coca-Cola is the most beloved drink in all the
                            trendsetting places.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Volk, June 3, 1929. Coca-Cola veroverde spoedig de gehele wereld. In
                                    Europa, is Coca-Cola nu de meest geliefde drank in alle
                                    toonaangevende plaatsen. After 1929, the
                        connotation to the brand’s global popularity seems to have disappeared from
                        advertisements. It is important to keep in mind that the number of
                        advertisements between 1930 and 1950 was relatively low, which explains why
                        references to the drink’s international character might not have been found
                        through querying. In the 1950s — when the corpus also contains a sizeable
                        number of ads — internationalism re-emerged as part of Coca-Cola’s brand
                        identity. Throughout the 1950s advertisements continued to highlight the
                        global character of the drink.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Vrije Volk, June 7, 1952.
                        Advertisers repeatedly mentioned the number of countries and continents in
                        which the Coca-Cola Company sold the drink.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Vrije Volk, June 10, 1959.  This
                        number increased from seventy-eight in 1929, to more than a hundred
                        countries in 1959.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Vrije Volk, June 25, 1959. The
                        emphasis in ads on this increase helped to establish the idea with Dutch
                        consumers that the global popularity of Coca-Cola was growing.
                    
                        Absolute frequency (blue) and relative (green) frequency of the
                            international aspect of Coca-Cola
                        
                    
                    In addition to the drink’s global character, advertisers tied the drink to
                        the Netherlands. They did so by mentioning the Dutch bottling companies in
                        advertisements. Words such as bottler,
                        to bottle,
                        Amsterdam,
                        Schiedam,
                        Scheveningen, and local situated Coca-Cola within a local
                                    context.bottelaar,
                                    bottelen, Amsterdam,
                                    Schiedam, Scheveningen,
                            and plaatselijke. After the Second World War,
                        the Coca-Cola Company allowed local Dutch bottling plants to import
                        Coca-Cola’s trademarked syrup, which bottlers mixed with local mineral water
                            . The names of towns that housed
                        the bottling plants appeared in small print at the bottom of advertisements.
                        The appearance of their names in these ads connected Coca-Cola to particular
                        Dutch places. See for instance: Coca-Cola
                                advertisement,
                            Leeuwarder Courant, July 18, 1929; Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Vrije Volk, July 19, 1963.
                        Advertisers further emphasized the local nature of franchises when
                        they claimed that everywhere bottling and distribution of Coca-Cola is a
                            local enterprise.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, October 16,
                            1954. In 1955, De Tijd wrote that
                            the Coke bottle is not only known all over the world, it is also of
                            local importance, which further underlines the entanglement of the
                        global and local.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            De Tijd, January 15, 1955.
                    
                    Advertisers not only mentioned the locations of bottling plants, they also
                        linked Coca-Cola to Dutch towns, such as Scheveningen, Amsterdam, and
                        Leeuwarden. In 1928, the regional newspaper Leeuwarder
                            Courant wrote that after its global success, Dutch consumers
                        could now also buy a Coke in Leeuwarden.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Leeuwarder Courant, July 18, 1929.
                        After opening a new factory in Amsterdam in 1961, an ad in De Telegraaf announced that Amsterdam and
                            Coca-Cola belonged together!
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            De Telegraaf, April 17, 1961. These
                        ads illustrate how Coca-Cola symbolized the entwinement of the global with
                        the local. The association between the global and the local is what Roland
                        Robertson labels glocalization, the interplay between
                        local developments and currents of globalization . Advertisements presented Coca-Cola as a
                        global, international brand somewhat tailored to the local context. 
                    The Coca-Cola Company acquainted many Dutch consumers in the 1950s and 1960s
                        with a product with a glocal brand identity, which made
                            glocalization one of the ideas that traveled alongside with
                        Coca-Cola to the Netherlands. Perhaps the glocalizing ability
                        of American brands, such as Coca-Cola, explains why in the eyes of scholars
                        and consumers Americanization became a code word for globalization 
                        . The Coca-Cola Company did not explicitly
                        relate Coca-Cola to the United States in advertisements. However, the
                        references to the drink’s glocal character can be read as
                        uniquely American. Ruth Oldenziel alludes to this particular feature by
                        describing America as having the 
                            uncanny ability (…) to be
                                everywhere and nowhere at the same time: omnipresent globally, but
                                territorially deterritorialized
                            
                        . The link to the United States was thus not so much an explicit
                        geographical reference, but rather a more implicit connection to symbolisms
                        and affects associated with the United States. The glocalizing
                        ability of prominent American brands such as Coca-Cola also explains how
                        consumers equated the process of Americanization with globalization.
                
                
                     4.4 A Refreshing and Invigorating Taste for Everybody 
                    The second theme that dominated Coca-Cola advertisements was its taste. This
                        became most explicit in advertisements published between 1928-1937 and
                        1958-1967. 
                     In the interwar period, advertisements described Coca-Cola’s taste as
                            fine, delicious and distinct. Collocates to
                                taste: fijnen (n =
                            56), heerlijken (n = 44), and
                                    aparten (n = 41).
                        Other frequent characteristics of the drink included: refreshing, bubbling,
                        and invigorating. Word (absolute / relative frequency): verfris* (144 / 65,44), fris* (16 / 7.27), verkwik* (16 / 7.27), sprankel* (11 / 5), and parel*’ (25 / 11.36). Soft
                        drinks contained bubbles that produced a tactile sensation, which
                        advertisers connected to refreshment. This link was expressed in the
                        following slogans: Coca-Cola bubbles in your glass,
                        Coca-Cola is deliciously refreshing, and Coca-Cola’s fizzes and
                            bubbles.
                            Coca-Cola parelt in uw glas (6),
                                    Coca-cola is heerlijk
                                    verfrisschend (6), and Coca-cola parelt en bruist (4).
                    
                     Overall, the description of Coca-Cola’s taste did not seem to change
                        drastically between the two periods. Not surprisingly, in both periods the
                        Coca-Cola Company presented their product as delicious and one of a kind.
                        There was, however, another striking characteristic associated with
                        Coca-Cola’s taste: its ability to refresh and invigorate. In the period
                        1958-1967, invigorating collocated significantly to Coca-Cola
                        and taste. Collocate to taste: verkwikking (26 / 5.90). Collocate to
                                Coca-Cola: verkwikkende (10 / 2.7).  Furthermore, the
                        relative frequency of words denoting invigoration accrued in this period,
                        which substantiates a discursive shift in the Coca-Cola Company’s branding
                        strategy. The ads linked the drink’s refreshing bubbles to invigoration:
                            how invigorating that tingling sparkle.
                            Hoe verkwikkend, die tintelende
                                    sprankeling in Coca-Cola
                                advertisement,
                            De Telegraaf, August 14, 1959. 
                    
                    In addition to the drink’s ability to stimulate the consumer, the Coca-Cola
                        Company claimed the drink could — rather paradoxically — also relax the
                        consumer. In one of the first Coca-Cola advertisements in Dutch newspapers,
                        Coca-Cola was associated with leisure time.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Volk, July 22, 1929. This theme
                        continued to pop up throughout the years. In 1954, for instance, an advert
                        claimed that the beverage would provide rest, relaxation, and new
                            energy.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Limburgsch Dagblad, November, 12,
                            1954.
                    
                    By focusing on relaxation, the advertisements also highlighted its
                        counterpart: stress. The advertisements chiefly situated stress within the
                        context of people at work in the office or homemakers doing their chores.
                        Figure 7 shows how advertisements instructed consumers to stop rushing
                            for a minute! Your nerves will quiet down and all tension will
                            disappear.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Vrije Volk, July 26, 1957; Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Vrije Volk, July 13, 1956.
                    
                    Moreover, Coca-Cola advertisements informed Dutch consumers that stress and
                        relaxation were part of a modern lifestyle. The Coca-Cola Company claimed
                        that the drink’s ability to stimulate led to its popularity and turned it
                        into a drink cherished by modern people.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Volk, August 16, 1928. The
                        modern businessman and homemaker drank a refreshing bottle of coke during
                        breaks to alleviate stress. This association between products and an urban
                        and modern lifestyle, Marchand shows, blossomed in the United States in the
                        1930s in cigarette advertisements .
                        Our results show that the Coca-Cola Company actively sought to evoke similar
                        depictions of such a lifestyle, in which consumption was an integral to
                        being a modern consumer.
                    Another distinctive element of the modern consumer was that both males and
                        female could drink Coca-Cola whenever and with whomever.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            De Waarheid, January 14, 1950. 
                        Moreover, ads explicitly pointed out that the sparkling refreshment
                        and unchanging quality caused people of all ages and in all settings
                        to consume the drink.
                            Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            De Tijd, April 19, 1952. Phrases
                        such as during work, during dinner, during sports and
                            play, and drank by young and old demonstrate that the
                        Coca-Cola Company set out to make the drink accessible for everyone.
                            onder het werk, bij het eten, bij sport en spel, and voor jong en oud. Ads for
                        Coca-Cola presented Dutch consumer with a vision of a modern consumer
                        society in which everybody could imbibe the same consumer goods. 
                    This image is what scholars such as Richard Pells, T. Jackson Lears, and
                        Charles McGovern describe as an American way of life. Additionally, Victoria
                        de Grazia argues that many American products available in Europe focused on
                        the democratization of consumer goods .
                        Our analysis shows that Coca-Cola advertisements in the Netherlands also
                        emphasized this aspect. 
                    By means of advertisements, the Coca-Cola Company injected specific elements
                        into the Dutch public consciousness that shaped how the Dutch viewed the
                        American way of life. These elements also resonated within Dutch advertising
                        discourse for other American products, such as cigarettes . This commonality between different kinds of
                        American consumer goods strengthened Coca-Cola’s function as an icon of the
                        American way of life. Further research into different consumer goods is
                        needed to see how they collaboratively contributed to the Dutch perception
                        of the American way of life, or America in general.
                    
                        Coca-Cola advertisement,
                            Het Vrije Volk, July 26, 1957
                        
                    
                
            

                5. Conclusion
                This article has shown that the Coca-Cola Company advertised Coca-Cola in
                    newspapers between 1928 and 1970, with the majority of advertisements published
                    between 1950 and 1965. In these advertisements, Coca-Cola was not explicitly
                    presented as an American brand. Coca-Cola’s link to the United States was much
                    more implicit. Using corpus analysis tools, we have established that an
                    important feature in Coca-Cola’s brand identity was its taste and its
                    international character. Dutch Coca-Cola advertisements unmistakably linked the
                    taste of Coca-Cola to refreshment and invigoration. Furthermore, instead of
                    presenting itself as an American brand, the Coca-Cola Company accentuated
                    Coca-Cola’s international and local character, a phenomenon described as
                        glocalization. 
                 While ads for Coca-Cola never explicitly mentioned the American way of life,
                    they exposed Dutch consumers to a lifestyle characterized by consumption; a
                    lifestyle often described as an American way of life. Ads provided Dutch
                    consumers with a more symbolic representation of the lifestyle characterized by
                    consumption. The expression of an American way of life in Coca-Cola
                    advertisements manifested on two different levels. First, the advertisements
                    depicted a modern, urban lifestyle — a simulacrum of the burgeoning American
                    consumer society at the time. The second expression of an American way of life
                    took shape in the way advertisers addressed consumers. Consumers in Coca-Cola
                    advertisements could be either male or female, and they were depicted being
                    engaged in activities of leisure or work. Coca-Cola represented elements of an
                    American way of life while at the same time its global spread disassociated the
                    product from its actual origins. This fits within what Rob Kroes calls a
                    resemanticization of reality in which American life is turned into an 
                        imaginary realm to be experienced
                            by those who bought a product
                        
                    . 
                 Further analyses of advertisements of other consumer goods can shed light on the
                    ways in which advertising discourse as a whole shaped Dutch perceptions of the
                    United States and the American way of life. Moreover, by incorporating
                    newspapers articles, researchers can examine how advertising discourse
                    corresponded with public debates on consumer goods, consumerism, and the United
                    States. This kind of comparative analysis has become more feasible with the
                    availability of computational tools and the proliferation of digitized archives. 
                In addition to answering a cultural-historical research question, this article
                    has demonstrated the practical implications of combining traditional and
                    computational methods. By means of two workflows, we have shown how we first
                    constructed a sub-corpus of Coca-Cola advertisements, which we subsequently
                    analyzed using the corpus linguistic toolkit AntConc. 
                The workflows highlighted how working with computational tools is not a linear
                    process but requires going back-and-forth between generating output,
                    interpreting output, and a close reading of the sources. This results in a
                    combination of distant and close reading that contextualizes results as well as
                    checks against corpus inadequacies 
                    . When applied in this manner, employing
                    computational tools leads to the discovery of patterns in the dataset, without
                    missing 
                        the power of the
                            particular
                        
                    —i.e. an optimal interaction between traditional and computational methods
                        . Further research has to show what can be
                    gained from adding other computational tools to our workflows, such as
                    distributional semantics for tracing historical concept . For more on distributional semantics to trace
                        historical concepts over time see: https://www.esciencecenter.nl/project/mining-shifting-concepts-through-time-shico.
            

                Appendix A: Absolute and Relative frequency of collocates to ‘Coca-Cola’ in
                    Coca-Cola advertisements
                
                    1928-1937 (n = 220)
                    
                        
                         Absolute Frequency 
                         Relative Frequency (per 100 ads) 
                    
                    
                        smaak
                        61
                        27.7
                    
                    
                        overal
                        40
                        18.2
                    
                    
                        dagelijks
                        40
                        18.2
                    
                    
                        heerlijk
                        39
                        17.7
                    
                    
                        aparten
                        27
                        12.3
                    
                    
                        wereld
                        24
                        10.9
                    
                    
                        landen
                        21
                        9.5
                    
                    
                        verrukkelijk
                        19
                        8.6
                    
                    
                        dorst
                        19
                        8.6
                    
                    
                        heerlijke
                        17
                        7.7
                    
                    
                        Leeuwarden
                        16
                        7.3
                    
                    
                        zeldzaam
                        13
                        5.9
                    
                    
                        bijzondere
                        13
                        5.9
                    
                    
                        aparte 
                        11
                        5.0
                    
                    
                        verfrisschend
                        10
                        4.5
                    
                    
                        parelt
                        10
                        4.5
                    
                    
                        internationale
                        10
                        4.5
                    
                    
                        aroma
                        10
                        4.5
                    
                
                
                    1948-1957 (n = 372)
                    
                        
                         Absolute Frequency 
                         Relative Frequency (per 100 ads) 
                    
                    
                        overal
                        41
                        11.0
                    
                    
                        bottelen
                        39
                        10.5
                    
                    
                        heerlijke
                        37
                        9.9
                    
                    
                        gebotteld
                        33
                        8.9
                    
                    
                        distributie
                        31
                        8.3
                    
                    
                        geniet
                        27
                        7.3
                    
                    
                        landen
                        24
                        6.5
                    
                    
                        sierlijke
                        23
                        6.2
                    
                    
                        sprankelende
                        22
                        5.9
                    
                    
                        plaatselijke
                        22
                        5.9
                    
                    
                        pauze
                        20
                        5.4
                    
                    
                        iedereen
                        18
                        4.8
                    
                    
                        verfrissing
                        17
                        4.6
                    
                    
                        ijskoude
                        17
                        4.6
                    
                    
                        flesjes
                        17
                        4.6
                    
                    
                        heerlijk
                        16
                        4.3
                    
                
                
                    1958-1967 (n = 414)
                    
                        
                         Absolute Frequency 
                         Relative Frequency (per 100 ads) 
                    
                    
                        pauze
                        88
                        23.7
                    
                    
                        verfrist
                        66
                        17.7
                    
                    
                        heerlijke
                        47
                        12.6
                    
                    
                        smaak
                        42
                        11.3
                    
                    
                        sprankelende
                        39
                        10.5
                    
                    
                        lekker
                        37
                        9.9
                    
                    
                        bottelaar
                        31
                        8.3
                    
                    
                        gebotteld
                        20
                        5.4
                    
                    
                        heerlijk
                        19
                        5.1
                    
                    
                        Nederlandse
                        18
                        4.8
                    
                    
                        Schiedam
                        17
                        4.6
                    
                    
                        koele
                        17
                        4.6
                    
                    
                        Amsterdam
                        14
                        3.8
                    
                    
                        ijskoude
                        13
                        3.5
                    
                    
                        verfrissende
                        12
                        3.2
                    
                    
                        verfrissend
                        11
                        3.0
                    
                    
                        verkwikkende
                        10
                        2.7
                    
                    
                        landen
                        10
                        2.7
                    
                
            
