Title:  Unraveling reported dreams with text
                    analytics
Volume:  011
Issue:  4
Date:  8 January 2018
Abstract:  
                
                We investigate what distinguishes reported dreams from other personal narratives.
                    The continuity hypothesis, stemming from psychological dream
                    analysis work, states that most dreams refer to a person’s daily life and
                    personal concerns, similar to other personal narratives such as diary entries.
                    Differences between the two texts may reveal the linguistic markers of dream
                    text, which could be the basis for new dream analysis work and for the automatic
                    detection of dream descriptions. We used three text analytics methods: text
                    classification, topic modeling, and text coherence analysis, and applied these
                    methods to a balanced set of texts representing dreams, diary entries, and other
                    personal stories. We observed that dream texts could be distinguished from other
                    personal narratives nearly perfectly, mostly based on the presence of
                    uncertainty markers and descriptions of scenes. Important markers for non-dream
                    narratives are specific time expressions. Dream texts also exhibit a lower
                    discourse coherence than other personal narratives.
            
Full Body Text: 

                1. Introduction
                Dreams are a fascinating phenomenon that has been studied for millennia. In
                    ancient Greek and Egyptian times dreams were seen as messages from the gods, and
                    played an important role in religion. One of the earliest recorded dream
                    analyses was written on clay tablets in Mesopotamia, 5000 years ago . This ancient epic tale of Gilgamesh includes several
                    dream descriptions and interpretations. Nowadays, various research fields still
                    study the meaning and purpose of dreams, such as psychiatry, psychology,
                    neuroscience, and religious studies. Despite all these research efforts, a
                    comprehensive explanation of the purpose of dreams is still lacking today.
                Psychologists and social scientists have studied dream content with quantitative
                    methods for decades, working with the hypothesis that dreams reveal
                    psychological information about the dreamer. One currently dominant theory in
                    this area is the continuity hypothesis, which assumes
                    that the content of dreams reflects a person’s daily life and personal concerns
                        . Previous studies on dream descriptions, i.e.
                    reported dreams written afterwards by the dreamer, have shown that around 75–80%
                    of dream content relates to everyday settings, characters, and activities. The
                    remaining dreams are related to uncommon or even bizarre topics. Some of the
                    latter are shared by numerous people, such as dreaming about flying, teeth
                    falling out, or being naked in public . 
                Dream descriptions are written reports of the memories of an experienced dream.
                    Even though much progress is made in neuroscience, it is not possible yet to
                    decode the dream content from a dreaming person’s brain activity. The only
                    possible way to gather dream contents is to study the reported recollection
                    produced when the experiencer was awake . For this
                    reason, we study written reports of remembered dreams. As a textual genre, this
                    type of written report bears similarities to other written recollections of
                    personal experiences, both in cognitive and sensory qualities . In this study we aim to investigate what linguistic
                    features are specific to dream reports, contrary to reports on personal stories
                    that actually happened, using tools for automatic text analysis. Computational
                    approaches to automatically analyze the content of dream reports from a
                    linguistic perspective are rare. In this work we want to pave the road for
                    further detailed and knowledge-directed research by presenting a first account
                    of a computational text analysis of dream reports.
                We performed three different types of automatic text analysis to investigate what
                    typical characteristics we can discover in dream reports. We hope that our
                    automatic linguistic approach can demonstrate to dream analysis experts how
                    well-studied techniques from the field of computational linguistics can be
                    applied to offer insights into linguistic patterns hidden in large dream
                    collections. These analyses go beyond the standard word frequency analysis that
                    is common in corpus linguistics and that has already been applied to dream
                    reports 
                    .
                The largest available digitally curated collection of dream reports is the
                    DreamBank  which contains over 22 thousand dream
                    reports gathered in the last decades in various scientific studies. We use
                    DreamBank as the base for our study; we also collected a contrasting data sample
                    of true personal stories (from Reddit and Prosebox) to perform our experiments. 
                We apply the following three methods: automatic text classification
                    to investigate what features are actually salient for predicting whether a
                    written text is a dream report or not, topic modeling to discover
                    the common themes in the dream collection, and text coherence
                        analysis to measure whether there is a difference in coherence
                    between dreams and personal stories. Each of these methods offers a different
                    perspective on dream data. As we will argue, they do lead to overlapping
                    findings that we discuss in the last section. This paper is structured as
                    follows. We first discuss related work in automatic textual analysis of dream
                    reports and previous work on comparisons between dreams and stories in Section
                    2. We present the data sets used in the experiments in detail in Section 3.
                    Next, we present the three different studies we have done in Section 4, and we
                    summarize and discuss our findings in Section 5.
            

                2. Related work
                Automatic textual analysis of dream reports is a relatively unexplored field.
                    Semi-automatic experiments have been performed by Bulkeley and Domhoff [2009],
                    who developed a systematic category list of word strings that can be used for
                    automated queries and word-frequency counts. The categories in which the words
                    are organized relate to the content of dreams, and are used to count mentions of
                    emotions, characters, perception, movement, cognition, and culture. In a more
                    recent follow-up study  this category list is
                    updated and evaluated on four data sets present in the DreamBank corpus. The
                    study shows that one can use this type of word analysis to detect the general
                    topics in dream content in the same way and with a similar accuracy as the more
                    time-consuming manual analysis. Furthermore, Bulkeley offers evidence that based
                    on an individual dream collection, it is possible to make accurate estimations
                    about a person’s life, his concerns, activities, and interests, thereby
                    confirming the continuity hypothesis.
                Some work exists on automatic text classification with machine learning methods,
                    where the task is to assign emotion labels to dreams. In , follow-up work to , the
                    authors aim to label dreams on a four-point negative/positive sentiment scale.
                    The authors represent dreams as bag-of-word vectors and include dynamic features
                    to represent sentiment changes in the dream story. They run ten-fold cross
                    validation experiments on a sample of 477 manually labeled dream reports and
                    achieve up to 64% accuracy, close to the average human agreement of 69%. 
                In  a more refined type of sentiment analysis is
                    explored; they predict the fuzzy assignment of five emotion categories to dream
                    descriptions, based on semi-automatically compiled emotion word dictionaries.
                    Their method is evaluated against a sample from the DreamBank that is manually
                    labeled with the emotion annotations from the Hall/Van de Castle encoding system
                        . The difficulty of using these DreamBank
                    annotations is that this labeling has been done at the document level, which is
                    also the level at which  evaluated their approach,
                    even though the annotations refer to specific phrases in the dream. The direct
                    link between the linguistic description and label is missing. 
                The dream reports in the DreamBank were written down either by the dreamers
                    themselves or by researchers that interrogated the dreamers after awaking. The
                    written dream reports resemble oral narratives as they were described in the
                    seminal work of Labov and Waletzky . They can be
                    considered as spontaneously told short stories that relate an experience. Labov
                    and Waletzky discuss the different crucial elements and structure in a
                    narrative. A narrative consists of five or six structural units. It often starts
                    with an abstract, which is a brief summary of the story, followed
                    by an orientation that sketches the setting, location and actors of
                    the narrative. The main unit of the narrative is the complication
                    entailing the main series of events. Additionally, an evaluation unit expresses
                    the attitude of the author towards the story, signaling the purpose of the
                    story. The narrative is concluded with a resolution to complete the
                    story and the coda that places the told story in a perspective and
                    connects it to the current situation.
                 compared dreams to stories from a narrative
                    perspective based on the ideas of Jung , and argues
                    that some dreams have a clear narrative structure while others are just a
                    fragment or a snapshot. A more specific definition is given by Montagero  who argues that the characters in a narrative
                    need to have intentional states and that a narrative must introduce an
                    unexpected event. He concludes that dreams indeed can be classified as
                    narratives under this definition.
                We also consider most dream reports as narratives, given that, in most cases,
                    they are tellable
                    . Although humans dream every night, the recollection
                    of a dream requires some motivation and effort. Furthermore, the dream content
                    is outside the dreamers control which makes it unpredictable and thus
                    reportable. Dreams do contain the minimal part of a narrative : that of having temporal juncture and a
                    complicating action where two events take place in a certain temporal order. 
                Drawing on the argumentation of this previous work we posit that dreams are
                    personal narratives, which narrows down our research question to: what
                    distinguishes dream reports from other personal narratives such as true stories?
                
            

                3. Data
                As we are interested in automatically investigating textual properties, and
                    studying what characteristics are typical for dream reports, we compare dream
                    reports to other texts and narratives. We use dream reports from the DreamBank,
                    and we place them in contrast with data representing personal narratives that
                    actually happened, taken from the internet sources Reddit and Prosebox. In this
                    section we introduce the three sources, and describe their properties.
                
                    3.1. DreamBank
                    We use the dream reports from collections as gathered in the DreamBank, a
                        project to combine the results of several scientific studies and resources
                        over the years in one online search interface .
                        These collections of dream series vary greatly in type, size, and intended
                        purpose. Some series consist of a longitudinal collection of dream
                        descriptions of a single person, such as the collection Dorothea: 53 years of dreams consisting of around 900 dreams.
                        Other series represent a specific group of dreamers such as adult male and
                        female blind dreamers . Some collections are in
                        English, gathered in Australia, Canada or the US. One of the collections,
                        collected in Switzerland, contains dream reports in German. The DreamBank is
                        an ongoing project and collections are added regularly. We use a snapshot
                        from the DreamBank retrieved in April 2015 containing 22 thousand dreams
                        divided in 67 different collections. 
                    For our experiments we performed the following selection steps on the
                        DreamBank data, where we limited ourselves to English written collections.
                        Since some of the DreamBank collections overlap, we removed the duplicates
                        from our sample. We also removed a part of the description in the collection
                        “College women from the late 1940” that contained answers to specific
                        questions, and we only kept the dream description itself. We applied an
                        automatic language identification step  We
                            used langid.py version 1.1.5 (github hash: e801bf8, accessible at http://git.io/vcc2Z). that
                        filtered out a handful of other dreams (for example dream #0694 of the Barb
                        Sanders collection  where she dreams about a
                        Spanish conversation). Next, the data was tokenized automatically, We
                            used twokenize.py, which is part of twitter_nlp (github hash 27c8190,
                            accessible at http://git.io/vccyu). leading to a sample of 21,598
                        dream descriptions containing a total of 4.3 million word tokens. Dream
                        descriptions contain an average of 56 words, with a population standard
                        deviation of 38.5. 
                    We noted that some collections in the DreamBank are much larger than others,
                        and that dream descriptions of certain persons (e.g. Barb Sanders) are
                        relatively prominent in the DreamBank content. We decided to create a sample
                        of the DreamBank where we limit the amount of dream reports per individual
                        dreamer to a random selection of at most one hundred dreams. This produced a
                        sample of 6,998 dream descriptions, comprising 1.3 million tokens in total
                        with an average of 65 words and a standard deviation of 43.7 per dream
                        description, similar to the larger sample. We used both the large and the
                        small sample in our experiments. 
                    We show an example of a tokenized dream description with 97 tokens:
                    
                        I was chosen to be interviewed by S , the college president , but it’s
                            unclear if my papers were approved in time , so I clutch my briefcase
                            with my acceptance letter in it and try to find the building . 
                        A woman student and Ellie help guide me to the building . 
                        I find a sign saying “ 504 , ” the room . 
                        I rush to the room , hoping , feeling late and uncertain . 
                        I am there in the nick of time . 
                        I am calm and handle it well . 
                    
                
                
                    3.2. Personal Stories
                    To discover what the typical linguistic attributes of dream reports are, we
                        need a comparable set of contrasting reports that is as similar to dream
                        reports as possible, both in structure and in content. Comparing dream
                        reports to a collection of news paper articles or personal letters will lead
                        to obvious findings such as: dreams do not report on political debates and
                        the weather forecast, and will not end in ‘yours sincerely’. This is not the
                        type of differences that we are interested in. We therefore aimed to find a
                        collection of personally written recollections of true daily life events.
                        Recall that dreams are known to reflect daily life events and activities for
                        at least 75–80% of the cases.
                    Comparable collections of personal stories recollecting true events, not just
                        fantasies or fiction, are difficult to find when looking for existing
                        curated corpus collections. For this reason we resorted to collections of
                        web texts to build our own corpus.
                    The first part of the contrasting data consists of personal stories. The
                        stories are crawled from Prosebox,
                            https://www.prosebox.net/ an online community to share
                        journals and personal stories. Just prior to this research, OpenDiary, a
                        community where users could post diary entries, was taken down. Many of
                        these users moved to Prosebox, and especially older posts are mostly diary
                        entries or journals.
                    We collected all public posts that were available at the end of March 2015.
                        As a result, we crawled 130 thousand posts with over 67 million tokens. We
                        applied the same filtering pipeline to the Prosebox posts as was applied to
                        the dreams; that is, we applied a language filter where we only kept the
                        posts which were identified as English; second, we tokenized the posts.
                        Since the number of tokens is much larger, we downsampled the corpus to a
                        similar number of tokens as the DreamBank samples, i.e. the large sample and
                        the smaller limited sample, containing 4.3 million words and 1.3 million
                        words respectively, with an average of 64 and 63 words and standard
                        deviations 78.8 and 94.3, respectively. In other words, we kept the average
                        document size virtually equal to that of the DreamBank samples; the Prosebox
                        data does exhibit a larger variance in size. We show an excerpt of a
                        Prosebox text here: 
                    
                        Just sitting 
                        Life is good here . 
                        I had a good day of just staying home yesterday . 
                        I went grocery shopping this morning and Cap is at his auction . 
                        He has called me a couple of times and he is having a great time . 
                        He loves seeing his friends that he sits with . 
                        Tomorrow should be another day of staying home . 
                        Yay . 
                        If I lived by myself I wouldn’t go anywhere . 
                        I love staying home . 
                        I bought groceries today . 
                        I bought strawberries and whipping cream for strawberry shortcakes . 
                    
                    The second part of the contrast data consists of Reddit posts. Reddit is a website where users
                        can submit content of almost every kind. The site uses a community system,
                        where each community is called a subreddit. We collected posts from a number
                        of subreddits where the posts are texts about daily and personal experiences
                        such as communities named offmychest, diaries, relationships, shortscarystories,
                            lifeinapost, anxiety, and self. Prior to this
                        research, the complete Reddit corpus was not available. See https://redd.it/3bxlg7 for a
                            dataset with all 1.7 billion publically available Reddit posts.
                        In total we crawled 122 thousand posts with 54 million words with an average
                        post length of 71 words for the 1.3 million words sample, and 72 words for
                        the 4.3 million words sample, respectively with standard deviations of 61.7
                        and 67.8. We show an example Reddit story here:
                    
                        Bad mistake , reasonable doubt , or both ? 
                        So I’ve been working at this restaurant for the weekend and I was taken
                            aback by the disorganization and bad management . 
                        I don’t know my work schedule for the next week ( If I even to continue
                            to work there b/c im on internship in a couple of weeks ) , don’t know
                            my exact duties , etc . 
                        The owner and head chef tell me two different things . 
                        I have no idea what’s going on . 
                        I made a hasty decision to ask for pay from the owner because of this . 
                        I thought that he could make up my hours or worse not even pay me because
                            there is no system of recording hours or a system of anything really
                            haha . 
                        Once I asked the question and got a sour look I realized I should’ve
                            asked in a different way ( ex . how does the payment method work ? ) . 
                        Do you guys think it was a mistake , case of reasonable doubt , or both ? 
                        Also , should I continue working there after this situation ? 
                    
                
            

                4. Experiments
                We applied topic modeling, text classification, and coherence tests to the
                    aforementioned data sets in order to compare them.
                
                    4.1. Text Classification Experiments
                    As a first analysis of the text collection, we set out to train
                        machine-learning classifiers to distinguish dream reports from personal
                        stories automatically. Both the extent to which the classifiers succeed, and
                        the features they use to make their decision, can lead to insights in the
                        differences between dream reports and other narratives. Terms or groups of
                        terms that are identified by classifiers as strong indications that a text
                        is a dream report or not are apparently typical for their respective
                        class.
                    In text classification, a machine learning classifier is fed with labeled
                        documents from which it learns to model the characteristics of the given
                        labels. Its labeling performance is tested by applying the classifier to a
                        held-out set of documents. For this experiment, we used the sets of 4.3
                        million words for both the dream data and contrasting data. We ran the
                            same experiments on the small sets too and found virtually the same
                            results.
                    We tokenized all documents with the Stanford Tokenizer.
                            http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tokenizer.shtml The
                        word tokens were standardized to lowercase. We extracted word unigrams,
                        bigrams, and trigrams as features. To avoid bias from explicit markers of
                        dream reports, we removed any features that contained one of the following
                        words: dream, dreamer, dreamt, dreamed, dreams, awake, awaken, woke.
                    We compared the performance of three different classification algorithms:
                        Support Vector Machines (SVM), Naive Bayes, and Balanced Winnow. We used the
                        libsvm  implementation of SVM, with linear kernel
                        and setting the C parameter to 1.0. We applied Naive Bayes by using the
                        Multinomial Naive Bayes implementation in Scikit-learn .
                            http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/naive_bayes.html
                        For Balanced Winnow, we made use of the Linguistic Classification System
                            . The α and β parameters were set to 1.05 and
                        0.95 respectively. The major threshold (Θ+) and the minor threshold (Θ−)
                        were set to 2.5 and 0.5. The number of iterations was bound to one. 
                    We evaluated the performance of the three approaches by means of ten-fold
                        cross-validation. To avoid author bias, the reports by the same author were
                        kept together in either the test set or the train set during each fold.
                        During each training phase, the 7,500 most frequent features were selected
                        and presented as binary values. 
                    The classification results, micro-averaged over examples, are given in Table
                        1. All three approaches yield a precision and recall of 0.97, which
                        indicates that the dream and non-dream reports can easily be distinguished
                        with a small remaining margin of error. Table 1 also displays the exact
                        number of documents that were correctly classified. The Balanced Winnow
                        classifier has a slightly higher number of correct classifications than
                        Naive Bayes and SVM. 
                    
                        Micro-averaged performance of three classifiers on distinguishing
                            dream reports from reports of real-world events on the 4.3M words corpus
                            (39,480 documents in total). TPR = True Positive Rate. FPR = False
                            Positive Rate. AUC = Area Under the Curve, # correct = number of
                            correctly labeled documents.
                        
                            Approach
                            Prec
                            Recall
                            F1
                            TPR
                            FPR
                            AUC
                            # correct
                        
                        
                            SVM
                            0.97
                            0.97
                            0.97
                            0.97
                            0.03
                            0.97
                            38,225
                        
                        
                            Balanced Winnow
                            0.97
                            0.97
                            0.97
                            0.97
                            0.03
                            0.97
                            38,334
                        
                        
                            Naive Bayes
                            0.97
                            0.97
                            0.97
                            0.97
                            0.03
                            0.97
                            38,229
                        
                    
                    The Balanced Winnow classifier returns an interpretable model of the features
                        that the classifier used internally to make its predictions. Upon analysis
                        of the 30 most indicative features of the dream and non-dream classes, we
                        obtained the following insights about the two types of texts:
                    
                        Dream reports are characterized by words that convey uncertainty and
                            retrieval from memory: somebody (rank 3), remember (rank 5), somewhere
                            (rank 12) and recall (rank 17); 
                        Another category of features that have a high rank in dream reports
                            are references to a space or situation: setting (rank 1), riding (rank
                            8), building (rank 16), swimming (rank 23), table (rank 25) and room
                            (rank 30); 
                        In contrast to dream reports, personal stories contain indications of
                            specific points in time: 2014 (rank 4), today (rank 9), tonight (rank
                            19), yesterday (rank 21), day (rank 23) and months (rank 28); 
                        Personal stories are also distinguished by conversational utterances,
                            such as ‘:)’ (rank 2), please (rank 17), ‘?’ (rank 20) and thanks (rank
                            27). 
                    
                
                
                    4.2. Topic modeling
                    To discover what type of topics are typical for dream reports, we employed an
                        unsupervised method that is currently popular for discovering latent themes
                        or topics in large document collections. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
                             is a probabilistic generative algorithm that
                        aims to give a broad overview of the topics that occur in a collection of
                        documents. Topics are defined as a distribution over a fixed vocabulary (in
                        practice, a topic consists of a set of semantically related words). Topic
                        modeling is an unsupervised process solely based on word occurrences in
                        documents. LDA assumes that documents are created based on an underlying
                        topic distribution and each document is generated from a mixture of these
                        topics that each have a different proportion in the document. LDA uses an
                        iterative process to estimate this underlying distribution based on the
                        observed words in the text. 
                    We ran experiments with LDA on the full DreamBank sample of 22,046 dreams. We
                        filtered the dream texts to exclude all function words and punctuation marks
                        and only kept those content words that were automatically part-of-speech
                        tagged by the Stanford parser as nouns, verbs and adjectives. All words have
                        been converted to lower case. Such explicit filtering step ensures that the
                        generated LDA topics contain only content words.
                    For these experiments we use the LDA implementation provided in the Mallet
                        toolkit . We ran LDA with 2,000 iterations with
                        Gibbs sampling and 50 topics. The produced LDA model was used to annotate
                        each document with its most relevant topics; namely those topics that cover
                        at least 10 percent of the document. Documents have three such topics on
                        average.
                    Setting the number of topics parameter is a rather arbitrary choice. We ran
                        experiments with 100, 200 and 400 topics as well and studied the output.
                        When raising the value of this parameter, more fine-grained topic
                        descriptions are produced. These detailed topics are still understandable
                        and coherent topics, but, as can be expected, they tend to have a lower
                        coverage in the document. As we aim to look at significant differences
                        between topic distributions in different sample sets and to compute g-tests
                        (log-likelihood tests) , we choose to keep the
                        number of topics fixed at 50.
                    
                        4.2.1. LDA on the DreamBank
                        LDA can give surprising insights in the data. We applied LDA to the full
                            DreamBank set of dreams and we present a random sample of these topics
                            in Table 2. The number in each row denotes the topic number and does not
                            express a ranking or weight. Certain topics express a specific script or
                            frame; in the first three topics in Table 2 we see
                                purchasing, using the
                                bathroom and school life. Other
                            topics express a setting such as inside the house
                            in topic 42, and the outdoor setting in topic 5. It
                            is also remarkable to see how narrative verbs are clustered together in
                            present tense in topic 35 and in past tense in topic 48. These verbs are
                            commonly used in action and event descriptions (do, say, see). These
                            automatically generated topics are a clear support for the
                                continuity hypothesis
                             as they reflect daily life events,
                            characters and settings.
                        
                            Examples from the topics generated on the DreamBank sample.
                            
                                44
                                money pay get give buy bank bill machine change
                            
                            
                                37
                                bathroom water toilet shower use clean bath floor sink
                            
                            
                                25
                                class school teacher students high test room classroom
                                    college
                            
                            
                                42
                                room door house see window open apartment go living
                            
                            
                                5
                                road hill tree see walking snow mountain trees people
                            
                            
                                28
                                love feel kiss make happy want man other hug
                            
                            
                                35
                                say says do see go man woman comes get
                            
                            
                                48
                                said did went came got told started saw looked asked
                            
                        
                        In a next step we zoom in on two comparable dream sets of men and women
                            to study the differences in topics between these groups. We use the
                            normative male and female dream sample present in the DreamBank
                            (abbreviated to Hall/VdC Norms) based on the older work of
                            Hall and Van de Castle . 
                        Topics were generated based on the full sample. For each topic we compute
                            whether the topic occurs significantly more or less in Hall/VdC
                                Norms male dreams than female dreams. We computed a
                                g-test We used the g-test implementation written by Pete Hurd,
                                available at http://www.psych.ualberta.ca/~phurd/cruft/g.test.r
                            on the frequency topic counts with p<0.05. In Table 3 we
                            show the topics that occurred significantly more in either the male or
                            the female dream sub-sample. Remarkable stereotypical differences can be
                            found in the topics; men tend to dream more about shooting, driving,
                            sex, and games, while women dream more about weddings, fashion, and
                            family.
                        LDA topics have been shown to express semantic coherence. Although there
                            is currently no metric available that could be used to optimize the LDA
                            settings to tune it explicitly towards human judgments, it has been
                            shown that the automatic topic assignment to documents matches human
                            preferences . Nonetheless, the human
                            interpretation of automatically generated topics might not always be
                            straightforward such as topics 11 or 39, which both seem to grasp a less
                            clear topic related to dreaming in general.
                        These preliminary results are in line with recent research on differences
                            between male and female in , and other work
                            such as  and ,
                            which states [that] there are more appearances of tools and cars in
                                men’s dreams, more appearances of clothing and household items in
                                women’s dreams. The main difference is that the results
                            presented here were obtained unsupervised, and support the current
                            manually found results reported in other papers.
                        
                             Male (top) and female (bottom) topics in the DreamBank.
                            
                                Male
                                
                            
                            
                                0
                                gun fire men shot shoot man police shooting war deer
                            
                            
                                5
                                road hill tree see walking snow mountain trees people
                                    side
                            
                            
                                11
                                dream remember seemed do time being other same feeling
                                    something
                            
                            
                                15
                                car driving drive road street get truck going front
                                    side
                            
                            
                                17
                                bed room sleep sex sleeping lying bedroom floor naked
                                    lay
                            
                            
                                29
                                game playing ball play team basketball football field baseball
                                    cards
                            
                            
                                33
                                plane fly flying sky air see airplane land people
                                    ground
                            
                            
                                34
                                building floor stairs get go elevator people steps see
                                    walking
                            
                            
                                Female
                                
                            
                            
                                12
                                wedding married john wife getting ring husband george bonita
                                    ceremony
                            
                            
                                14
                                things room put stuff box small old boxes take find
                            
                            
                                21
                                wearing white dress black blue dressed clothes red shirt
                                    shoes
                            
                            
                                23
                                house mother father home brother family old sister parents
                                    children
                            
                            
                                26
                                get go do going trying take want find time know
                            
                            
                                39
                                girl friend dream girls friends remember went dreamed did
                                    school
                            
                            
                                40
                                man woman men young other women boy old older small
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        4.2.2. LDA on dreams versus personal stories
                        In the next step we combined the dream sample with the Reddit and
                            Prosebox samples into one large collection on which we ran the LDA topic
                            modeling using the same setting of 50 topics.
                        To investigate what topics occur significantly more with dreams than with
                            personal stories, we took a random sample of 2,000 dreams and 2,000
                            stories and computed a g-test to check whether there were significant
                            differences in the topic distributions. In this sample of 4,000
                            documents we found that 42 of the 50 topics occur significantly more or
                            significantly less with either dreams or personal stories. This shows
                            that there are clear differences between the two sets; more so than
                            between the male and female dreams. In Table 4 we show the top five most
                            significantly different topics for dreams and stories.
                        Topic 28 is typical for what we expect to be a dream description,
                            mentioning words such as dream,
                                remember and seemed. We
                            observe an inside the house setting description
                            (topic 23) and an aquatic setting description (topic 1). The other two
                            topics express related narrative description verbs in present and paste
                            tense.
                        For the personal stories we observe two topics that are directly linked
                            to the Reddit categories that were included in the sample, namely
                                anxiety and relationships.
                            Topic 45 expresses conversational internet language including
                            profanities and abbreviated verb forms. Topic 24 consists mostly of time
                            expressions.
                        There is some overlap in the most important words in the topic word
                            lists. The term get occurs in the top words lists
                            of four of the five most significant personal stories topics. The terms
                                see and saw occur in
                            respectively three and two of the significant dream topics.
                        
                            Five most significant topics for dreams (top) and non-dreams
                                (bottom).
                            
                                Dreams
                                
                            
                            
                                23
                                room house door see go floor open stairs window
                                    apartment
                            
                            
                                40
                                saw came said went looked got ran walked horse did
                            
                            
                                1
                                water see boat pool river swimming lake beach go people
                            
                            
                                28
                                dream remember seemed girl man boy came saw dreamed
                                    being
                            
                            
                                13
                                see go says say man woman get look comes walk
                            
                            
                                Non-Dreams
                                
                            
                            
                                26
                                do time get things think going know something make
                                    other
                            
                            
                                45
                                fucking shit fuck do get im know day got dont
                            
                            
                                30
                                feel do life help depression anxiety get know feeling
                                    want
                            
                            
                                22
                                relationship do want feel other months boyfriend tl girlfriend
                                    friends
                            
                            
                                24
                                day last today work get going week night got time
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    4.3. Bizarreness as dream characteristic
                    When people are asked what is typical about dreams, they will often mention
                        weirdness as a typical property of dreams. This might be due to the fact
                        that many dreams are forgotten the next morning while weird or impressive
                        dreams tend to stick in people’s memory . This
                        recollection could be attributed to the bizarreness effect, the inclination
                        to remember bizarre things better than ordinary things . Domhoff shows in 
                        that bizarreness does occur in dreams, but it is not as manifest as people
                        tend to believe. 
                    Bizarreness can emerge in different forms in dreams. The most prominent type
                        of oddity seems to be caused by the discontinuity of events and sudden
                        switches of scenes. In the study of Reinsel et al.  bizarreness was measured by counting three
                        different type of occurrences: discontinuous events, improbable
                        combinations, and improbable entities. Discontinuous events were found to be
                        the most contributing factor in bizarreness (around 60% of the counts) while
                        improbable entities were much less present (only around 8%). This is in line
                        with previous studies on large volumes of dream reports that show that the
                        amount of bizarreness attributed to strange entities is relatively low; most
                        characters in dreams are known persons . Domhoff
                             investigated metamorphosis, a
                        specific type of discontinuous events, via a search in DreamBank.net and
                        found only 50 mentions of metamorphosis in the whole DreamBank.
                        Transformations turn out to be highly infrequent in dreams.  study metamorphosis as a typical dream
                        phenomenon and focus on the relation between change in form to change in
                        inner states. No evidence was found that form change is connected to a
                        change in mental state. This was a small-scale study on a set of 65 dreams
                        from 21 persons. 
                    Interestingly, bizarre thoughts do not only occur in our sleep but can also
                        occur when awake. It has been shown that people in a relaxed undisturbed
                        awake condition produce dream-like reports when asked to recall that most
                        recent thoughts in the same way subjects are asked after being awakened . These awake fantasies are very similar to dream
                        reports, including bizarreness. 
                    In our study we aimed at using a quantitative approximation of bizarreness
                        and applying this metric to the DreamBank texts. We focus on the
                        discontinuity of events in dreams and try to quantify this by looking at
                        textual coherence in the dream reports. We hypothesize that dreams are less
                        coherent in their discourse structure than personal stories. We measure two
                        different aspects of discourse structure, namely discourse marker frequency
                        and entity-based text coherence, using the smaller balanced sample sets of
                        1.3 million words.
                    Discourse analysis is a broad and multi-disciplinary field that studies
                        language in use beyond the sentence level .
                        Automatic discourse parsing is still in its early development phase, as was
                        illustrated by 2015’s CoNLL shared task  on shallow
                        discourse parsing where the best system achieved a overall F-score of 24%. 
                    In this initial experiment we only focus on discourse marker occurrences and
                        measure whether there is a difference between discourse marker frequency in
                        the dream data and the personal stories. Discourse markers are words or
                        phrases that explicitly signal discourse structure and describe how two
                        sentences or phrases are related to each other. For example, for
                            example indicates that the current sentence exemplifies something
                        that was mentioned in the previous sentence. Typical discourse markers are
                            but, since, while, even
                            though, and because.
                    We used a list of 60 markers We excluded and as
                            discourse marker in this experiment due to its ambiguity as conjunction
                            marker and high frequency. based on annotations from the Penn
                        Discourse Treebank  that was used in the CoNLL
                        shared task. In total, about 40 thousand occurrences of these discourse
                        connectives were counted in the DreamBank data, and about 50 thousand in
                        both Reddit and Prosebox, which means that there are about 20% fewer
                        discourse markers counted in the DreamBank data than in the contrasting
                        data. In Figure 1 we show the distribution of 28 of the 60 markers in the
                        balanced DreamBank, Reddit and Prosebox data sets, having a frequency of
                        occurrence over 250. For most markers we can observe similar distributions,
                        or a slightly lower count for the dreams. One marker however occurs
                        substantially more often with the dreams than with Prosebox or Reddit:
                            then. This is a typical discourse connective that
                        is used in sequential narration. Conditional discourse markers like
                            if and if then and causal
                        markers like because, so and
                            since occur less frequent in the dream sample. 
                    
                        Frequency of discourse markers per dataset and their total number.
                            Discourse markers used have a frequency of more than 250 in the Penn
                            Discourse Treebank.
                        
                    
                    In a second experiment we study entity-based coherence. Mentioned entities
                        and chains of referring expressions in a text are core indicators of text
                        coherence. We assume that discontinuity in dreams is expressed in sudden
                        shifts in scenes and events, and we expect that these are linked to shifts
                        in mentioned entities. On the basis of this assumption, we tried to measure
                        discourse coherence by applying an existing automatic model to detect
                        entity-based coherence.
                    We used the Brown Coherence Toolkit v1.0 . The
                        authors of this toolkit present an extension of the entity-grid coherence
                        model proposed by Barzilay and Lapata . An
                        entity grid represents the entity mentions in a document in a textual matrix
                        where each row represents an entity and the column represent the syntactic
                        roles of the entities (subject, object, other). This matrix is used to
                        predict which role each entity will have in the next sentence.
                    To detect the entities in the text we used the extended entity grid based on
                        the Wall Street Journal corpus that was automatically pre-processed with
                        OpenNLP software, available in the Brown Coherence Toolkit.
                    We applied the model to each of the balanced dream and personal stories data
                        sets and measure its performance with a binary discrimination test as was
                        previously done in the work of Elsner and Charniak . The binary discrimination test tests the model’s ability to distinguish
                        between a human-authored document in its original order, and a random
                        permutation of that document. The test reads any number of documents and
                        performs the test on each one, using 20 random permutations.
                    The results of this test are shown in Table 5. All achieved results are
                        substantially lower than the scores reported by Elsner and Charniak, who
                        report an F-score of 86%, when training on Wall Street
                            Journal (WSJ) newspaper text and testing on a held-out set from
                        the same corpus. As WSJ consist of financial news paper articles, we can
                        expect a drop in performance when switching to a completely different
                        textual genre of dreams and personal stories. Nevertheless, the scores in
                        Table 5 indeed suggest that the dream text is less coherent than more formal
                        edited text in terms of coherence relations, but also as compared to
                        Prosebox and Reddit, which are remarkably similar. 
                    
                        Results from the entity-based coherence model as evaluated by a binary
                            discrimination test.
                        
                            Dataset
                            Accuracy
                            F-score
                        
                        
                            DreamBank
                            0.23
                            0.32
                        
                        
                            Prosebox
                            0.37
                            0.42
                        
                        
                            Reddit
                            0.37
                            0.43
                        
                    
                
            

                5. Discussion
                We presented three automatic text analysis studies of dream reports. First, we
                    performed a supervised text classification experiment to see how easy or hard it
                    is to distinguish dream reports from texts that are closely related in both
                    content and structure, namely true personal stories. We applied three different
                    text classification algorithms to the same task; they all succeeded in labeling
                    the documents with a near-perfect precision. Differentiating between dreams and
                    personal stories turned out to be an easy task. The analysis of the features
                    used by the Balanced Winnow classifier shows that expressions of uncertainty,
                    setting descriptions and narrative verbs are typical for dreams, while time
                    expressions and conversational expressions are typical for the personal stories. 
                In the second study we aimed to explore the general topics that are present in
                    the full DreamBank. We applied LDA topic modeling to the DreamBank to study the
                    main themes in dreams. The results mostly showed topics describing everyday
                    activities, settings, and characters. This unsupervised method signaled the same
                    differences as the text classification experiments between dreams and stories:
                    setting descriptions and uncertainty expressions are typical for dreams while
                    time expressions and conversational expressions occur more often in stories. In
                    our exploratory study on discontinuity in dreams, we observed that dream reports
                    indeed use less discourse markers and have a lower entity-based textual
                    coherence. With these experiments we are only just scratching the surface of
                    doing automatic discourse analysis but we feel that these preliminary
                    experiments are a starting point for further analyses in this direction.
                Even though our experiments have shown some interesting and consistent findings
                    about the typical differences between dreams and stories, we need to be careful
                    with our conclusions. The fact that the text classifiers obtained such high
                    scores and the topics were significantly differently distributed over the
                    samples, could indicate that the contrasting data sample was not as
                    representative as we had hoped for. The emerging topic about
                        anxiety for example shows that this subreddit had a
                    substantial influence on the results. The importance of conversational
                    expressions to distinguish personal stories in the classification experiment
                    also points to a bias of the source platforms. We suspect that a more careful
                    selection over a much larger set of personal stories, and perhaps an additional
                    check to filter out characteristic internet language is needed to create
                    automatic models that focus on the more subtle differences between reported
                    dreams and personal experiences from real life.
                As a next step, we plan experiments on another sample of personal stories and
                    dreams to investigate the effect of the sample representativeness. We also aim
                    to collaborate with dream analysis experts to work towards better
                    interpretations of the results that we found and to explore further research
                    questions in the area of dream analysis.
                We also believe that an in-depth study of the narrative mechanisms in dream
                    descriptions could be a fruitful path for future research. The overview of the
                    distribution of discourse markers presented in Figure 1 begs for further
                    analysis. Furthermore, we would like to investigate the applicability of the
                    Labovian Model of narrative  to dream descriptions. We
                    would expect that dreams in general contain the narrative units
                        orientation and complicating action but that the
                        coda and resolution are often absent.
                Furthermore, we are interested in the question whether humans can just as easily
                    distinguish between dream descriptions and true stories as the text classifier
                    could. We are currently working on building an online human judgment task to
                    investigate this question.
            

                Acknowledgments
                We would like to thank Kelly Bulkeley and G. William Domhoff for their valuable
                    feedback and suggestions. We also thank G. William Domhoff and Adam Schneider
                    for creating the Dreambank that was the underpinning for this study. We are
                    grateful to José Sanders and Kobie van Krieken for sharing their insights on
                    narrative theory.
            
