Title:  Environing Media: A Review of Nicole
                    Starosielski’s 
Volume:  011
Issue:  4
Date:  13 February 2018
Abstract:  
                
                The Undersea Network follows the undersea
                    telecommunication cable system which today carries nearly all transoceanic
                    Internet traffic. The book traces the history of network infrastructure that now
                    haunts our contemporary digital media environments. Starosielski looks to the
                    convergence of cables as points of intersection between the colonial project and
                    the environments, revealing the entangled ecologies of information and
                    materiality through which signals pass. The collection is a model for those
                    interested in exploring the role of digital materiality in the humanities, such
                    as communication studies, ecocriticism, postcolonial studies, media studies, and
                    writing studies.
            
Full Body Text: 
If the work of this book could be captured in a single action, writes Nicole
                Starosielski, 
                    it would be the attempt to grasp a surfacing cable before
                        it recedes, to connect the histories of network infrastructure to today’s
                        media environment
                    
                . In a globally networked world, where we imagine connectivity as something
                wireless occurring in the dehistoricized digital now, The
                    Undersea Network does so much with a simple grasp, materializing
                concepts in media theory such as ecology, intersectionality, and network by tracing
                the transoceanic undersea cable systems as they traverse the various companies,
                regions, eras, ecosystems, borders, and cultures they move through to span a globe.
                Starosielski’s innovative approach intersects fields of media studies, ecocriticism,
                history, postcolonial studies, geography, and communication studies. The book
                questions conceptions of networks as wireless, ethereal, or naturalized into ‘the
                cloud.’ Starosielski reveals the ways human labor, bureaucratic systems, and
                material infrastructure converge on and through places, people, and objects. She
                reminds us that the Internet is more than simply a digital environment. The Undersea Network expands our view to see the more
                    broadly robust, resilient, and equitable global networks with which we often
                interact unaware of the materiality of history . This book leads us to the margins of digital communication, seeking
                the depths, nodes, pressure points, and landings through which our media pass.
Though it is deeply informed by critical theory and cultural studies, the book reads
                in many places like a travel narrative and a detective story. Starosielski uncovers
                the telegraph cables in the 1860’s, the telephone cables of the 1950’s, and
                fiber-optic cables which allowed the Internet to connect globally. Starosielski uses
                her natural talent as a storyteller to depict the process of rediscovering the
                material connections between digital nodes and the physical environment: 
                    I walk toward the ocean along the path where I assume the
                        cable is laid, though if there are markers that make its route visible, I
                        cannot see or recognize them. Instead, I am the visible one: one of the few
                        women on the street, young, white, American, holding a camera, and looking
                        for something to photograph. The ocean surges up an alley that might
                        otherwise provide access to the beach. A young man waves for me to come
                        through the huts that border the alley. He moves a fence aside, and I duck
                        in. Clothes dangle from the ceiling, a chicken runs by, and trash is swept
                        up through the house by the ocean. The last stop, near the original
                        Commercial Pacific Cable route, is a reminder that my ability to navigate
                        and even perceive cable infrastructure is contingent on my nationality,
                        racial and gendered assimilations, and cultural familiarity with how local
                        geographies have been organized.
                    
                 The work keenly moves from vivid descriptions of remote locations she
                traverses, and the people who live there, to the overlapping theoretical issues
                relevant to postcolonial, ecocritical, feminist, and media studies which emerge
                there — all in a style that makes it both exciting to read and intellectually
                engaging. Looking at these turbulent ecologies through which
                our media circulate, Starosielski seeks to add a 
                    critical layer to our understanding of global
                        networks
                    
                . She knowledgeably explores the history of the telecommunication club system,
                which secured a dominant network of affiliated companies against newcomers and
                produced a ring of networks in the Pacific. This and other networks led to
                worldwide, transpacific routes and designs which moved away from those of the
                telegraph area, toward a trunk and branch system . This adaptation led to more secure
                network connections at their landings .
                She uncovers fragments of these landings’ palimpsest histories, emerging like the
                cables from the depths. Through her exploration, the entanglement among place,
                people, and technological communication becomes powerfully evident.
The Undersea Network continues the work of expanding the
                foci of the digital humanities. Starosielski underscores the complex ecologies of
                our virtual and natural worlds, using digital mapping and tracing to reveal their
                deep entanglements. Surfacing.in, the digital
                accompaniment to this book, makes visible the massively displaced networks through
                mapping. Starosielski puts into practice Lauren Klein and Matthew Gold’s 
                    diverse ecology of digital humanities scholarship
                    
                 through her multimedia visualizations. Such approaches afford important
                models for future research. Though the book and mapping project bring large-scale
                networks to the surface, they also bring our focus on the specific locations through
                which these networks pass. Together, the book and map deepen our understanding of
                the historic and contemporary environments, locations, and people which collectively
                compose and maintain the transoceanic digital network. Starosielski’s work is a
                model for how digital humanities research can work with inclusive, theoretical, and
                applied methods to foster the intersectional approach to digital humanities
                scholarship called for by scholars such as Roopika Risam .
                As scholars increasingly acknowledge the materiality of digital networks, we also
                bring into view the places, humans, and nonhumans which comprise those networks. 

                Visualizing Labor
                Starosielski plumbs the history of the cable network, offering us a view of the
                    spaces through which our signal traffic passes haunted by a colonial past.
                    Unearthing the cables means uncovering the lives of the workers who laid and
                    maintained them, and the islanders whose land the cables passed through. She
                    exposes the cables as an agent of colonial modernization, documenting the
                    portrayal of native populations and the body performances of becoming
                        modern. The bodies of the cablemen were 
                        the place where the border between the network’s inside
                            and outside was enforced, the guarantor of quality performance
                        
                    . Beyond the obvious effects cable work had on the laborers, Starosielski
                    demonstrates how the body of worker and body of land converge on the clarity
                        of the message which 
                        directly reflected the skill of the operator and his
                            geographical location
                        
                    . Bodies were also a location through which 
                        global currents and local practices could disseminate
                            through the network
                        
                    . This information exchange signaled changes ranging from 
                        technological developments to excessive
                            drinking
                        
                    . These locations and the people who worked in them helped influence the
                    designs that have shaped our modern digital infrastructure. As cable lines came
                    ashore, they were often met with conflicting attitudes. Many islanders saw the
                    cable networks as agents of colonialism. While the encroaching networks brought
                    the promise of economic growth, they also threatened to flatten culture and
                    tradition. While residents in Hawai’i resisted the cable networks, other
                    islands, such as Tahiti, view the cable landings 
                        as an important site in local education, integral to
                            the transmission of cultural knowledge
                        
                    . The undersea cables link the islands to the global network, which
                    suggests both threats to the location’s culture and the ability to transmit
                    local knowledge to the entire world.
                The Undersea Network reveals some surprising places
                    where the lives of humans and the network cables snare. Such intersections range
                    from the 
                        intensification of fishing and shipping in coastal
                            waters
                        
                     at the turn of the twenty-first century, to [c]oncerns about
                        deliberate attacks and a new asymmetric terrorist
                            threat which included the cables recently considered part
                    of national critical infrastructure
                    . The threat of cable damage or
                    takeover played out in many ways, but perhaps most comically in an exchange
                    Starosielski records between a prospective cable builder and a government
                    official: 
                        They got a bit offended when I told them this. I just
                            said, Your army could take it over, and they said, Well, we
                                don’t have an army.
                            I see. Okay, your police.
                            Police? I said, Okay, who in this country has got guns?
                                Someone’s got guns. Someone with guns could take it over. They
                            said, Yeah, you’re right. Someone could.’
                        
                     Fears of attacks on the network had serious impacts on investments, and
                    the companies’ successes or failures impacted the regions in which they operated
                    and the people they employed. Starosielski also details the loss of numerous
                    jobs during the bankruptcies which occurred in 2001, as companies found
                    themselves unable to recoup the costs of laying cable . With the loss of these workers came a
                    loss of industry knowledge, leaving many of the companies that began to reemerge
                    in 2005 with a lack of essential information.
            

                Digital-Material Traffic
                Starosielski offers rich means of looking at environments in which we
                    communicate. She destabilizes bifurcated distinctions of
                        nature and culture, showing how
                    entangled the two are in our world-wide network of cables. These cables traverse
                    built and natural spaces, and Starosielski traces them through deep ocean and
                    remote backcountry as well as the many cities and towns where they pass through
                    the lives and nations of people, land, and animals. Likewise, she pushes us away
                    from talking about place in terms of the rhetorical moves made by
                    telecommunications companies, who portrayed places like New Zealand as remote
                    and isolated. Such moves position 
                        cable technology as bringing a new and complete
                            connection, despite the fact that it was used by an elite
                        
                    . Here her signal paths depart from that of the traditional travel
                    narrative, revealing the ways in which these locations had already been
                    connected, such as in the case of New Zealand which was linked via ships,
                        migrations, news circulation, and the postal service long before the
                    telegraph wires emerged out of the sea . Cables are shaped by the places through which they pass, and the places are
                    in turn transformed by their connections.
                Surfacing.in further complicates our view of digital
                    and material environments, blending visualized objects of cables, environments,
                    and cultures with digital images of networks to render these narrative elements
                    spatially. The project has users move through the digital network, first coming
                    ashore through a cable in a disorienting manner. As you surface and dive,
                    seafaring through the network, 
                        narratives about the history of the cable network, the
                            companies that construct it, and the ecologies that it runs through will
                            orient you in your journey
                        
                    . Part of this re-orienting involves facing some of the horrors of
                    colonial practice, such as how the infrastructures of colonial empires could
                        not have been built without the labor of slaves and indentured servants
                    and that 
                        the expenses saved through this practice made
                            transoceanic networks both possible and profitable
                        
                    . Through different levels of view, map,
                    place,
                    theme, and image, we can zoom in on
                    the intersecting locations, issues, images, information, and history and see how
                    they converge and cross in an inseparable mesh. The digital project makes
                    visible the new and old ways in which cables connected these Pacific
                    Islands.
                Starosielski argues that these islands are not seen in contemporary American
                    culture as part of networks. Instead the two concepts 
                        islands and networks appear to be mutually
                            exclusive
                        
                    . She points out how the word for island actually indicates isolating
                        and insulating and that 
                        isolation and boundedness are what make [geographical
                            islands] special
                        
                    . Thus, these island spaces are threatened by the emergence of the network
                    cables in the 
                        cultural anxiety that islandness will disappear
                        
                    . Yet, Starosielski explores how networks and islands act in triangulation
                    in order to produce the global network. The Undersea
                        Network reveals that places and materiality are as much a part of
                    the nodes through which our signal traffic passes as the digital applications
                    and the cables themselves. Through her exploration, Starosielski offers a model
                    for thinking about the digital world in relation to the physical environment and
                    the histories that play out there. This collection challenges notions of
                    non-networked spaces, revealing how even cable-free islands offer buffer zones,
                    anchors, and other means of protecting the integrity of the cable network.
            
