Title:  Recording invisible proofs to compose stone
                    narratives. Applications of Near Infrared Spectroscopy in provenance
                    studies.
Volume:  012
Issue:  3
Date:  19 November 2018
Abstract:  
                
                The history of human-environment interaction is embedded in stone. Stones are
                    essential components of daily life and their various usage characterize certain
                    areas or chronological periods. The form of a stone object is the result of a
                    long chain of interactions with distinct bodies but the intangible life story of
                    any artefact is partially registered in its original material properties and
                    gradual physical alteration. Digital systems can be adopted for collecting these
                    invisible records and tracing a stone’s history. Chemical imaging and portable
                    spectroscopy are quick and non-destructive remote sensing techniques that can be
                    used to gather empirical data and track production and use of stone artefacts
                    over time. This article reviews the application of Near Infrared Spectroscopy as
                    a method for geochemical characterization of objects and as a tool for
                    provenance studies within the Mobima project, carried out by an
                    interdisciplinary team of archaeologists and chemists at University of Umeå,
                    Sweden.
                Near Infrared Spectroscopy can be used for acquiring and processing spectral
                    information directly in the field, modelling datasets of big assemblages and
                    classifying objects.
                Making stones’ biographies visible will help understanding the entanglement of
                    past societies and their geological landscapes.
            
Full Body Text: 


                Introduction
                The life story of a stone artefact is an assemblage of events evident in the
                    tangible and intangible attributes of the object. By the term tangible, I
                    generally define that some of these attributes that are visible to naked eyes
                    like the color or the shape; other qualities, such as the cultural meaning that
                    the artefact assumed in a certain context, are invisible, and therefore
                    intangible; finally, some attributes related to the geochemical characterization
                    of the material are invisible but can be recorded through analytical methods.
                    Investigating the geochemical characteristics of stone artefacts is essential in
                    order to read the complex network of agents co-occurring in an object’s
                    biography . Digital tools can be beneficial in
                    order to decipher some of these evidences. Technology helps with reconstructing
                    narratives from otherwise invisible proofs; in particular, the application of
                    portable Near Infrared Spectrometry and Imaging represented a turning point in
                    the archaeological practice. This technology, particularly useful to gather
                    large geochemical datasets, has been successfully applied to the study of
                    various archaeological features at different scales, from landscapes survey to
                    characterization of lithic tools. 
                In this paper I discuss the epistemological implications with the study of stone
                    artefacts referring to new materialistic positions and the broader debate over
                    theoretical issues within archaeological sciences (,
                        , , , , ). Related to that I describe different case studies
                    in which the use of technology supported the experimentation of new protocols
                    for acquisition and processing of empirical data. From in-field measurements of
                    soils and pigments, to hyperspectral imaging of ancient walls and pedagogical
                    implications in teaching archaeometry, I will consider potentialities and
                    concerns with the use of spectral remote sensing. All the case studies presented
                    are carried out within the Mobima project
                        http://www.idesam.umu.se/english/research/research-projects/mobima--mobile-imaging-in-archaeology/
                    (Mobile Imaging in Archaeology), the goal of which is testing and developing
                    applications of short-range remote sensing techniques on archaeological
                    materials with a specific focus on Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIR). 
            

                Theories for disentangling an ecology of
                        things
                    
                The use of stone materials for various purposes is a constant throughout the
                    entire history of humanity. The mineral world has been quotidian to humans since
                    prehistory as a long-term entanglement: from hunter-gatherers’ knapped tools to
                    more recent mines, quarries, and buildings 
                    . From early humans up to this day, stone materials
                    come in different forms, textures, sizes, and correspond to precise needs. The
                    selection of particular raw materials supply sources is mostly determined by an
                    empirical observation of rock's chemical and mechanical properties. For example,
                    a certain type of marble has been suitable for a particular sort of art and
                    architecture, obsidian appears to be an appropriate material for blades and
                    spear tips, while pozzolana sand is good for hydraulic mortars. Other contingent
                    factors equally occur in the choice such as the range of raw materials naturally
                    available, the network of trades/exchanges and the accessibility of the bedrock.
                    Considering these circumstances we can affirm that a stone artefact is always
                    the product of the joint agencies of human and stone mutually influencing one
                    another.
                As Tilley states, 
                    social relations are simultaneously
                            relations between material forms
                        
                    ; as a consequence of that, the study of socio-cultural dimensions of
                    stone artefacts should also be based on the analysis of their structure and
                    physical properties. Material and physical agents together with social practices
                    are co-occurring in the network of human-stone interaction . A stone artefact encloses the 
                            objective nature of material culture and
                            the subjective experience of human beings
                        
                    , as the product of a long chain of interactions with other bodies
                    generating variations in their material tangible properties: rain, frost, and
                    sun provoke geochemical modifications on stones leading to decay and erosion; a
                    Roman marble inscription celebrating a victorious emperor can be cut and reused
                    as building material for a Romanesque cathedral. Various agencies are entangled
                    and can be categorized by using different chronological and spatial scales. For
                    example, usage of raw stone materials can be mapped by reconstructing the steps
                    of exploitation and colonization of natural resources in a region, while the
                    network of trades and transport is taken into account by tracing movements of
                    people and stone goods over longer distances. 
                The combination of a stone’s tangible and intangible properties is better
                    understood via its materiality, defined as: 
                        a notion that encompasses the view that
                            material and physical components of the environmental and the social
                            practices enacted in that environment are mutually reinforcing
                        
                    . Every object is part of a texture of matters, as outlined by , and the interactions between
                    humans-artefacts-environments can be read from the point of view of things. The
                    focus on an object’s materiality shifts the archaeological perspective on
                    cultural interpretation; the artefact is no longer a clue to be decoded but an
                    essential component of the past characterized by material properties that must
                    be explored in detail 
                    . To which extent can the study of stone artefacts’
                    materiality depend on the analysis of their physical properties? The
                    socio–cultural environment and the geological characteristics are equally
                    necessary to describe an artefact. In this sense, cultural interpretation and
                    archaeometric data are necessarily entangled. 
                Various terms have been used to refer to the study of geochemical characteristics
                    of stone artefacts. These terms often carry implicit theoretical connotations.
                    The debate over methods for collecting data concerning the geochemical
                    characteristics of objects is developed in the field named provenance studies
                    and generically defined by  as the study of
                    attributes suitable for tracing the raw material the artefact was made of and
                    where it was manufactured. Although the words provenience or provenance are
                    equally adopted to define this particular branch of archaeology, the use of one
                    or the other term is ambiguous. A debate has been undertaken by scholars
                    suggesting that the terms provenance and provenience actually refer to different
                    concepts and not only a spelling variation According to the Oxford
                        dictionary the two terms are synonymous and there is not a relevant
                        difference in the meaning http://www.oxforddictionaries.com (, , , , ). The distinction
                    between provenience and provenance is often related to the context. For example,
                    when associated with museum and archive policy for item acquisition, the word
                    provenance implies the history, the
                        life of the object including previous owners, while provenience is
                    the 
                        find spot
                        
                    . In relation to archaeological research, provenience is defined by Price
                    and Burton as either the place of
                        discovery of an object or its 
                        place of origin
                        
                    . I refer to provenance and provenience as indicating two different
                    methodological and theoretical strands. 
                In the US, the term provenience is used by archaeologists and chemists
                    principally indicating the place of origin of the raw material an artefact is
                    made from. A consequence of this concept is the provenience postulate that
                    states that: 
                        the chemical differences within a single
                            source of material must be less than the differences between two or more
                            sources of that material, if they are to be distinguished
                        
                    . In these terms, the study of an artefact’s provenience poses geochemical
                    analytical problems, especially for the definition of the material’s signature.
                    Consequently, the success in the application of the postulate is uncertain from
                    case to case and it depends on: type of materials, geographic distribution of
                    sources, analytical techniques, budget/costs, time, and type of artefacts 
                    . Nevertheless, a strict focus on the analytical
                    issues related to the application of the provenience postulate risks resulting
                    in a never-ending debate on different methods’ technical details. The use of
                    analytical methods must be related to the transformation of the paleo
                    environmental record and the problematics of artefacts’ proveniences need to be
                    contextualized in the site development dynamics. 
                I apply the term provenience to indicate the field of studies that aims at
                    finding the origins, the sources of the raw materials, marking a direct thread
                    which ties together supply-artefact and relies mostly on geochemical analytical
                    techniques. Provenience is a markedly static concept, which does not include the
                    interaction of the object itself and the environment.
                Nevertheless, the origin of raw materials is to be considered part of a more
                    comprehensive narrative of provenance: the chain of events that shaped what an
                    artefact looks like when we observe it. Objects are constituted primarily of raw
                    materials and are continuously altered, changing their properties and becoming
                    other things .The ecosystems, in which
                    artefacts and sources are situated, play an important role in defining a stone’s
                    geochemical signature as they are in continuous change. Quarries, mines or
                    outcrops are exposed to weathering and buried sites are influenced by post
                    depositional processes (modification occurring to the sediments once they are in
                    place), both of which are capable of causing a chemical alteration of the
                    geological materials. Environmental and human factors can make objects move.
                    Erosion, water transportation or human activity can carry artefacts far from
                    their place of production. All these movements and transformations might
                    interfere with a clear identification of the geochemical characteristics of
                    objects and sources, but are fundamental for defining the biography of the
                    artefacts.
                Provenance is therefore more appropriate to refer to the life of the items in
                    context, it applies to the entangled history of humans and stone materials as
                    traced by the co-occurrence of physical characteristics and acquired meanings.
                    Digital tools can help make visible the proofs of ongoing narratives, expressed
                    in objects’ intangible properties.
            

                Methods for assessing the invisible
                Artefacts are not crystallized traces of human activities but active players in
                    dynamic environments, referring to the interaction of distinct objects on
                    different scales of matters . The concept is not new
                    in archaeology and it can be backtracked to Schiffer’s work (1987) on the Formation processes of the archaeological record.
                    Although Schiffer makes a distinction between systemic contexts and
                    archaeological contexts, somehow a limitation to the hypothetic interactions
                    between humans and things, he classifies the processes that influence artefacts
                    in a physical way. Variations in the material attributes of objects should be
                    recorded and linked with the biography of the artefact itself, defined as
                    provenance. Measuring artefacts’ properties is a fundamental step for
                    understanding the stories of their provenances. This process of mapping
                    interactions is extremely challenging due to the high variability of physical
                    modification that may occur to things and that things contribute to. Considering
                    the material qualities of artefacts as the center of a network of social
                    relations, symbolization, physical interactions with the environment and
                    subsistence, we are able to formulate more interesting research questions within
                    a more comprehensive theoretical frame 
                    . A solid narrative of provenance relies on the
                    association of epistemological issues, sampling strategies and tools for the
                    collection of empirical data. A theory of things based on objects’ physical
                    properties is linked to the discussion on methods for gathering and processing
                    information. 
                Digital techniques, analytical tools and sampling strategies applied in different
                    case studies then must be calibrated on the target, adapted to record the
                    complexity of the network between humans-things and environment. The physical
                    and material properties of a stone artefact are measurable attributes, and
                    observations that can be conducted refer to standard systems: the geological
                    description (petrographic-mineralogical), the chemical characterization
                    (elements and properties, carried out using various methods) and the
                    documentation of traces resulting from the contact with other bodies (tool
                    marks, for example). Consequently, analytical tools can be designed to fulfill
                    the demand of a certain type of empirical data 
                    , avoiding the risk of generating datasets not
                    comprehensive of the set of issues that are the focus of theoretical practice
                        . 
                A substantial problem for the determination of stone materials’ characteristics
                    with geochemical quantitative analysis is represented by the choice of sampling
                    strategies. Geochemical methods applied in provenance studies (petrographic
                    analysis, X ray fluorescence, mass spectrometry, instrumental neutron
                    activation, just to mention some of them) are often destructive, expensive and
                    time consuming. Analytical techniques carried out in laboratories require a
                    careful selection of the objects to be studied. The system applied is often a
                    convenient sampling method based on project specific needs and related research
                    questions . I argue that this could result in a biased
                    dataset representing some specific targeted queries to the detriment of the
                    evaluation of the entire variability of the objects’ population. In selecting
                    variables to record and items to measure, archaeologists are influencing the
                    questions that can be posed to materials , testing
                    tools for recording and visualizing the material properties of a more
                    comprehensive range of artefacts is essential in order to defy workflows based
                    only on destructive and punctual analysis. 
                The choice of using Near Infrared Spectroscopy relies on practical and analytical
                    strategies. NIR is a technique based on recording different molecular vibrations
                    in the Near Infrared band of the electromagnetic spectrum. It is a
                    non-destructive method that requires the use of controlled light source and
                    digital captors (like cameras or probes) and that can be implemented in various
                    contexts. NIR covers the spectrum region between 700 and 2500 nm and contains
                    absorption bands corresponding to overtones and combinations of fundamental C-H,
                    O-H, and N-H vibrations. NIR has a scarce sensitivity to minor constituents, as
                    a Near Infrared Spectrum doesn’t present clear peaks but often it shows more
                    broad bands that are the result of aligned peaks .
                    Considering NIR properties, the identification of elements from a single
                    spectrum is often not worthwhile and a fingerprint approach is preferable. One
                    big advantage with the use of NIR is the fact that it is a nondestructive method
                    requiring a very simple sample preparation, and performs a long series of
                    measurements in a short time. This makes it a method with interesting
                    possibilities of application in archaeological research, recording spectra from
                    various elements several times. NIR is largely used as a control test in
                    pharmaceutics industries, agriculture, food production and geology. For example,
                    NIR has been applied to a wide range of geologic problems: mineralogical mapping
                    of lunar surface , mineral exploration , mineralogical analysis of drill cores , field mapping of expansive soils  and field mapping of mineral assemblages for gold
                    deposits explorations . The development of close
                    range hyperspectral imaging associated to LIDAR scanning has allowed rock
                    characterization of quarry walls both with natural and artificial light.
                    Mineralogical variation in vertically oriented rock faces has been mapped at
                    high resolution using a light weight hyperspectral imager .
                Moreover, several spectral reference libraries are already available as open
                    source from various agencies. The USGS has a database consisting of over 1300
                    spectra available
                        http://speclab.cr.usgs.gov/spectral-lib.html, the library
                    contains minerals, man-made materials, vegetation and other materials. Jet
                    Propulsion Laboratory ASTER Spectral library version 2.0 
                        http://speclib.jpl.nasa.gov contains more than 2400 spectra of
                    minerals, vegetation and man-made materials. 
                Mobima project’s target is to construct an experimental analytical protocol for
                    archaeological materials which could be applied to features directly in the
                    field or to large datasets of artefacts in laboratory. There are various
                    portable instruments on the market which allow us to multiply the number of
                    measurements and bring the laboratory directly to the field (for example,
                    portable X ray fluorescence or portable Raman spectrometers), due to the
                    constant development of tools for non-destructive analysis and handheld devices.
                    On the other hand, as a consequence of the use and misuse of these methods, an
                    opinion has spread that portable instruments are not sufficiently reliable for
                    chemical elemental characterization of archaeological objects (, , ). This opinion of portable instruments is likely
                    due to an insufficient evaluation of the data gathered and the instrument
                    settings/calibration, which had as an outcome the production of datasets
                    unacceptable in terms of accuracy for fulfilling the provenience postulate. 
                By using field-portable and quick image-based techniques, it is possible to get a
                    more global overview on materials’ surface chemical characteristics. NIR can be
                    used as a unique tool for categorizing different types of raw materials (using
                    spectral data as common fingerprints for same source artefacts) or as an
                    exploratory method to set sampling strategies for elemental analysis. The
                    adaptability of NIR instruments makes it possible to be applied to almost every
                    kind of material. The extended collection and interpretation of spectral data
                    could become a digital added value to an artefact’s optic description.
                Within the Mobima project two different devices are used for testing Near
                    Infrared Spectroscopy on archaeological materials.
                
                    The portable micro probe produced by JDSU (now Viavi) covers a wavelength
                        range of 908-1676 nm. The probe has two integrated tungsten lamps and a
                        captor that is 5x3mm wide. The probe is connected to a tablet used to manage
                        and store the records. The instrument is calibrated every 5 minutes (on
                        average) using a white and a black reference (see figure 1, on the left). The portable probe is suitable for
                        research directly in the field, is easy to carry and can record spectra in a
                        few seconds.
                     The Sisuchema Pushbroom short wave infrared hyperspectral imaging system
                        (1000–2498nm) is a non-portable Near Infrared (NIR) imaging system used in
                        the laboratory mounted on a conveyor belt for taking pictures of large
                        artefact datasets or sample series (see figure
                            1, on the right). 
                
                
                    The Viavi micro probe used for recording spectral data on structures
                        discovered during survey in Auvergne, France (on the left). The Sisuchema
                        Pushbroom hyperspectral camera in the laboratory at Umeå University while
                        scanning Mesolithic quartz tools (on the right).
                    
                    Two images: on the left, two men with a Viavi micro probe; on the
                        right, the Sisuchema Pushbroom hyperspectral camera in a lab.
                
                A parallel experiment is carried out testing the use of a modified reflex camera
                    for field imaging. By removing the blocking filters and adding two different NIR
                    filters (720 and 950 nm), it is possible to transform a digital SLR camera into
                    a tool for NIR multivariate imaging. The spectral information obtained with this
                    instrument is not as detailed as that collected with the Hyperspectral imager,
                    but it can still be used as a quick data evaluation technique (details in , ).
                These instruments in combination grant good coverage for collecting Near Infrared
                    spectra both in the field and in the laboratory. Both the NIR probe and the
                    Hyperspectral camera work connected to a tablet or a PC so that the data can be
                    evaluated directly during the field/lab operation. 
                NIR potentialities and limits for archaeological research can be evaluated
                    referring to the two instruments tested within the Mobima project (JDSU microNIR
                    and Sisuchema Pushbroom, mentioned above) according to precision, accuracy,
                    reliability and validity These concepts were codified in the 19th century by measurement and evaluation
                        theorists and applied for obsidian provenience studies 
                        . Here, a quick glossary: Precision: We consider precision as the relative standard
                        deviation for repeated measurements on a sample .
                        The measure of systematic error and random error can be considered as a
                        variable when calculating the reproducibility of a set of measurements.
                            Accuracy: Accuracy of a method is to be
                        checked against specimens with known composition from a recognized
                        organization. Furthermore, samples must be analyzed using two or more
                        analytical techniques. Reliability: Reliability
                        involves precision and accuracy  and it refers to
                        the difference in measurements in different conditions over time. In these
                        terms, reliability can be quantified on a population as relative standard
                        deviation or as a test for statistical difference . Validity: The definition of validity in
                        literature corresponds to two different levels. There is a quantifiable
                        validity coinciding to accuracy and defined as a constant standard deviation
                        (systematic error) that can be corrected, and a notional one referring to
                        the ability of an instrument to record values that are relevant for the
                        study target . According to Carmines and Zeller,
                        it is not possible to validate the instrument itself but that must be done
                        in relation to the specific purpose for which it is applied ..
                Working with the Micro NIR in the field, there might be a precision problem with
                    the positioning of the probe on the surface of the materials. The captor window
                    inside the instrument is usually small compared to the holder (4x2 mm, placed in
                    the center of a 4 cm wide holder): for this reason addressing a measurement on a
                    very specific spot becomes problematic (considering also the non-homogeneity of
                    many rock types). The calibration in the field is performed using a white
                    reference (100% reflectance) made by spectralon, a fluopolymer with the highest
                    diffuse reflectance of any known material in the near infrared region of the
                    spectrum. For the black reference (0% reflectance), the producers’
                    recommendation for the JDSU probe is to calibrate by pointing the spectrometer
                    in a dark corner. In field conditions finding a spot with no natural or
                    artificial light disturbance might be difficult, therefore an easy solution has
                    been adopted placing the probe on a sheet of fine grained black sand paper.
                    
                Accuracy of NIR portable spectrometers and imaging systems can be evaluated
                    within an internal validation model and in comparison with other non-destructive
                    and portable techniques. The method that has shown to be suitable for the
                    correlation, accordingly to our project aims and goals, is portable X-Ray
                    Fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) Another interesting correlation could be
                        done associating NIR and Raman spectroscopy for the study of stone materials
                        in the field. Raman is a vibrational non-destructive spectroscopic
                        technique. Like NIR, this method is fast and does not require complicated
                        sample preparation. Raman spectroscopy has been used in geology for sourcing
                        rock materials, as the minerals can be easily identified without major
                        problems . It is possible to find on the market
                        miniaturized portable Raman spectrometers, but so far there are few
                        publications evaluating the use of these devices . In contrast to NIR, Raman spectroscopy requires more technical expertise
                        but results in sharper peaks. The two methods can be considered as
                        complementary as the excitation occurs in different vibrational states and
                        molecular bonds that are not active within one method are generally active
                        in the other one..
                XRF is a well-established technique used for sourcing materials in archaeology.
                    Scholars have been debating the applicability of portable XRF devices for
                    provenience studies (, ,
                        ) and the discussion about the reliability and
                    the treatment of such data is still open. A major problem is presented by the
                    application of calibration systems. Handheld portable XRF devices are often sold
                    with a series of calibration models loaded in the system. The models are
                    calibrated through a fundamental parameter routine against samples of known
                    composition. This type of calibration is good for a presence/absence assessment
                    but not accurate enough for provenience elemental analysis . 
            

                NIR in practice
                Within Mobima, the research focus is on method development and experimental
                    design. For this reason, the project is run on various materials and sites.
                    Portable NIR spectroscopy has proved effective in relation to some case studies
                    already published and in particular for stone materials characterization (, , ). 
                The first application of NIR in archaeology within this framework was the study
                    run on bone fragments classification in archeological soils by means of NIR. The
                    NIR hyperspectral imaging was applied to the identification of animal bone
                    material in complex sieved soil-sediment matrices from a mid-Mesolithic site in
                    northern Scandinavia. The whole dataset of bones and teeth samples was analyzed
                    through image based nondestructive techniques and used as reference for the
                    identification of fragmented skeletal material on soils from the excavation. The
                    information about the bones’ chemistry-mineralogy variability within the site
                    and in different layers provided information about the state of preservation of
                    the materials . 
                A field based study of rock paintings in northern Scandinavia was carried out
                    during the autumn of 2014 using the NIR portable Micro probe. The detailed
                    results from the targeted analysis on a panel in Flatruet, Härjedalen, Sweden
                    show a large spread in spectral data from red paintings and the background.
                    Nevertheless, evidence of clustering was observed and using multivariate data
                    analysis and it was possible to separate the information related to the
                    paintings. 
                Using partial least squared discriminant analysis and setting bedrock and paint
                    as discriminant variables, the separation was clear and the model was used for a
                    classification test. The classification was run on 20 samples (10 paint and 10
                    background) and only three spectra were misclassified. An analytical problem
                    emerged due to the spread of secondary iron oxides from precipitation on the
                    surface of the rock wall but this resulted in measurement noise rather than a
                    real item classification problem. In a local model scale, looking at the
                    different composition of pigments within two painted figures, it was possible to
                    spot the difference between two different elks feasibly painted with different
                    red pigments . This study opened the way for
                    further on-site analysis of painted prehistoric panels, highlighting some
                    analytical problems and showing how they could be overcome. 
                Since February 2016 a comprehensive field study has been launched on the medieval
                    city walls of the city of Carcassonne (France). The study was initiated as an
                    international collaboration between the Umeå University (Sweden), the French
                    university of Rennes 2 and IRSTEA Montpellier. The goal was the application of
                    different spectral techniques for the study of the use of raw stone materials in
                    the fortress walls. The data were collected using a NEO HySpex-320m-e camera
                    (1000-2500 nm), mounted on a pulley system and moving on a rail. The
                    Hyperspectral data were associated to NIR enhanced color photography and point
                    measurements performed with NIR microprobe and compared to portable XRF (Thermo
                    Scientific Niton XL3t ED-XRF analyser using a 50 kV X-ray tube with an Ag target
                    and a Si (Pin)-detector and applying the Mining Cu-Zn calibration). The dataset
                    was processed through multivariate methods in order to evaluate the clusters and
                    draw a first overview of the materials’ provenance .
                    The association of various methods allowed the understanding of the dynamics of
                    stone use and re-use on the entire extent of the walls in different
                    chronological periods. Such a wide perspective is crucial to understand the
                    impact of the monumental construction in the landscape in terms of materials
                    supply and exploitation of quarrying sites. 
                Near Infrared Spectroscopy has been successfully used also for educational
                    purposes, in particular within the archaeological field school for master
                    students in the environmental archaeology program at Umeå University. On
                    excavation, students collect and process data in real time. This approach is
                    pedagogic for understanding the correlation between features observed in the
                    field and chemical properties registered in the Infrared Spectra.
                    Non-destructive field-based analytical techniques are taught together with
                    traditional sampling strategies and wet chemical laboratory analysis.
                Applications of Near Infrared Spectroscopy in geology are mostly related to
                    industrial and mining research, while within archaeological
                    provenance/provenience studies elemental analysis is generally preferred. There
                    is still some resistance amongst archaeological geochemistry specialists towards
                    the applications of NIR for stone materials studies, motivated by the
                    difficulties in making element identification from the spectral data. This
                    argument is legitimate when the research goal is sourcing materials fulfilling
                    the provenience postulate (mentioned above, ) only according to defined and quantified geochemical
                    association of elements. It would be a mistake to focus on measurement precision
                    to the detriment of the archaeological accuracy needed for a determined case
                    study . Within the Mobima project, the Near
                    Infrared spectra are often not evaluated for peaks identification but their
                    shape corresponds to the combination of chemical elements constituting a single
                    material bar code. Of course, this approach involves some inconvenience. The
                    direct comparison of chemical elements in stone materials obtained with other
                    analytical methods becomes arduous. Nevertheless, by multiplying the
                    measurements and processing the dataset through layers of multivariate analysis,
                    it is possible to create local models for clustering and sourcing. 
            

                Data mining, data minding
                NIR spectroscopy can be used extensively as a digital screening method. The
                    application of this type of target specific portable spectroscopy or imaging
                    technique provides a detailed overview of the physical-chemical characteristics
                    of the materials. NIR turns into a crucial tool for looking at the large scale
                    variability of stone artefacts’ qualities and an essential sampling tool for
                    elemental analysis. The application of NIR to archaeological research makes it
                    possible to collect big datasets in short time 
                    . The first field test application of the NIR
                    probe for the study of rock paintings allowed the collection of 1432 spectra in
                    the near infrared within working five days and from six different sites . The time for each measurement is about 1-2
                    seconds and there is no limit to the number of records. The data collected with
                    the Micro probe are stored as data matrix files in which the
                    variables/wavelengths are reported. The spectra can be visualized on the
                    laptop/tablet in real time during the acquisition. 
                
                    SWIR images visualized on the laptop in real time during data acquisition
                        (Carcassonne project)
                    
                    A laptop with visualizations on the screen.
                
                The hyperspectral image files are more laborious to process. Depending on the
                    size of the image the dimension of the data files can vary from about 50 to 500
                    MB (raw format). When working with the lithics from a site, for example, we have
                    to deal with image datasets of up to 22 GB for a total of 2261 objects analyzed.
                    For these reasons the computing time for processing information must be taken
                    into account. The use of a large dataset means that the sampling bias becomes
                    less influential, and the responsibility of the researchers in choosing the
                    fragment to analyze is reduced. The procedures adopted by the Mobima Project
                    members are based on a Big Data Approach, consisting in hierarchical and cluster
                    models. Archaeometry, like the rest of archaeology, is involved in the big
                        data challenge
                    , both from a computational and a theoretical
                    point of view, statistical and interpretative tools are improved to handle large
                    amounts of information. When analyzing a big dataset lacking in structure
                    (meaning not structured in a SQL database) with statistical tools we can spot
                    similarities and patterns among the data (see figure
                        3). This modus operandi is usually referred to as data mining and it
                    allows to cross reference large datasets and create clusters of aggregated data
                        . Within a data mining practice the information is
                    processed in order to find correlations rather than causations . 
                In order to follow this path we apply methods issued from the data driven
                    discipline of chemometrics, which focuses on the application of mathematical
                    methods for analyzing chemical data. Chemometrics deals with both descriptive
                    and predictive analysis and it is grounded especially in multivariate data
                    analysis. Principal Component models are used as exploratory tools to spot
                    patterns in the data matrix. Image mapping is based on cluster analysis so that
                    similar spectral values can be projected directly on the picture. Spectral
                    information is evaluated and associated to the spatial distribution on the
                    object surface. The data collected are processed using the software Evince by
                    Prediktera, which is designed for operating image mapping, spectral
                    transformations and multivariate statistics (more details on the software at
                        www.prediktera.se). 
                
                    Detail of the inner wall of Carcassonne acquired with the NEO
                        HySpex-320m-e camera system. On the right the PCA model shows all the pixel
                        values distributed in the multivariate space, on the left the same pixels in
                        the image are colored according to the intensity value (t1). It is easy to
                        spot the compositional difference between the building materials, in this
                        case sandstone, and the architectural mortar. Moreover the hyperspectral
                        image highlights some inclusion in the sandstone (blue dots in the center on
                        the image) that can be used to establish the quarry of origin.
                    
                    Two side-by-side visualizations.
                
                NIR technology associated with chemometrics becomes a powerful tool for screening
                    and evaluating big datasets, by working on associations among different
                    materials in a way that couldn’t have been possible with other elemental
                    analyses. The visual approach to chemical data that can be reached with these
                    tools shifts the focus on the variability of the chemical properties of stones
                    in a local model instead of a determination of the singular elements. The
                    visualization of spectral data directly during the acquisition via digital tools
                    represents a substantial difference between NIR and other analytical methods.
                    The invisible attributes of stones can be disclosed while looking at the
                    artefacts themselves, providing an advantageous tool for sampling and work
                    planning. 
            

                Conclusions
                In the first section of this paper the theoretical frame of the study of stone
                    artefacts was problematized in order to delineate a more solid protocol for
                    tracing the provenance of objects. Moving from a theoretical body for the study
                    of stone-human entanglement, focusing on non-human agencies, to the empirical
                    data collection represents a challenge for our discipline.
                It was shown how the adoption of new analytical procedures could be helpful for
                    acquiring geochemical data, in particular a sampling strategy targeted to the
                    reduction of the influence of researchers’ prejudice about materials could help
                    focus more on artefacts’ materiality.
                NIR offers a range of interesting possibilities. Portable spectrometers and
                    imaging systems are versatile instruments that can be used as short range remote
                    sensing tools both in the laboratory and in the field. The technical peculiarity
                    of this type of spectrometry makes it possible to distribute the measurements on
                    the surface of the objects allowing a diffuse quantification of the chemical
                    properties and the direct observation of their variability.
                Visualizing and increasing exponentially the number of measurements performed is
                    a critical step in order to build an analytical protocol adequate to represent
                    the peculiarity of chemical-geological information at different scales. The
                    preliminary results from the Mobima project show how the application of NIR
                    technology represents a resource for looking at the intangible strands of an
                    artefact’s biography. Near Infrared Spectroscopy can be adopted as a screening
                    technique for picturing geological materials’ chemical topography, involving in
                    the analysis information that would have otherwise been neglected. In different
                    archaeological contexts NIR tools can provide precious information, however the
                    application is dependent on a good understanding of the spectral signatures of
                    various materials, together with statistical modelling. 
                NIR spectra datasets are useful sources of information about correlations between
                    objects; however, the archaeologists still hold responsibility for the
                    interpretation of these patterns. Knowing what type of pigment was used in a
                    rock painting gives us a suggestion about the painter’s technological know-how
                    and the materials she/he had at disposal, but it could indirectly contribute to
                    the definition of a typo technological series of paintings on different sites.
                    NIR spectra can help us understanding how much of the Roman walls of Carcassonne
                    still stand but will not suggest what happened to the rest of the blocks.
                As other digital analytical tools, NIR can help record the visible and invisible
                    traces of events embedded in the physical form of a stone artefact; discerning
                    how these data are tied together and with other elements is the challenge thrown
                    down to researchers.
                Biographies of stones are intertwined to help us estimate the mapping of bodies
                    and agencies on different scales; the combination of proofs collected with these
                    tools can be the foundation for interpreting the invisible. In a 
                        past formed from a turmoil of multiple voices
                        
                    , the stone call can be detected by means of digital analytical tools.
                
            

                Acknowledgements
                Thanks to the Mobima project: Johan Linderholm, Paul Geladi for the work done
                    together in the last two years. Thanks to Johan Hallqvist, Dominique Allios and
                    Lorenza La Rosa for feedback.
                The Marcus and Amalia Wallenberg foundation is to be acknowledged for financially
                    supporting this project. 
            
