Title:  Reconstructing
                        
Volume:  012
Issue:  2
Date:  5 September 2018
Abstract:  
                
                This paper explores the art history, the digital aesthetics, the technical
                    anatomy, and the restoration of Shu Lea Cheang’s early web artwork Brandon (1998-1999). Commissioned two decades ago by
                    the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, the work is just back on view to the public
                    after a major restoration. It seems timely to consider Cheang’s artwork: a
                    collaboration between the artist and a network of programmers, designers,
                    authors and other contributors that offers a creative platform for remembering
                    and engaging with histories and issues of identity from the LGBTQ+ community. In
                    the spirit of the piece, this article is a multi-disciplinary collaboration
                    between a curator, a media art conservator, a computer scientist, and a scholar
                    of the digital liberal arts, which brings together these different areas of
                    expertise to offer an innovative and multi-faceted consideration of one artwork
                    from a digital humanities perspective.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Commissioned by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Brandon (1998–99) by Shu Lea Cheang is a landmark art project that
                    spans disciplinary boundaries. The multipart work comprises a sprawling network
                    of components including online digital interfaces, live public programs hosted
                    by collaborating institutions in the United States and Europe, and a multimedia
                    installation. Realized at a moment when the internet was coming into widespread
                    use, Brandon is among the most ambitious digital
                    projects of its time and the first artwork in the Guggenheim’s permanent
                    collection to use the Web as a primary medium. As a memorial to Brandon Teena, a
                    trans person who was raped and murdered in Nebraska in 1993, Cheang’s work also
                    represents a crucial intervention in gender studies, raising questions about
                    rights and identity that remain urgent today. The critical questions about the
                    relationships between gender and technology that Brandon raises anticipate those being asked by contemporary artists
                    who have not previously had the opportunity to interact with the work.
                Yet for many years, Brandon had been inaccessible to
                    a wide public due to technological obsolescence. The Guggenheim’s recent
                    restoration of the work sparked a reevaluation of its art historical, cultural,
                    and technological significance. Brandon’s enduring
                    importance stems from its highly collaborative structure, which incorporates
                    contributions by numerous prominent scholars, artists, and programmers. Yet this
                    sprawling form also poses unique challenges for evaluating the work. The process
                    of restoring, studying, and presenting Brandon to
                    contemporary audiences must be as multidisciplinary as the work itself,
                    involving media conservators, computer scientists, curators, and humanities’
                    scholars. Only by considering the work from multiple perspectives — historical,
                    theoretical, technical, and aesthetic — can a full understanding of its
                    importance be achieved. 
                A narrated screen navigation of the web artwork Brandon can be found at . 
            

                1.  www.brandon.guggenheim.org
                    : An Art-historical Analysis
                
                    ...how do we not stifle the web as an
                        art medium...how do we not consider being in a ‘museum’ meaning the ultimate
                        recognition of a ‘work of art’ that the work is set and done...these are the
                        burdens of mine. To launch this project I want to be given space to
                        experiment, to fail (fail on the part of interfacing with an unknown net
                        public). - Shu Lea Cheang 
                
                Shu Lea Cheang’s Brandon, “a one year narrative project in
                    installments” launched online on June 30, 1998. One of the most ambitious
                    projects that the new media artist and activist had realized at that point in
                    her career, the web artworkThroughout this article we identify Shu Lea
                        Cheang’s Brandon as a web artwork, reflecting
                        the artist’s own differentiation between web art and net art in her practice
                        at this time. See . was inspired by the
                    story of trans man Brandon Teena. The work explores “issues of gender fusion and
                    the techno-body in both public space and cyberspace”  through a meta-narrative structure defined by
                    hyperlinks to a network of connected interfaces that begins with the splash page
                        (Figure 1). Brandon is also a landmark in the history of the Solomon R.
                    Guggenheim Museum, representing the first web-based artwork that the institution
                    commissioned for a planned “Virtual Museum.” The launch of www.brandon.guggenheim.org was linked to its display at the
                    Guggenheim’s now defunct satellite venue in New York’s SoHo neighborhood.
                    Visitors to the launch event encountered an installation that included three
                    interactive computer workstations and live navigation of the browser windows
                    displayed on a 14 foot high by 45 foot long video wall consisting of 75 stacked
                    rear projection cubes (Figures 2 and 3). A simultaneous live chat in one of the
                    artwork’s interfaces linked the audience in SoHo with the artist and other
                        Brandon users at the Theatrum Anatomicum at the
                    De Waag Society for Old and New Media in Amsterdam, where Cheang was an artist
                    in residence. With technical grace and
                        an unprecedentedly epic scale, reported Austin Bunn of the Village Voice, 
                        Brandon
                            makes a bid to become the inaugural piece in the canon of online
                            art
                        
                    .
                Cheang characterized the work as a multi-artist/multi-author/multi-institutional collaboration” that
                        unfolded over the course of a year with periodic content uploads
                    . Brandon included
                    contributions by dozens of artists, writers and technologists (Figure 4) as well as uploads from two live events
                    that were simulcast through the internet and featured cultural critics,
                    theorists and academics from a wide range of fields held in both the US and
                    Europe. The work’s fundamentally collaborative nature reflects a core tenet of
                    much web-based artwork produced in the 1990s; indeed, for Cheang it was the
                    medium itself that made the artwork possible .
                        
                        The splash page of Shu Lea Cheang’s Brandon (1998-99), Interactive networked code (html, Java,
                            Javascript and server database). Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York.
                            Commissioned by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, and produced in
                            association with the Waag Society for Old and New Media, The Institute
                            on the Arts and Civic Dialogue at Harvard University, and The Banff
                            Centre, with additional funding from The Bohen Foundation, The
                            Rockefeller Foundation, the New York Foundation for the Arts, and the
                            Mondriaan Foundation. Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R.
                            Guggenheim Museum.
                        
                    
                    
                        The video wall at the Guggenheim Museum, SoHo displaying Shu Lea
                            Cheang’s Brandon (1998-99). Ⓒ Solomon R.
                            Guggenheim Museum.
                        
                    
                    
                        Impressions of Brandon’s launch event at
                            the Guggenheim Museum, SoHo on June 30, 1998. Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                            Museum.
                        
                    
                        Cheang’s collaborators are listed on Brandon’s credit page. Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ
                            Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                        
                    
                
                    1.1 Brandon: the Artwork
                    Cheang’s work memorializes Brandon Teena, a twenty-one-year-old trans man
                        living in Nebraska who was brutally raped and murdered in 1993. Brandon
                        Teena’s story became a touchstone for bringing visibility to transgender
                        people and their struggles in the United States. Brandon Teena was the
                        subject of a 1998 documentary film The Brandon Teena
                            Story and the award-winning 1999 feature Boys Don’t Cry. Cheang’s response to Brandon Teena’s story
                        departs from the linear narratives and psychological realism of these later
                        films. 
                    Instead of a biography of Brandon Teena, the artwork Brandon examines the structural conditions that have confronted
                        trans people in contemporary society. The work’s five different interactive
                        web interfaces, bigdoll, roadtrip, mooplay, panopticon, and theatrum
                            anatomicum (Figures 5-9), employ images and texts that meld
                        critical histories of gender and sexuality with contemporary perspectives on
                        American culture, emphasizing expressions of institutionalized violence.
                        Cheang’s project further suggests parallels between gender and the malleable
                        forms of public and private identity that can be constituted online.
                    For the Guggenheim commission, Cheang described her intention to deploy
                        Brandon 
                            into cyberspace through
                                multi-layered narratives and images whose trajectory lead to issues
                                of crime and punishment in the cross-section between real space and
                                virtual space
                            
                        . The basic structure of the project belies the conceptually rigorous
                        and at times impenetrable navigation of the website. Persistence and
                        exploration are required to unlock each interface which often proves
                        challenging to users, an intention of the artist: “I am testing the limits
                        of [users'] frustration level” Cheang said in a 1998 interview .
                    
                            The bigdoll interface. Screenshot:
                                Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                            The roadtrip interface. Screenshot:
                                Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                            The mooplay interface. Screenshot:
                                Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            The panopticon interface. Screenshot:
                                Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            The theatrum anatomicum interface.
                                Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                         Artist Jordy Jones was Cheang’s primary collaborator on the bigdoll interface (Figure
                            5), which is subtitled recombinant social body. Working
                        with JavaScript programmer Cherise Fong, Jones developed a bank of images
                        and texts related to gender and identity that would be displayed in random
                        sets, with order and placement shuffled every time the page was accessed.
                        For example, the phrase SHE’S A HE might appear surrounded by images
                        of a person in a business suit and a close-up picture of a pierced nipple.
                        Jones further invited other artists to contribute images to the archive over
                        the course of the project’s development.
                    The roadtrip interface (Figure 6) is a nonlinear text and image framework laced with
                        hyperlinks that uses the highway as a key motif. According to Cheang, the
                        interface was 
                            [c]onceived to upload Brandon
                                onto the cyberzone where he surfs across Nebraska’s route 75
                            
                        . Users encounter a cascade of texts and images related to various
                        figures with fluid gender identities: Herculine Barbin, a nineteenth-century
                        French hermaphrodite; a Mississippi Man named James McHarris who was
                        stripped in a courtroom to determine his gender in 1954; Venus EXtravaganza,
                        a drag queen who was featured in the 1989 film Paris is
                            Burning; and Baby Bean, a
                        nineteenth-century transexual. Four episodes describe
                        Brandon Teena’s fictional encounters with each of these figures on an
                        extended journey. Roadtrip also represents the
                        backbone of the work, including links to the other interfaces that users
                        must find by clicking on various moving images.
                    The mooplay interface (Figure 7) draws upon the experiential qualities of the early
                        1990s text-based, networked systems called MOO. The interactive MOOs allow
                        for multi-user engagement in virtual reality settings that often involved
                        role playing through user created characters. The mooplay interface simulates the experience of a live MOO. It
                        features narratives written by Pat Cadigan, Lawrence Chua, and Francesca da
                        Rimini, which are presented together in mixup,
                        a page within the interface, in scrambled forms. As with bigdoll, loading the site recombines the elements
                        on the page, meaning that no two users encounter exactly the same story. At
                        the heart of these narratives are a series of personae,
                        developed by each of the contributing writers, that appears inchoate, and
                        ever-changing. Among the ten fictitious characters whose names appear as
                        hyperlinks in mixup, are snakeboy,
                            dolyoko and donmonster. A JavaScript applet offers a
                            pseudo chat between users and these personae, with
                        predetermined sentences producing the effect of engaging with various
                        identities in an online social space.
                    The panopticon interface (Figure 8), developed by Beth Stryker and Auriea
                        Harvey, is a virtual simulation of Jeremy Bentham’s concept for an ideal
                        prison in which inmates occupied cells arranged in a circle around a central
                        guard tower. The web environment was inspired by Cheang’s visit to the
                        Koepel prison in Arnhem, Netherlands — one of the prototypical examples of
                        this form of architecture. Heavily informed by Foucault’s theoretical
                        analysis of the Panopticon as a metaphor for social life in modernity, the
                        interface features an array of images related to surveillance by both the
                        government and the medical establishment. Cheang’s work surveys how powerful
                        institutions manage diseases of
                            the social body, especially those related to so-called sexual
                        deviance and gender nonconformity . The six
                            cells and six hospital wards
                        in Cheang’s Panopticon are populated by images of prisoners and patients set
                        to undergo invasive surgeries. Each image is accompanied by a text relating
                        to overlaps between the medical establishment and the carceral state. For
                        example, one text relates to a 1907 eugenics law passed by the state of
                        Indiana mandating forced sterilization for people in state custody.
                    Finally, the theatrum anatomicum interface (Figure 9), connects the web-based components of
                            Brandon to several live events. According
                        to Cheang, the interface resets the dissecting table
                        designed for an anatomical body in order to similarly study the 
                            gendered social body
                            
                        . This virtual space hosted images and texts related to performances
                        staged in an actual seventeenth-century operating theater in Amsterdam,
                        which had been reconfigured as the Society for Old and New Media, De Waag,
                        Amsterdam, where Cheang developed the theatrum
                            anatomicum interface during her residency. At the time of Brandon’s launch, theatrum
                            anatomicum, which was modeled after the physical space in De
                        Waag, had not been fully activated, anticipating the live events later that
                        year that would populate the interface with new content.
                
                
                    1.2 Shu Lea Cheang: the Artist and her Practice
                    Brandon embodies interests that have been and
                        continue to be central to Cheang’s career — both in terms of its subject
                        matter and the collaborative working process that the artist initiated. Shu
                        Lea Cheang was born in 1954 in Taiwan and has lived and worked in the United
                        States as well as in Japan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and France,
                        where she currently resides. She describes herself as an artist, filmmaker, [and] networker, as she has
                        worked in a variety of mediums: film, video, installation, and web
                            projects.
                    In the early 1980s, Cheang was part of the New York-based Paper Tiger
                        Television collective, a group that produced public access television
                        programs that critiqued corporate control over broadcast networks and
                        offered an alternative source of news and a platform for experimental video
                        production. Cheang began creating video installations for art spaces in the
                        early 1990s. These multiscreen pieces grappled with subjects ranging from
                        the Tiananmen Square Massacre to representations of Asian identity in the
                        mass media . In 1995, she realized her first
                        web-based project, Bowling Alley (1995–1996),
                        for the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis. The commission linked the Walker's
                        galleries to a local bowling alley with a web-based video-link running on an
                        Apple PowerBook. According to Cheang, the piece was an examination of how
                        private and public spaces were becoming intertwined through network
                        technology, a theme Cheang explored again in Brandon.
                    The activist orientation of Cheang’s work, as well as her career-long
                        commitment to utilizing new media — be it video, cable
                        networks, or the web — continues in the present. Cheang’s projects address
                        profound social disruptions while manifesting an underlying sense of humor
                        and taste for the absurd. One of Cheang’s most complex works, I.K.U. (2001), initially took the form of what the
                        artist describes as a Japanese Sci-Fi Porn feature. It
                        spawned a sequel project, U.K.I. (2009-2014).
                        The latter includes a viral performance for which a
                        cast climbed over piles of junked keyboards and computers. Additionally,
                        Cheang produced an online viral game in which users are
                        pitted against a futuristic corporation that’s intent on reprogramming the human orgasm on a
                        biological information network — a corporeal World Wide Web.
                
                
                    1.3 Brandon's Live Events
                    In each of her previous projects, Cheang maintained a link between the
                        physical realities of embodied experience and the virtual world. The artist
                        described herself as a cyber-nomad during the period of Brandon’s development, appearing frequently on an international
                        circuit of festivals, conferences and biennials . She
                        described 
                            experimenting with boundary
                                crossing between the actual (state/nation) and virtual
                                (anonymous/avatars)
                            
                        . The subtitle of Brandon,
                        a one year narrative project in
                            installments refers to a sustained enrichment of the site and
                        the series of four live events through which the artist enacted this
                        boundary crossing. In addition to the netlinked launch
                        event on June 30, 1998, three additional programs took place in
                            real life, underscoring the necessity during this early
                        period of web-based art to maintain a physical experience of the
                        artwork.
                    On the night of August 5, 1998 at The Institute for Arts and Civic Dialogue
                        at Harvard University, Cheang staged A Virtual Court
                            Test Trial for Brandon to provide an opportunity for the BRANDON project to interact
                            with a theatre-going public and netizens, with the goal of
                        developing a virtual court system that would open a dialogue on both real
                        and virtual crimes . The test trial
                        (under the artistic direction of Anna Deavere Smith) invited the
                            net public, as well as scholars and legal experts
                        ranging from Lawrence Lessig to Kendall Thomas, to serve as jurors for six
                        simulated court cases. The presentation of five of these sexual-assault
                        cases included actual court documents, evidence, and testimony performed by
                        five actors through a script prepared by Cheang and a team of researchers.
                        The cases included the wrongful death suit that Brandon Teena’s mother
                        brought against the county sheriff (Brandon v. County of Richardson), the
                            cyber rape case Legba v. Mr. Bungle (see ) and the Chanelle Pickett case (Chanelle Pickett
                        v. William C. Palmer) about a trans woman who was murdered in Watertown,
                        Massachusetts in 1995. The audience at the event was by invitation only but
                        the public could watch a simulcast and log on to a live chat room on the
                            Brandon website. The performance was
                        exploratory rather than conclusive, as Cheang noted, 
                            ...in the end we’re not
                                making any judgment calls. There will be no sentencing
                            
                        .
                    Like Brandon’s launch event, the third and
                        fourth live events were simultaneously staged inside the Theatrum Anatomicum
                        at De Waag and at the Guggenheim’s SoHo branch, and
                            simulcast with audio and video streams that
                        connected both venues through Brandon (Figures
                            10 and 11).
                        On September 20, 1998, the third live event, Digi
                            Gender, Social Body: Under the Knife, Under the Spell of
                            Anesthesia took place. The forum included a panel discussion in
                        SoHo and performance in Amsterdam that sought to relocate the 17th
                            century public dissecting lessons...as a digital-age net
                            spectacle...with cultural critics, genderists and
                            biotechnologists conducting a 
                            virtual surgical operation on
                                the theory and construction of technosocial bodies
                            
                        . The centerpiece was an activation of the installation designed by
                        Atelier Van Lieshout (Figures 12 and 13) based on the drawings of the Theater
                        Anatomicum by Jonas Zeuner from 1773. Recalling dissecting lessons of the
                        seventeenth century, the installation included an operating table and
                        suspended rings that held a revolving web camera which captured and
                        transmitted the live event. Instead of a live surgery as Cheang had hoped to
                        broadcast from a clinic, the main operating table held a projection screen
                        carrying images of sexual reassignment surgery and the Theatre Anatomicum interface from Brandon. In place of medical doctors, a panel of
                            surgeons including scholars of media theory and
                        LGBTQ+ studies such as Allucquére Rosanne Sandy Stone
                        and Susan Stryker, verbally operated on the concept of digi
                            gender. 
                            Technical diagram of the live audio and video connection that was
                                established between the Guggenheim SoHo and De Waag in Amsterdam for
                                the DigiGenderSocialBody event on September 20, 1998, here detailing
                                the set-up at De Waag. Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            Technical diagram of the live audio and video connection that was
                                established between the Guggenheim SoHo and De Waag in Amsterdam for
                                the DigiGenderSocialBody event on September 20, 1998, here detailing
                                the set-up at Guggenheim SoHo. Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum
                            
                        
                        
                             The installation by Atelier Van Lieshout at the Theatrum
                                Anatomicum, Society for Old and New Media, De Waag, Amsterdam
                                featured a revolving webcam that was used to live-stream video
                                imagery of Brandon’s events via the
                                interface theatrum anatomicum. Foto: Derk Jan Wooldrik Ⓒ Courtesy of
                                De Waag Society of Old and New Media.
                            
                        
                        
                            Detail of installation view of Atelier Van Lieshout construction
                                for Shu Lea Cheang’s Brandon (1998-99)
                                at the Theatrum Anatomicum, Society for Old and New Media, De Waag,
                                Amsterdam.
                            
                        
                    
                    The fourth and last live event, 
                            a virtual courtroom where
                                crime and punishment calls for public debate
                            
                        , was held on November 15-20, 1999. Building on the 1998 test trial at
                        Harvard University, the session was titled Would the
                            Jurors Please Stand Up? Crime and Punishment as Net Spectacle.
                        The event established parallels between medical institutions, the legal
                        system, and broad social attitudes toward gender and violence. Participants
                        could apply to become jurors using a court interface on the Brandon website that included case questionnaires (Figure 14). At the Amsterdam venue, laptops
                        were mounted onto the Atelier Lieshout installation for participants to
                        engage in the virtual court. In this final live event, as in the previous
                        forums, Cheang continued to cross virtual and real boundaries to explore and
                        challenge viewer’s perceptions of identity, gender and violence in an
                        emergent online space. As she noted in an interview from the time: 
                            If virtual worlds are used as
                                laboratories, it’s easier to recognize the possibilities for change
                                — both within a virtual environment, and, just maybe, in the real
                                world as well
                            
                        . 
                            Screenshot of the web questionnaire for Would
                                    the Jurors Please Stand Up? Crime and Punishment as Net
                                    Spectacle held from November 17-20, 1999. Ⓒ Shu Lea
                                Cheang
                            
                        
                
                
                    1.4 Brandon's Context and Commission
                    Though the digital form of Brandon may have been
                        a new type of acquisition for the Guggenheim, the project fits into a larger
                        post-WWII tradition of artists experimenting with new media and
                        technologies. The burgeoning net.art scene of the 1990s offers the most
                        immediate context for Brandon. In addition to
                        adopting networked technology, artists including jodi.org (Joan Heemskerk
                        and Dirk Paesmans), Alexei Shulgin, and Vuk Ćosić valued dispersed modes of
                        authorship and sought to circulate their work in venues outside of
                        traditional art institutions. Because many key net.art projects from the
                        time explicitly rejected museum display and required new approaches to
                        collecting, Brandon represents a rare
                        opportunity to bring institutional resources to bear on understanding and
                        preserving a work from this pioneering period.
                    Cheang also joined artists such as the VNS Matrix collective (Virginia
                        Barratt, Julianne Pierce, Josephine Starrs, and Francesca da Rimini) in
                        utilizing the virtual space of the web to challenge fixed notions of gender
                        and sexuality. VNS Matrix are among the first artists to use the term
                        cyberfeminism to describe their practice. Cheang self-identified as a closet cyberfeminist
                        claiming sympathies with the broad notion of female and queer access to
                        online spaces and visibility within them while distancing herself from a 
                            declared movement
                            
                        . It’s also important to consider Cheang in the context of artists
                        exploring identity offline in the 1980s and 1990s (see 4.3). Cheang’s 1993 installation Those
                            Fluttering Objects of Desire was included in that year’s Whitney
                        Biennial, an exhibition that famously brought questions about race, gender
                        and sexuality to the foreground of American art discourses.
                    Cheang first began working on Brandon in the
                        mid-1990s and wrote a proposal by 1995 that identified it as a web project...designed and conducted
                            as time-based hypernarrative on the WWWebLand
                        . Her early sketches of the interface (Figure 15), from her residency at the Banff
                        Media Centre in Canada already demonstrate the complex direction she hoped
                        to take the work. Cheang anticipated the potential the web could provide for
                        artistic experimentation and technological innovation noting, it’s been so great working with
                            DeWaag’s design team and programmer...I earn my respect! Not every[o]ne
                            believes artist[s] can push technology further
                        . John G. Hanhardt, the former Guggenheim Senior
                        Curator for Film and Media Arts, initiated the commissioning process.
                        Hanhardt had previously worked with Cheang at the Whitney Museum of American
                        Art, where he had been a curator in the mid-1990s. Hanhardt’s team at the
                        Guggenheim included Matthew Drutt, Associate Curator for Research, who
                        shepherded the commission to its realization.
                    The complexity of Brandon pushed the boundaries
                        of the Guggenheim’s exhibiting and collecting practices. The commission of
                        the website Brandon required the Guggenheim to
                        consider the web as a virtual exhibition environment that complements and
                        expands the museum’s gallery spaces. For the museum, it was its very first 
                            move beyond the
                                site-specific or time-specific nature of conventional exhibitions
                                into a more complicated boundless paradigm
                            
                        . By the end of the one-year narrative experiment Brandon had expanded the Guggenheim’s program, moving the
                        institution closer to achieving what museum curators at the time had hoped
                        for in their groundbreaking decision to commission web art: 
                            not taking the Internet
                                inside of a museum...[but rather] exposing the museum to the
                                internet
                            
                        .
                            Shu Lea Cheang’s draft of Brandon’s
                                interfaces during the development phase Ⓒ Shu Lea Cheang.
                            
                        
                
            

                2. Brandon’s Collection and Preservation
                From the moment of Brandon’s commission in 1998, the
                    web artwork was anticipated and regarded as an addition to the Guggenheim’s
                    permanent collection. In his official letter of intent to the artist, the
                    curator Matthew Drutt assured: 
                        ...it will be the Guggenheim’s
                            intention to acquire Brandon for its
                            permanent collection at the close of its presentation
                        
                    . The Brandon commission was considered an
                    exciting milestone in the Guggenheim’s larger vision to start collecting digital
                    art: 
                        The context for Brandon’s development is the Guggenheim
                            Virtual Museum [...]. It will not only be a showcase for web-based art,
                            it will be the means through which the Guggenheim brings such works into
                            its collections
                        
                    . At the time of this announcement, the Guggenheim Virtual Museum (Figure 16) was not yet existent (and it would in
                    fact never be launched), but Drutt explained to the New York
                        Times that by commissioning Brandon for the
                    Virtual Museum, [w]e've started
                        collecting before we built the institution...
                    . 
                        The Guggenheim Virtual Museum was designed by Asymptote Architecture
                            around 1998. Ⓒ Asymptote Architecture: Hani Rashid and Lise Anne
                            Couture.
                        
                    
                Despite these best intentions, Brandon's passage
                    from commission to accessioned collection artwork was not smooth, and certainly
                    not as immediate as anticipated: Brandon did not
                    officially enter the Guggenheim collection until September 2005. This chapter
                    illuminates Brandon’s life — on and offline — after
                    the completion of the one year narrative
                        project in installments and examines the chronology and conditions
                    of the website’s eventual accession, maintenance and restoration (See Figure 1). The following reconstruction of events is based
                    on the research of archived Guggenheim staff emails and recent, unpublished
                    interviews the authors conducted with stakeholders involved in Brandon’s commission and accession, including Shu Lea
                    Cheang, Matthew Drutt, John G. Hanhardt, Jon Ippolito, Caitlin Jones, Alexander
                    Galloway, Justin Dávila and Marleen Stikker.
                Brandon's history as the first artist’s project commissioned for the
                        World Wide Web
                    , and as one of the first web artworks collected
                    by a major museum, cannot be told without tracing the evolution of media art
                    conservation as an emerging practice. From a standpoint of collection management
                    and care, the Guggenheim’s curatorial vision in 1998 to not just commission and
                    stage, but to collect Brandon was courageous, if
                    not daring. At that time, the Guggenheim had no media art conservator on staff
                    who could have examined the incoming artwork, ensured proper storage and
                    tracking of digital components, documented the artwork’s significant conceptual
                    and aesthetic properties, identified its functional and interactive behaviors,
                    projected the inherent preservation risks and laid out a plan for maintenance
                    and management of change. As a profession and practice, media art conservation
                    barely existed at the time, within the United States or internationally.
                    Moreover, the Guggenheim’s information technology (IT) infrastructure was not
                    advanced enough to allow in-house web hosting and maintenance of Brandon on Guggenheim servers. At the time, even the
                    Guggenheim’s own website, the development of which had been spearheaded by
                    Matthew Drutt in 1994, had to be hosted by an external Internet Service
                    Provider, USWeb Los Angeles, which later also
                    accommodated Brandon from its 1998 launch to its
                    2002 take-down .
                
                    2.1 What are we collecting?
                    Regardless of the museum’s lack of IT infrastructure and media conservation
                        staff in the 1990s, Brandon’s specific nature
                        and complexities would have challenged any collecting institution in taking
                        ownership of the work, then and today. 
                    Brandon's sprawling layout includes over 82 web
                        pages, interactive experiences and pop-up windows based on 65,000 lines of
                        code and 4,500 files (see 3.2), requires
                        extraordinary time and effort to grasp, let alone to analyse and document.
                        Shu Lea Cheang herself states that no
                            one (including myself) can claim to have viewed the entirety of this
                            work
                        . The difficulty of defining the artwork’s identity
                        and components was further exacerbated by the collaborative, multi-author
                        nature of the work and the fact that parts of the code were developed and
                        temporarily hosted across several institutions, namely Banff Centre for Arts
                        and Creativity in Canada and the De Waag Society for Old and New Media in
                        Amsterdam. Moreover, Brandon was never just a
                        website. Its constituents included a physical installation at De Waag
                        (Figures 12 and 13) as well as the four performative and interactive public
                        events around Brandon (see 1.3), which expanded and animated Brandon as a platform for live engagement and
                        exchange via chat, webcam, audio broadcast and online participation and
                        rendered the artwork, in part, a live performance. In his New York Times
                        interview, Drutt acknowledged at the time: 
                            It's very difficult for me to
                                imagine what the museum is going to collect at the end of this
                                    [Brandon project] because a lot of
                                it is ephemeral. Once it happens, it's over. But I think it's
                                something we have to embrace rather than shy away from
                            
                        .
                
                
                    2.2 Brandon between 1999 and 2005: Afterlife,
                        Off-line Dormancy and Collection Intake
                    Despite Brandon's credit page description as 
                            ever-processing
                            
                        , no further developments or user entries took place after the
                        project’s closing event in November 1999 (see
                            1.3). The website remained live and hosted by USWeb's subcontractor W3 until
                        2002. During this live period, the artist retained direct log-in access to
                        the server for maintenance and upkeep purposes. She occasionally hired
                        Alexander Galloway, then an editorial intern and tech
                            person at Rhizome, as well as a friend of the artist, to
                            fix either some JavaScript
                            stuff or some server-side stuff in Brandon, a couple
                            of hours here and there whenever “the site was broken or
                        something went wrong” . Some evidence
                        also suggests that Galloway may have been asked around 2000 to consolidate
                        Brandon’s code from other external sites, namely the De Waag servers .
                    In 2002, John G. Hanhardt announced to the artist: ...we are now looking to make [Brandon] part of the Museum’s Permanent
                            Collection. As a first step, we want to archive the project which means
                            we will take it offline and archive it for later acquisition
                        . Shortly after, Galloway was commissioned by
                        Jon Ippolito, then the Guggenheim’s Assistant Curator for Media Arts, to
                        create an archival back-up of Brandon's code.
                        In his Technical Notes for the Archiving of Brandon,” Galloway documents: 
                            In June 2002 the files from
                                the Brandon development website were
                                compressed into a TAR archive and burned onto this CD-Rom
                            
                        . Along with the CD-Rom, Galloway sent a note of concern to Ippolito:
                        “I am a little worried to tell you to pull the plug on the website, since it
                        is possible that in ignorance I have overlooked files that I don’t know
                        exist” . Galloway urged Ippolito to “Please
                        cross-check my work, or have Shu Lea do it, before you tell the ISP to pull
                        the plug”. Soon after, Brandon was deleted from
                        the server and remained offline until its formal intake into the collection
                        three years later, in September 2005.
                    The reasons behind Brandon’s delayed accession
                        and three-year off-line dormancy were not fully established within this
                        research project, but contributing factors may have included the 2001
                        departure of Brandon’s commissioning curator
                        Matthew Drutt; a possible necessity to quickly remove Brandon's code from USWeb servers
                        without the technical ability to host Brandon
                        on Guggenheim servers just yet; and last but not least: a general
                        uncertainty among museum staff how to apply accession, intake and cataloging
                        procedures to web artworks, or media art more generally.
                    The momentum that triggered the artwork Brandon’s formal acquisition into the Guggenheim collection in 2005
                        was created by two coinciding requests for exhibition inclusion: Rhizome’s
                            ArtBase 101 (launched 6/23/2005) and Banff
                        Centre’s The Art Formerly Knows as New Media
                        (9/17-10/23/2005). The museum’s ability to successfully process and complete
                        the acquisition this time around, however, was largely owed to the new
                        practices and resulting institutional confidence that the Guggenheim’s
                            Variable Media Initiative had instilled
                        across museum departments 
                        . Launched by Ippolito in 1999, the
                        initiative advocated embracing and consciously managing the change inherent
                        in time-based, variable, ephemeral, performative and technology-based works
                        of art, and to collaborate with artists to preserve identified artwork
                            behaviors, rather than exclusively focusing on
                        their (possibly ephemeral or temporary) materializations. As a result of
                        this initiative, Variable Media Interviews had become
                        part of the Guggenheim’s acquisition process; Variable Media
                            Guidelines had been added to legal contracts and purchase
                        agreements; archival master formats and preservation deliverables were
                        requested for the collection; and artists were asked to complete
                            Variable Media Questionnaires to anticipate and
                        discuss possible changes over time in their collected works. 
                    In 2005, based on the Guggenheim’s new and empowered ability to commit to
                        complex media artworks, Hanhardt reached out to Cheang again: At the time that this project
                                [Brandon] was realized we did not have
                            the policy in place to accept digital artwork into the collection. Thus
                                Brandon was not made part of the
                            Collection. [...] I will begin the process of proposing that this
                            artwork be made part of the collection as netart commission
                        . Three months later, on September 20, 2005,
                        Hanhardt proposed Brandon for acquisition to the
                        Guggenheim’s Art & Museum Committee, which ratified the acquisition
                        shortly after.
                    The two loan requests in 2005 not only triggered Brandon's formal accession, but its Guggenheim implementation
                        and first major restoration. Variable Media Fellow Caitlin Jones worked with
                        Cheang and Francis Hwang, then Rhizome’s Director of Technology to restore
                        the work to functionality and with Christopher Borkowski, the Guggenheim’s
                        Senior Web Administrator & Developer, on taking Brandon home
                        , i.e. installing and hosting Brandon on Guggenheim servers for the first time.
                        The degree of the art work’s technical dysfunctionality in 2005 was
                        significant: ...many links at the
                            roadtrip.html did not work in Safari, and many Java applets were
                        not functional, including the bodysurgery applet, the
                            chat applet for the virtual
                            court, the sessions and questions within the
                            virtual court, and big parts of the
                            theatrum anatomicum interface. Hwang explained to
                        Cheang: 
                            The main problem is that
                                [...] the code was written such a long time ago that any browser
                                viewing it will have a much different version of the Java
                                interpreter [...], which is probably the main cause of the bugs. I
                                don’t have the expertise, or knowledge of code to fix this in any
                                reasonable amount of time
                            
                        . Hwang was able to restore some, but not all of Brandon's issues in time for the Banff loan. He informed Jones
                        and Cheang: 
                            ...similar problem here [in
                                TAcourt]: Fairly advanced java problems that I can’t fix in the time
                                I got
                            
                        . To address all of Brandon's graver
                        issues at some point, Hwang suggested 
                            finding and paying someone
                                with Java expertise to update the code. [...] This will probably be
                                expensive
                            
                        . Seven years later, Cheang recalls: 
                            ...yes, even with 2005
                                restoration, we didn’t have a chance to resolve all issues due to
                                budget reasons and surely, version of programming language, ie.
                                certain java language may not be functioning...
                            
                        . Although Brandon was finally properly
                        acquired, hosted in-house and restored to function, it had become clear as
                        early as 2005 that this project was likely to continue to require high
                        maintenance, in particular due to its use of 10 unique Java applets, which
                        are called multiple times across Brandon. 
                
                
                    2.3 Brandon between 2005 and 2012: Keeping it
                        Live
                    The characteristic qualities of net.art, as described by
                        net art critic Baumgärtel in 1999, are connectivity, global reach, multimediality,
                            immateriality, interactivity and egality
                        . Today, in our networked world, the
                        notions of immediacy and permanent accessibility have become further
                        identifiers of life and art online. We are accustomed to uninterrupted
                        online access which shapes our expectation of on-demand availability of
                        online content, including net artworks such as Brandon. And yet, after its 2005 resurrection, Brandon experienced many dysfunctions over the
                        years, due to changes and updates to both browser software and the
                        underlying operating systems; updates to internet protocols; deprecated
                        functions in Java and deprecated tags in HTML; as well as broken links.
                            Brandon's oscillation between on- and
                        offline status had become a source of disappointment and frustration among
                        scholars, educators and the art community. Pointedly, the online
                        encyclopedia Media Art Net opens its 2005 description of Brandon with the comment: 
                            The project, which is now
                                offline again, was originally announced...
                            
                        .
                    The Guggenheim’s biggest challenges in caring for Brandon over the years include the work’s permanent display and
                        need for monitoring and maintenance; the spontaneity of failures and
                        consequential urgency of intervention; staff changeover in the Curatorial
                        and IT Departments; and importantly, the general economy of attention in
                        museum culture. At the Guggenheim (and many other institutions),
                        examinations and treatments of artworks are typically conducted--and
                        budgeted for — in the frame of acquisitions, exhibitions, loans or defined
                        research projects. Allocating resources to unexpected interventions can be
                        highly challenging in light of competing priorities and the lack of
                        budget.
                    In 2012, Cheang wrote to the Guggenheim stating that Brandon
                        has been offline and unaccessible
                            for months and asking for the project to be 
                            brought back online
                            
                        . Luckily, Carmen Hermo, then the Guggenheim’s Curatorial Assistant
                        for Collections, was able to prioritize Brandon
                        immediately and work with Jack Szwergold, then the Guggenheim’s Web
                        Infrastructure Systems Administrator to 
                            make adjustments to return the
                                site to functional use. Jack [Szwergold] was able to fully recover
                                the archive, and performed minor backend clean–up to the base code
                                in order to restore the site to working order
                            
                        . Szwergold also created a web–based and password-protected clone of
                            Brandon to start fixing further issues,
                        such as broken links. In a recorded Skype meeting on 5/29/2012, Hermo and
                        Szwergold presented the artist with a summary of issues and treatment
                        proposals; it became clear that specialty expertise and allocated funds were
                        needed to truly restore Brandon.
                
                
                    2.4 Brandon between 2012 and Today: The CCBA
                        Initiative, Source Code Analysis, Condition Assessment and Restoration
                        Planning
                    Over the last decade, Media Conservation at the Guggenheim has evolved from
                        project-based approaches — such as the Variable Media Initiative — to a
                        permanent program with dedicated staff (since 2008). The implementation of
                        this new conservation specialty enabled the museum to address the complex
                        needs of its software- and computer-based artworks in a systematic way. In
                        2016, the Conservation Department launched the initiative Conserving Computer-based Art (CCBA)
                        
                        , at the core of which stands an ongoing research
                        collaboration with New York University’s Department of Computer Science.
                        Since 2014, computer science students and faculty have been conducting
                        source code analysis on Guggenheim collection works, enabling the museum to
                        better comprehend and document the intended artwork behaviors,
                        functionalities, software and hardware dependencies as well as associated
                        preservation risks.
                    As one of the CCBA case studies, Brandon was the subject of source code analysis
                        and documentation over two semesters by computer science students Emma
                        Dickson and Jillian Zhong. Based on their thorough examination of every
                        element of the work, a complete account of errors and malfunctions was
                        created in 2016.
                    Among Brandon's functional compromises, its
                        non-displaying Java applets were considered most disruptive to the
                        artist-intended experience of the work (Figures 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22). Java support was
                        discontinued by Google Chrome in 2015  and Mozilla
                        Firefox at the end of 2016 , rendering many
                        critical parts of Brandon unviewable with
                        contemporary browsers. 
                            The Java applet randomtext in cell 10
                                of the panopticon was no longer displaying the random phrases.
                                Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            After the 2016/17 migration of the Java applet randomtext to JavaScript, the random
                                phrases appear as in the original again. Screenshot: Jonathan
                                Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            The Java applet surgery in the theatrum anatomicum was no longer
                                displaying. Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            After the 2016/17 migration of the Java applet surgery, the images and magnifying
                                function are visible again. The applet’s background images were
                                converted to an animated GIF, and the magnifying field was recreated
                                with JavaScript. Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R.
                                Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            The Java applets lake and IHeleType
                                in cell 10 of the panopticon were no longer displaying the blue head
                                and animated typewriting. Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon
                                R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            After the 2016/17 migration of the Java applet lake to an animated GIF, and the Java
                                applet IHeleType to JavaScript, the blue head and animated
                                typewriting are visible again. Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ
                                Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                    
                    An additional grave compromise to the work was the inoperability of mooplay, one of Brandon's five interfaces. Due to a broken script that
                        generates hyperlinks in mixup, users could no
                        longer navigate to mooplay’s pseudo chat.
                        Broken links were not just limited to internal dysfunctions; some external
                        URLs have changed as well. As an example, the link to the Institute for Arts
                        and Civic Dialogue on Brandon's credit page
                        today leads to an advertisement of the domain vendor, and TAbody's button LISTEN TO REALAUDIO which
                        should enable a download of the audio recording of the DigiGenderSocialBody
                        event (see 1.3), calls the URL of a defunct
                        De Waag server in vain. Embedded sounds, such as the police siren in TAopening, were not functioning, in this case due
                        to missing or outdated plug-ins called by the HTML
                            embed tag. For example, when accessed in Firefox,
                        these sound files resulted in the display of a grey warning window a
                            plugin is needed to display this content (Figure 23 and 24). All
                        user entries in Brandon's virtual court
                        section, such as the court session logs and juror submissions from the
                        November 1999 event, were stored in a MySQL database and were no longer
                        retrievable by Brandon’s interface due to code deprecation. 
                            The sound of a police siren in TAbody
                                was not functioning and instead triggered a warning that a plug-in
                                was missing. Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            The entrance sound in TAopening was
                                not functioning and instead triggered a warning that a plug-in was
                                missing. Screenshot: Jonathan Farbowitz, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                        
                    
                    The work’s aesthetic compromises primarily pertained to changes in font
                        types, sizes and colors. In Brandon, styling
                        was not done with CSS (see 3.2), but HTML
                        font tags, which are no longer consistently supported by all browsers and
                        will be fully deprecated in the near future. As a result, instead of
                        following the specified parameters, contemporary browsers resort to their
                        default settings. For example, the font types specified for large parts of
                            Brandon are the old apple font Chicago, and alternatively Times. However, since today’s browsers ignore these HTML tags,
                        their display of Brandon defaults to Times New Roman.
                        The same applies to Brandon's font sizes.
                        Unable to read the old HTML tags, contemporary browsers apply their own
                        default font size of 12pt; as a result, Brandon's fonts display too small. The source code analysis also
                        unearthed blink tags that were used to make individual
                        words and phrases in Brandon blink. After the
                        full deprecation of the blink tag, the words were still
                        displayed, but no longer blinking.
                    To holistically address Brandon’s identified
                        errors, the Guggenheim Conservation Department decided to launch a major,
                        cross-disciplinary restoration project. In the Spring semester of 2016,
                        computer science students Emma Dickson and Jillian Zhong were tasked to
                        build a prototype to test the migration of a number of Brandon's Java applets to JavaScript. These prototypes were
                        presented to the artist on April 1, 2016 for approval, and Cheang welcomed
                        and supported the proposed restoration strategy (Figure 25). After a period of fundraising, the restoration
                        project was formally launched in December 2016 and completed in April 2017,
                        in time for Brandon's inclusion in Rhizome’s
                        online exhibition Net Art Anthology
                        . For details on the restoration, see 3.4. and .
                            
                            Skype interview with Shu Lea Cheang on April 1, 2016. The artist
                                welcomed the proposed restoration and approved prototype migrations
                                of the Java applets in Brandon. From
                                left to right: NYU computer science student Jillian Zhong,
                                Guggenheim conservator Joanna Phillips and NYU’s Prof. Deena Engel.
                                Foto: Amy Brost, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                
            

                3. A Technical Anatomy of Brandon
                
                    3.1. The State of the Internet and Technological Landscape at the Time of
                            Brandon's Creation
                    The artwork Brandon was written when the web was
                        nascent. In 1997, the first year the US Census Bureau began collecting data,
                        only 18% of households using a computer had internet access. That number
                        doubled to 42% by 2000  and tripled by
                        2013 to 73% of households . At the time of Brandon’s creation, the Internet itself was
                        exploding: while there were only 1.1 million pages on the Internet in 1997,
                        this number more than doubled in 1998 . With the advent of Google in 1998, it became more accessible and useful.
                        Yet, people had to dial in via landline phone connections, and mobile
                        devices with Internet access were not yet available.
                    The web technologies used to develop Brandon
                        were standard and widely used at the time the work was composed. Brandon is based on a combination of programming
                        in Java and Perl along with other web technologies to create a work that
                        exploits textual narrative and images. The selection of technologies was not
                        radical in nature; it was rather an innovation at that time to use web
                        technologies to build a work of art. Other contemporary programmer-artists
                        were building programming tools to create algorithmic art: for example, John
                        Maeda created Design By Numbers in 1999, a
                        computer program intended for artists . 
                
                
                    3.2. The Use of Web Technologies and Programming Languages in Brandon
                    There are approximately 65,000 lines of code in the HTML, programs and script
                        files which were written by Brandon's
                        developers (Figure 26). These files were coded
                        manually; they were not developed by automating the process programmatically
                        as is often done today using PHP, Python or other modern scripting
                        languages. The programmers working on Brandon
                        used a variety of client-side web technologies including HTML to annotate or
                            markup webpages for format and content along with
                        JavaScript to make the pages more responsive to the user; Java to build
                        web-ready displays, animations and other visual features; and digital
                        images, among others. Perl and PHP3 were implemented on the server-side to
                        support Brandon's interactive functionality and
                        data manipulations. A short explanation of each employed web technology
                        follows:
                    HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), which is widely used in Brandon, allows developers to annotate textual
                        content in a way that distinguishes between content and structural elements
                        by using tags. For example, a paragraph is surrounded
                        by <p> ... </p> tags. The text that appears in the
                        top border of a browser window of a web page is surrounded by
                            <title> ... </title> tags to denote its
                        placement. 
                    Notably, content formatting in Brandon was done
                        within the HTML, without CSS. CSS stands for “Cascading Style Sheets” and is
                        a current technology that allows web developers to systematically assign
                        text formatting (e.g., bold, italics or font colors) as well as page
                        placement (e.g., centering text and other layout aspects) within individual
                        pages or across large websites. Although CSS was first registered in March
                        1998, it was not yet commonly used when Brandon
                        was developed and implemented. This reflects a possible conservative
                        approach on the part of Brandon's programmers.
                        JavaScript was written in this work within the HTML files (rather than
                        captured in external scripts as current best-practices would promote).
                        Framesets, which combine multiple HTML documents in a single browser window,
                        were used throughout the work. 
                    Brandon uses ten unique Java applets, which were
                        written using JDK 1.0.2 . The computer
                        scientists on this research team obtained working source code for the JAVA
                        applets by decompiling the programs to render them in a human-readable Java
                        form.
                    On the server side, Perl is a back-end programming language which was used in
                            Brandon for a variety of tasks such as
                        capturing phrases or dialogue from texts and manipulating files; some of the
                        Perl scripts are called by Java applets. Although Perl is still in use for
                        legacy applications at the time of this writing, PHP and Python are among
                        the more commonly used scripting languages in current web environments for
                        these purposes. PHP is also a server-side scripting language. The PHP3 files
                        here are written using an early implementation of PHP and are called on to
                        manage a variety of tasks, such as connecting to the MySQL database, which
                        is used to capture data related to the virtual court sessions in the work.
                        Although the amounts of data collected in this database are quite small and
                        could more easily have been stored in text files without the overhead of
                        running a server-side database, the developers possibly anticipated a
                        significantly larger dataset or simply preferred coding with a database
                        rather than from text files. 
                            The lines of code in Brandon.
                                Diagram: Deena Engel, Ⓒ Deena Engel and Solomon R Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                        
                
                
                    3.3. A Structural Analysis of Brandon
                    Brandon is comprised of approximately 4,500
                        files in a complex structure of 413 directories and subdirectories
                            Author Deena Engel calculated the statistics and generated the pie
                            charts for sections 3.2-3.4 by writing a series of custom python scripts
                            that traverse Brandon’s file directories to conduct the analysis and
                            render the charts. This analysis reflects the 2005 edition of Brandon in
                            the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum collection.. There are over 30
                        distinct file types (Figure 27). HTML web page
                        files comprise 13% of the total number of files. Images comprise nearly
                        two-thirds of the files at 63%: 41% of the files are JPG images and another
                        22% of the files are GIF image files; there are also 13 BMP image files. In
                        turn, 110 or 13% of the GIF image files are animated GIFs while the rest of
                        the GIF images are still images. The CLASS and JAVA files for the Java
                        applets comprise another 6% of the total number of files. PHP scripts and
                        early versions of PHP files such as PHP3 and
                            PHTML files along with server-side programming
                        scripts such as Perl and Perl/CGI scripts comprise 2% of the files. The
                        remaining files do not appear to the viewer. Text files containing drafts,
                        notes and prose that reveal the artist's work as it developed comprise
                        approximately 2% of the files. Additional files hidden from view include
                        questionnaire log files (11%), database scripts (SQL files) and operating
                        system level shell scripts among others. 
                            The file types in Brandon. Diagram:
                                Deena Engel, Ⓒ Deena Engel and Solomon R Guggenheim Museum 
                            
                        
                    These files are organized through a complex directory tree (Figure 28) to support both the technical
                        requirements and the content requirements for artistic goals. For example,
                        technical requirements include the need to place Perl/CGI scripts into
                        folders called “cgi-bin” which were typically configured on the web server
                        to better support security. Content requirements and support for artistic
                        development would suggest that narratives, images and other content
                        materials be logically grouped together depending on the narrative chapter
                        of the work in order to make the materials easier to find and manipulate,
                        both for the artist and for the programmers. This also helped the
                        programmers to simplify relative file paths within the code. 
                            Excerpt of file tree for Brandon.
                                Diagram: Emma Dickson, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                
                
                    3.4 A Technical Description of Brandon’s Five
                        Interfaces
                    The artist collaborated with programmers and designers in each of the five
                        interfaces of the work (bigdoll, roadtrip, mooplay,
                            panopticon and theatrum anatomicum). Each of the five interfaces uses a
                        specific selection of technologies based on the intended functionality and
                        programmers’ preferences. A further study of the technical anatomy of each
                        narrative chapter follows. 
                    The bigdoll interface consists of an HTML file
                        to build the web page which contains JavaScript and uses an assortment of 50
                        GIF images. All of the image files are named image, plus a number from 1-50 at a size of 144 pixels wide x
                        108 pixels high each. The web page opens as an invisible grid of 5x5 white
                        blocks (using an additional GIF image of a white rectangle in the same size
                        as the other image files). Randomly selected images from the selection of 50
                        images appear as the user mouses over each block while JavaScript is used to
                        process the user’s mouse-overs and mouse-clicks. When the user has
                        successfully hidden the left- and right-most columns and
                            uncovered the assigned image blocks in the center
                        three columns, JavaScript calls a function to open roadtrip, the next chapter in the narrative.
                    Roadtrip uses an HTML file containing 14
                        original JavaScript functions along with 35 still GIF images and 2 animated
                        GIF images. The roadtrip interface makes use of
                        the JavaScript function scroll for manipulating
                        the browser window, which creates the impression of traveling along a road.
                        The background image that appears to move is a solid black rectangle with a
                        single vertical yellow bar (Figure 29) that is
                        tiled to look like the dashed lines of a typical American highway. The other
                        images are placed in the browser window through the use of an HTML table of
                        30 rows (where each row has one, two or three columns) so that the relative
                        positions of the images do not change with respect to one another as the
                        window automatically scrolls. The scrolling is reversed (to go forward or
                        back) when the top or the bottom of the table reaches the top or bottom of
                        the browser window respectively. Some of the images open a pop-up
                            window when they are clicked; some are not interactive; and
                        others open to the other chapters. 
                            The background of the roadtrip
                                interface is based on this image, which is tiled to create the
                                impression of a highway. Ⓒ Shu Lea Cheang.
                            
                        
                    Mooplay is one of the two most complex
                        interfaces of the work from a technical standpoint (along with theatrum anatomicum). It includes HTML and HTML
                        pages with JavaScript along with GIF and JPG images as the other interfaces
                        do. However, mooplay also includes Perl/CGI
                        scripts and Java applets to support a chatserver and to manipulate the
                        narrative texts in their randomized, mixed-up forms.
                        Approximately one-third of the files in this section are text files which
                        are not technically significant but hold value for the work in the logs and
                        commentary that have been captured.
                    The panopticon is built using HTML files with
                        GIF and JPG images. There are four Java applets which are used to manage the
                        images and a text scroll. The HTML in this section uses complex framesets;
                        note that nearly half of the over 200 files used for this chapter are HTML
                        files as a result.
                    GIF and JPG image files make up 80% of the files in theatrum anatomicum. There are also a handful of BMP
                        (bit-mapped image files) and four WAV (sound) files. From a programming
                        standpoint, this section uses Perl scripts as well as Java applets. The Java
                        programs and the HTML files each make up about 5% of the files. There are 13
                        tables of data in the MySQL database and several earlier versions of the
                        data are also stored with the files for this chapterTo obtain the data
                            for this study, a mysqldump was run.. The
                        database contains data relevant to four cases and 89 jurors over 18
                        sessions, which took place November 15-20, 1999.
                
                
                    3.5 The 2016/2017 Restoration of Brandon
                    
                    The objective of Brandon's major 2016/2017
                        restoration was to reinstate Brandon's intended
                        online experience and interactivity as a living artwork, while preserving
                        all functional behaviors and aesthetic properties of the work as defined by
                        the original source code. A more in-depth account of the restoration can be
                        found on the Guggenheim Blogs .
                    The selected method to realize this goal was a combination of code migration,
                        hyperlink replacement, database replacement, and HTML tag and frameset
                        migration. In keeping with Conservation ethics and standards, all changes
                        were documented through version control, treatment reporting and code
                        annotation. The latter includes headers with project information (Figure 30) as well as detailed explanations
                        preceding each code intervention (Figure 31,
                            32). No original code was deleted, only
                        commented out and added to. In respect of Brandon's original code, interventive programming solutions
                        were kept as minimal as possible and in style with the original programming.
                        Popular alternatives to code intervention, such as embedding the work in an
                        emulated legacy server environment and web browser software, were dismissed
                        as a treatment option for Brandon's case. The
                            historic appearance of the artwork in a fixed
                        legacy browser (e.g., Netscape) would have created an illusion of
                        authenticity that collides with the twenty-year evolution of Brandon's identity. Brandon has no conceptual dependencies on particular
                        technologies and was always intended to be experienced by directly accessing
                        the work through an ever-evolving variety of personal computers,
                        environments and browser versions around the world. Discontinuing Brandon's 20-year history of permanent change and
                        freezing the work at an arbitrary moment of its complex history would have
                        deprived Brandon of its inherent variability
                        and liveliness.All code interventions were overseen by the authors
                            Deena Engel and Joanna Phillips, executed by NYU computer science
                            student Emma Dickson, and supported by Jonathan Farbowitz, the
                            Guggenheim’s Fellow for the Conservation of Computer-based Art (Figure 33).
                        
                            The 2016/17 restoration project is identified through in-code
                                comments at the top of the file. Screenshot: Emma Dickson, Ⓒ Solomon
                                R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            Every intervention is explained and documented through code
                                annotation. Screenshot: Emma Dickson, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            Every intervention is explained and documented through code
                                annotation. Screenshot: Emma Dickson, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            The Guggenheim’s Fellow for the Conservation of Computer-based Art
                                Jonathan Farbowitz and NYU computer science student Emma Dickson are
                                discussing the restoration of Brandon in the Guggenheim Media
                                Conservation Lab. Foto: Kris McKay, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                        
                    
                    All Java applets that manipulate text in Brandon
                        were replaced with JavaScript functions, and all Java applets that
                        manipulate static sets of images to create animations were replaced with
                        animated GIFs (Figures 18, 20 and 22). To
                        restore access to the user data entered in Brandon's court sessions in 1999 and to prevent the (future)
                        necessity of server-side programming to query the underlying MySQL database,
                        all data were extracted from the database and converted into text that is
                        accessible to the JavaScript code. This approach seemed particularly
                        feasible, since Brandon's data have been static
                        since 1999 without further additions.
                    To restore mooplay, the character names in
                            mixup were reconnected with the pseudo chat
                            (Figure 7) as well as with their sets of
                        programmed dialogue through code migration from Perl/CGI into JavaScript
                            (Figure 34). The inaccessible RealMedia
                        sound file in TAopening was replaced with an
                        MP3 transcode, which is now downloadable again. In keeping with Brandon's use of HTML for styling, CSS styling was
                        avoided as much as possible. Thus, instead of using separate CSS pages for
                        the correction of deprecated font tags (Figure
                            35), CSS styling was hard-coded into the HTML using internal
                        styles (Figure 36). Correcting the font size
                        tags also required a translation to a contemporary CSS font-size system
                        (using pt) from a legacy system that used a relational scale from 1-7 (Figure 37). The deprecated
                            blink tags (Figure
                        38) were reactivated by a new JavaScript function that identifies text
                        between two blink tags and animates it to blink (Figure 39).
                    As a measure of preventive conservation, legacy HTML tags were also addressed
                        in cases, where deprecation was not yet complete, but anticipated. Amongst
                        others, this applied to the popular HTML tag frameset,
                        which is widely used in Brandon to integrate
                        several scrollable HTML pages into one window. To prevent these pages from
                        near-future corruption, the framesets were replaced with borderless tables
                        for simple page layouts, along with additional iFrames for more complex
                        designs. 
                            The hard-coded phrases of the characters donmonster and hardCandy,
                                which are called by mooplay’s
                                pseudochat. Screenshot: Emma Dickson, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim
                                Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            The deprecated HTML font tags defined font sizes and colors within
                                the HTML, without CSS. Screenshot: Emma Dickson, Ⓒ Solomon R.
                                Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            Here, the font styling shown in Figure
                                    35 is migrated to internal styles that can be rendered by
                                contemporary browsers. Screenshot: Emma Dickson, Ⓒ Solomon R.
                                Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            In the left column, Brandon’s legacy font sizes 1-7 are compared
                                to contemporary font sizes defined by pt. Screenshot: Emma Dickson,
                                Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                        
                            Brandon features a number of
                                deprecated blink tags that are no longer
                                recognized by contemporary browsers. As a result, the words are
                                displayed without the intended blinking. Screenshot: Emma Dickson, Ⓒ
                                Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum
                            
                        
                        
                            In the 2016/17 restoration, the deprecated
                                    blink tags are replaced with a JavaScript
                                function that finds all text in the code that is located between two
                                    blink tags and animates it to blink.
                                Screenshot: Emma Dickson, Ⓒ Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
                            
                        
                    
                
            

                4. Digital Cultures and Digital Aesthetics
                If the above describes the artwork’s conceptual and technical identity, its place
                    within digital art history and the process of its restoration, then what of its
                    digital aesthetics and its discursive fields? This article will finish with some
                    preliminary thoughts that bring to the fore aspects of the work’s original
                    context within digital cultures of the late twentieth century while also raising
                    questions — which will be answered not in this article but by the new audiences
                    who will now come to the piece — about how it might be experienced within a very
                    different digital context today.
                
                    4.1 Digital Culture in the 1990s
                    Sherry Turkle’s 1995 publication Life on the Screen:
                            Identity in the Age of the Internet documents contexts central
                        to the work’s formation, and helps situate it retrospectively within 1990s
                        digital cultures. This publication reflects, and reflects on, early life on
                        the internet and offers a sense of the possibilities (as well as some of the
                        potential problems) that emerged in the 1990s for the construction of the
                        self online. Turkle is particularly interested in the therapeutic and
                        liberatory potential of the expression of the self through multiple
                        identities that the internet seemed to offer by way of its anonymity. In the
                        third section of the book she dwells particularly on the MUD environments
                        (Multi User Domains) that enabled online communities to set up collective
                        online worlds such as the LambdaMOO (an online MUD community that created an
                        early ‘second-life’ type environment), in which participants constructed
                        their own characters and interacted with others. As Turkle’s analysis shows,
                        there was no sense that these characters were supposed or presumed to be
                        mimetic representations of their creators: participants often had more than
                        one character, either sequentially or synchronically, and their characters
                        were often clearly fictitious, being speaking animals or otherwise
                        humanly-impossible figures. In her chapter on Tinysex
                            and Gender Trouble, Turkle represents cyberfeminist
                        perspectives, among others, and outlines several case studies that
                        demonstrate the possibilities for expression and development of the self
                        that stem from gender swapping in the participant’s MUD character or
                        characters (see, for example, ). This
                        digital utopianism is a key theme for Cheang’s work, and will be discussed
                        further in the next section.
                    Turkle also returns repeatedly in the book to the case of the virtual rape
                        that occurred in 1992 in LambdaMoo. This is a case in which a character
                        called Mr. Bungle allegedly used a piece of code, referred to as a
                            voodoo doll, that enabled him to take over others’
                        characters to control them and their actions. The violations perpetrated
                        caused outrage within the community and a revisiting of the governance
                        structures of that online world. The case was written about by Julian
                        Dibbell in A Rape in Cyberspace, published in
                            The Village Voice
                        . Dibbell’s piece (and his reflection on the
                        accountability of words and deeds) was influential for Turkle , and in turn for Cheang’s work. Cheang
                        was in correspondence with Dibbell, and his work influenced the mooplay section of Brandon substantially, particularly in its central concern with
                        sexual violence. Transcripts from the Mr. Bungle case are also quoted in
                            Brandon, and the very concept of the
                        virtual court might be seen to be inspired by the events around the Mr.
                        Bungle case that Dibbell outlines.
                    The concept of the Panopticon, which forms one of Brandon's interfaces (and which Cheang researched extensively,
                        as the work’s credit notes show), is also the subject for a section of
                        Turkle’s book. In Discipline and Punish, Michel
                        Foucault used the image of Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon prison to express his
                        sense that all structures of social hierarchy have developed to institute
                        the type of power Bentham envisages in the Panopticon: one in which
                        subjects’ exposure to constant potential surveillance leads to a
                        self-censoring, self-regulating enforcement from within . The Panopticon used surveillance as a tool of
                        mind control. For Cheang, the Panopticon represents those medical and legal
                        discourses that have surveiled, diagnosed, taxonomized, proscribed and
                        regulated formations of gender and sexuality. For Turkle, however, it is the
                        internet itself that offers a whole new dimension to the reach of the social
                        Panopticon: 
                            In our day, increasingly
                                centralized databases provide a material basis for a vastly extended
                                Panopticon that could include the Internet
                            
                        . It should perhaps come as no surprise that the web was perceived as
                        an engine of both liberation and suppression. Early writings on the web
                        often present polarized utopic and dystopic visions, so it is perhaps
                        fitting that in this important piece of early web art, that ambivalence
                        around its medium is carried implicitly in the Panopticon image.
                
                
                    4.2 Genres and Discourses
                    The above contexts and discourses are all central to Cheang’s art work and in
                        many ways Brandon acts as a creative engagement
                        with, and interrogation of, issues in digital cultures that were key points
                        of reflection at its time of production. However, the work interweaves these
                        with multiple other discursive contexts to give a richly multi-layered
                        texture and a much broader historical reach. Within a strong theoretical
                        framework (Lacan’s theories of gender and sexuality are, for example,
                        invoked in the artwork in addition to those of Foucault), the work creates a
                        collage of discursive textures. The virtual trial of Mr. Bungle in the
                        LambdaMOO online community, for example, is juxtaposed with the recent trial
                        in the wake of Brandon Teena’s death. References to online MUD communities
                        and the discourses of science fiction and fantasy are interwoven with
                        references to historical documents from medical and legal discourses that
                        form the disturbingly real backbone of the work. The popular memes of the
                        road trip provide a backdrop to the piece that is both fantasy and reality,
                        the stuff of fiction and everyday life.
                    While creative genres envelop the piece, it is striking how much of what is
                        presented in Brandon is historical fact. Of
                        course the work is based around the life and death of Brandon Teena, but
                        what is perhaps more difficult to see at first glance is how many of the
                        other characters in the piece are figures from history. The work is a
                        substantial history of LGBTQ+ identities, often connected with issues of
                        race, at the same time as it is a creative piece. Alan Turing features in
                        the panopticon episode as one of the
                        better-known parts of this narrative, but all the other characters in the
                            panopticon (with the exception of two that
                        were added in 1999 in conjunction with the Sydney Mardi Gras) were also,
                        over the course of the team’s research, discovered to be real historical
                        figures. Historical research discovered, for example, that Roni’s
                            Scribbles refers to a transgender prison inmate whose blog
                        with that title documented issues of transgender prison life.A
                            substantial analysis of the historical figures featured in the piece was
                            conducted by Emma Dickson, one of the students working on the project,
                            supervised by author Marion Thain. This work, then, is a creative
                        engagement with historical facts. It is a blended work of fact and
                        fiction.
                    Embedding the documentary within envelopes of science fiction, fantasy, and
                        other creative discourses enables documentary histories to be brought into
                        creative worlds. Brandon Teena is taken on a road trip that includes space
                        travel, and Cheang not only takes the central character into places
                        geographically distant from home, but also offers a journey into a
                        cross-historically congregated LGBTQ+ community. In this way, the piece
                        takes on something of the idea of the online community that was created by
                        the early MUD groups: a second life in the digital environment in which
                        alternative communities, not available in the local geographical
                        environment, could be sought. Of course – as Turkle’s work on the MUD
                        communities shows — the digital environment was also celebrated at this time
                        as a space in which one could, at least ostensibly, take on whatever
                        identity (sometimes human, sometimes not) one chose, and switch between
                        multiple identities. Yet we now inhabit a world dominated by social media
                        platforms in which the notion of authenticity often rests on the creation of
                        a single, stable, identity, which must be performed under a
                            real, stable, name and reflect
                            real experiences. Multiple accounts, multiple
                        identities, and pseudonyms are often discouraged (a desire for
                            transparency might be a motivation; the
                        requirements of the profiling that funds the sites might also push in this
                        direction). It will be interesting to see what new questions Cheang’s work
                        will raise for an audience at home within this very different context.
                
                
                    4.3 Interactive Aesthetics
                    Arguably what has changed even more than these digital cultural contexts, is
                        our experience of digital interfaces – and Brandon is a particularly interesting work in terms of what is
                        required of us as viewers (or perhaps more appropriately navigators) when we
                        come to its digital interface. The interactivity demanded by this piece is
                        not of the nature of the full body participation that is usually the focus
                        for scholarship around the nature of interactive digital art (see, for
                        example, Roberto Simanowski’s chapter on Interactive
                            Installations; ).
                        The user is not asked to engage phenomenologically with this work, but
                        rather through a cursor. Yet it is interesting how much persistent
                        interactivity of that kind is needed to navigate the work. As already noted,
                        actively moving the cursor over the interface is necessary to bring up
                            bigdoll, and even more so in order to find
                        that illusive point of entry to the main roadtrip interface. Once in roadtrip, further activity is required, or at least rewarded,
                        from the viewer. If one continuously moves the cursor over the road, images
                        appear that you would otherwise not see. These are of motels, road signs,
                        and other icons of the American highway. More importantly, however, the user
                        needs to click on the already visible images by the side of the road in
                        order to be taken through to particular episodes of the trip, and once
                        inside each episode it is striking that most of the content demands some
                        sort of interaction – even if that interaction is just a matter of scrolling
                        or expanding windows to reveal the full text. It is less a sense of bodily
                        involvement that is important here, but of becoming an active agent, and
                        being aware of our agency. Yet this autonomy is limited within the work,
                        which is insistent that any desire to control our exploration is
                        deliberately curtailed and playfully frustrated in various ways. Most
                        obviously, as one tries to navigate the work, the roadtrip interface moves continuously outside of our control,
                        constantly propelling the viewer along the road, meaning we can click into
                        episodes along the way but we can’t stop, slow down, or go back to something
                        we missed – we simply have to wait for it to come around again. It is also a
                        nice touch that, at certain points, moving the cursor over one section
                        brings up an icon that always appears on the opposite side of the road –
                        thus constantly frustrating the viewer’s desire to interact with it through
                        the cursor. This kind of playfulness builds up expectations of interactivity
                        in order to tease the viewer with them: within its microcosm the work seems
                        to be asking us to experience self-consciously the tension between our
                        autonomy and the limits of our autonomy. This keeps our attention as viewers
                        or navigators of the art, and it makes us interestingly aware of being
                        agents, but also subjects within a digital world that is outside our
                        control.
                    This interactive aesthetic is demonstrated particularly through the
                        importance of our experience of the “random” as a core component of the
                        artwork Brandon. Cheang generates the
                        experience of randomness within the work at times as an aesthetic illusion
                        and at times through genuine uses of randomized interaction with the work’s
                        media repository. For example, our very access to the work through the
                            bigdoll interface requires us to click on a
                        particular section of that interface that is not marked as any different
                        from any of the other squares within that field. Our interactive exploration
                        suddenly, and as a result of our random exploration, opens up the inner
                        world of the work: roadtrip. While discovered
                        only through random interaction, however, the point of access never changes
                        – it is merely unmarked. The work generates such experiences of randomness
                        in many different ways at many different points. The navigation around the
                            panopticon, for example, appears random
                        because the links from one cell to another do not take one in any obviously
                        sequential or numerical order, yet the navigation in fact will always take
                        you through the same apparently random loops. This was part of the
                            findings of an study of the narrative structure of the panopticon undertaken by Emma Dickson,
                            supervised by author Marion Thain. Moments at which the work
                        genuinely exploits the potential of interaction with its stored media to
                        generate random possibilities include, for example, the chat in mooplay. Here the responses to user interaction
                        are taken randomly from the texts stored within the work . The pop-up windows offering
                            theory pills (colourful tablet images with legends
                        such as take one) that appear from time to time outside of the
                        artwork’s main window are also generated randomly, offering a humorous
                        commentary on the artwork’s own (serious) engagement with discourses of both
                        gender theory and medicine.
                    The aesthetics of the piece seem as engaging now as ever, even if the effect
                        is somewhat different. What must at the time of its conception have been a
                        much more futuristic interface now has something of the look of a piece of
                        contemporary retro techno chic. The playful processes required of the viewer
                        to engage with the piece (the extensive random exploration of the interface
                        through the cursor, and the discovery of hidden links)
                        might be less confounding, in some ways, to the users of web 2.0 than to
                        those engaging with the digital interface in those relatively early days,
                        but the act of exploration required of the viewer is still challenging.
                        Indeed, online interfaces have become a lot more intuitive to use over the
                        past couple of decades, resulting, arguably, in less patience with the type
                        of navigation the artwork requires (indeed, there have already been reports
                        of viewers thinking the piece is not functioning because they haven’t
                        persevered with the random interaction necessary to get beyond the initial
                        launch screen). How might the changed context of interface design change the
                        nature of the audience’s experience of the work? And how might the
                        contemporary context alter our experience of the connections it makes
                        between content and form? As younger audiences come to the piece it will
                        resonate afresh, and differently, for twenty-first-century digital
                        natives.
                
            

                Conclusion
                While this essay places the artwork Brandon,
                    briefly, in various digital contexts, its restoration to public view will enable
                    a fuller consideration through the multiple lenses of media studies and a
                    broader reconsideration of its importance in relation to a host of other
                    contexts — especially, perhaps, to histories of gender, sexuality, and race, but
                    also to other issues of identity, community, and digitality.Many pieces
                        (in periodicals ranging from The Guardian to
                        the Wall Street Journal) considered the work’s
                        role in relation to discourses of gender, sexuality and race soon after it
                        first appeared, and there are signs that scholars and commentators are
                        returning to the artwork. For example, the artist and activist group Toxic
                        Lesbian held a public navigation event of Brandon on Feb. 12, 2016 at the Matadero Contemporary Art
                        Center in Madrid; on April 13, 2017, Rhizome included Brandon in its Net Art Anthology ;
                        from Sept, 15-23, 2017, Brandon was presented
                        during the International Queer Film Festival in Lisbon; and the Museum of
                        Contemporary Art Chicago will include Brandon
                        in its upcoming exhibition I Was Raised on the
                            Internet (opening June 2018). At the point of this writing, the
                        authors are also aware of current unpublished academic research into Brandon. While our commentary is limited to
                    a consideration of digital contexts, our collaboration aims to contribute to an
                    evolving methodology of digital scholarship: one in which universities work
                    together with major partners in the culture industry, and in which project teams
                    come together from across the disciplines. Here we build on the strengths of
                    emerging collaborative practices such as those seen in the application of
                    computational techniques to identify paper molds for Rembrandt’s drawings ; hosting hackathons to encourage data explorations
                    to support the study of art history such as the 2016 Museum of Modern Art Datathon
                    ; as well as applying art historical approaches to
                    digital-born art, such as using principles in technical art history to study
                    works of software-based art . In all cases, the
                    cross-disciplinarity of the team requires experts to forge new approaches in
                    this field.
                We have deliberately preserved some of the differences in prose style between our
                    different disciplinary voices in order to better reflect what it might mean to
                    bring together such diverse fields within a multi-author team. We celebrate the
                    play of differences around a single object rather than to trying to present a
                    more homogeneous veneer. The same is true for content as well as style:
                    ultimately our aim is not to construct a new, unified, thesis about Cheang’s
                    work, but rather to bring together around a single focus some of the very
                    different kinds of scholarly concerns that can usefully interact around a
                    digital artwork. In giving Cheang’s work this kind of attention we are also, of
                    course, asserting its significance within a history of digital culture. It is a
                    tribute to it to say that an artwork created within a medium that has changed
                    more rapidly than any other since its creation still feels, in various ways,
                    relevant. It is not surprising then that the work was included in Rhizome’s
                        Net Art Anthology: 
                        a two-year online exhibition of
                            the history of net art from the 1880s to the present
                        
                    . With the restoration work achieved through the partnership of the
                    Guggenheim with NYU, the work can continue to hold its place as a formative
                    moment in this history.
            

                Acknowledgements
                The authors would like to thank New York University’s computer science students
                    Emma Dickson ('17) and Jillian Zhong ('16) for their thorough source code
                    analysis and documentation of Brandon, as well as
                    for developing first prototypes for the artwork’s restoration. Additional thanks
                    go out to Emma Dickson for her important historical research, and execution of
                        Brandon's restoration, in 2016 and 2017. The
                    authors would like to thank Jonathan Farbowitz, the Guggenheim’s Fellow for the
                    Conservation of Computer-based Art, for his archival research of Brandon's complex institutional history and for his
                    supporting work on Brandon's restoration and
                    documentation. Additional thanks go out to Curatorial intern Esther Michaels for
                    her research in the Guggenheim Archives. For her assistance in accessing these
                    unprocessed archives, the authors thank Chiyong Han, Associate Archivist at the
                    Guggenheim Museum. For reading and providing their insights on this paper, the
                    authors thank Jennifer Blessing, the Guggenheim’s Senior Curator of Photography,
                    and Lena (Carol) Stringari, the Guggenheim’s Chief Conservator and Deputy
                    Director. We would like to acknowledge the important research and maintenance
                    work on Brandon by previous Guggenheim staff Carmen
                    Hermo and Jack Szwergold, and would like to thank all of our interviewees for
                    generously sharing their insights and memories: Shu Lea Cheang, Matthew Drutt,
                    John Hanhardt, Jon Ippolito, Caitlin Jones, Alexander Galloway, Justin Dávila
                    and Marleen Stikker.
                The study and restoration of Brandon would not have
                    been possible without the generous supporters of the Guggenheim’s CCBA
                    initiative: the Carl & Marilynn Thoma Art Foundation; the New York State
                    Council on the Arts with the support of Governor Andrew Cuomo and the New York
                    State Legislature; Christie’s; and Josh Elkes.
            
