Title:  Reading, Making, and Metacognition: Teaching
                    Digital Humanities for Transfer
Volume:  012
Issue:  2
Date:  12 September 2018
Abstract:  
                
                This paper argues that digital humanities pedagogy can provide unique forms of
                    attention and engagement for students at the outset of their college and
                    university careers. It reports on courses taught at NC State University and
                    elsewhere which use digital humanities pedagogy under the aegis of studying
                    transformations in reading. With attention to the mediation of attention
                    itself, these courses can cultivate habits of self-reflection to aid students in
                    any disciplinary pathway. Furthermore, digital humanities pedagogy can offer a
                    transferable project-based model of instruction, helping students to develop
                    metacognitive skills as well as to acculturate to different environments across
                    campus. Ultimately, this essay underscores the need to articulate strategies of
                    educational transfer in digital pedagogy.
            
Full Body Text: 
Introduction
Look around the penumbra of digital humanities pedagogy and you’ll find abundant
                attention to reading. Courses in book futurism, text technologies, and mediated
                reading practices show up frequently in what many digital humanists, however
                identified, are teaching. Consider just a few recent examples: Kari Kraus, Book 2.0: The History of the Book and the Future of
                    Reading (University of Maryland, 2012), Mark Sample, History and Future of the Book (Davidson College, 2014),
                Ryan Cordell, Technologies of Text (Northeastern
                University, 2014), Rita Raley, Distracted Reading
                (UCLA, 2015), Andrew Logemann, The Future of Reading
                (Gordon College, 2016), not to mention, beyond individual courses, the numerous
                assignments and instructional resources that support such interests. The
                    instructors and resources mentioned in this paper represent just some of the
                    generously shared models for teaching the past and future of reading, histories
                    of text technologies, or design-based approaches to books and digital media.
                    Digital pedagogy is greatly enhanced by an ethos of sharing and collaborative
                    praxis 
                    ; my own teaching is deeply indebted to the shared
                    lessons of other teachers and their students. Many of these courses
                express their instructors’ disciplinary backgrounds in writing and rhetoric, library
                science, book history, or media studies, but their reach is even broader. As Rachel
                Buurma suggests with her entry on Reading in the volume
                    Digital Humanities Pedagogy, changes prompted by
                digital technologies raise a new
                    pedagogical challenge for teachers whose fundamental charge is to teach students
                        how to read, compassing teachers and courses
                across an educational spectrum .
Questions about technologies and how we read also aim at the looming problem of
                attention itself. Numerous scholarly and popular commentators have described how
                modes of attention are changing, for better and worse, in the digital age. In her
                book How We Think, N. Katherine Hayles glosses an
                extensive literature on distraction and cognition and, in response, proposes that we
                take multiple configurations of reading as inspiration for designing new
                courses, curricula, and collaborative research opportunities. Hayles urges teachers
                to approach human attention both as a
                    design strategy and as a conceptual framework, or as both form and
                content . Among Hayles’s specific
                recommendations include a comparative media studies approach, project-based
                instruction, and classrooms that connect to multiple collaborative spaces offline
                and on. Courses on reading have developed all of these opportunities in the service
                of digital humanities pedagogy.
Such courses might help orient students to a university education more broadly. This
                work often falls to first-year experience (FYE) courses, common reading programs, or
                learning communities which transition students to the diverse community and habits
                of mind of the college experience 
                . These experiences often attempt to nurture students’
                curiosity, interdisciplinary thinking, and participation in a community in 
                    which they are not likely to have
                        imagined themselves as members
                    
                 (see also ). Courses on reading can meet
                many of these same goals with their disciplinary openness, emphasis on collaborative
                praxis, and student reflections on the very conditions of their learning. A digital
                humanities pedagogy might do even better, turning attention not only to the evolving
                platforms for reading, but to the institutional spaces in which entering college
                students can find support and even inspiration for their own work beyond the course.
                In this essay, I want to show how these courses can bridge disciplines and connect
                different learning spaces on campus. Such an approach extends the work of knowledge
                creation beyond the classroom community to other spaces and professionals,
                especially in the library, and thereby enriches students’ sense of the distributed
                facilities and extra-disciplinary partnerships which might contribute to their
                academic and social goals during their college career.
Ultimately, I want to emphasize the potential for transfer in digital
                humanities pedagogy. Transfer is commonly defined as learners’ ability to recognize
                when and how their skills, store of knowledge, or critical thinking strategies might
                apply in different domains . For example,
                when a composition student uses principles of reasoned argument in their writing for
                another course. Yet transfer is a complex phenomenon. Recently, scholars of transfer
                have emphasized such properties as adaptation, enculturation, repurposing, and
                transformation 
                
                . Transfer is the subject of extensive research in
                education, cognitive psychology, and composition studies, yet it rarely appears, or
                shows up in other guises, in discussions of digital humanities pedagogy, even
                    though transfer may be one of DH’s most powerful claims as an educational
                    experience. As Anne B. McGrail suggests: 
                    Transfer happens best in the context
                        of integrative learning. Understanding is developed across disciplinary
                        boundaries and likely to be retained across contexts. Because DH is
                        collaborative and cross-disciplinary, engaging multiple knowledges at once,
                        it is more likely to create knowledge transfer
                    
                . Rebecca Frost Davis agrees that 
                    digital projects, networks,
                        communities, and resources provide ample opportunities for students to
                        transfer their learning
                    
                . Courses on reading may sharpen the focus on knowledge transfer in DH, in
                part by helping students 
                    become acquainted with the problem of
                        transfer in itself
                    
                . In other words, attention to mediated attention (reading) asks
                students to reflect upon their own processes of learning and, better still, to
                access and design new parameters for their own education, whether within a
                discipline, across domains, or in concert with new spaces, persons, and
                partnerships. If courses about reading are timely in the context of digital
                transformations, they also offer early-career students a timely exploration of their
                own learning ecology, helping them to realize and tactically access the knowledge
                work beyond their curricular strictures. 

                Comparative Textual Media
                For the past several years at NC State University, I have experimented with
                    courses about reading as a first-year seminar experience for our university’s
                    honors program. The syllabus, major assignments, planning documents, and
                        milestones for the most recent iteration of the class — HON 313, Reading Machines, Fall 2017 — are available via
                        Humanities Commons at https://hcommons.org/deposits/item/hc:21393/. A seminar is
                    required of all first-year students in the program, intended to engage students
                    in discovery, inquiry, and
                        creativity across a variety of disciplines . As an FYE, it helps cultivate community by
                    bringing students from all sorts of different academic tracks. My own courses
                    have included large proportions of students from engineering and the sciences,
                    with only a few from the humanities and social sciences and precisely none from
                    my home department of English. That mixed disciplinary enrollment comes by
                    design, intended to enculturate students into new academic communities, broaden
                    their sense of research possibilities, and, more implicitly, to help them
                    cultivate strategies for transfer, or what the program calls 
                        the integration and appreciation
                            of knowledge across disciplines
                        
                    .
                Paul Fishwick and others have suggested how digital humanities can introduce
                    students — and especially engineering students — to an interdisciplinary context
                    for inquiry 
                    
                    
                    . Yet I do not use the term digital
                        humanities as potentially limiting the cross-disciplinary affiliations
                    which these courses hope to foster (e.g. between design and biology).
                    Furthermore, as Ryan Cordell has persuasively argued, digital humanities
                    as such does not capture the undergraduate imagination, and ought instead to be
                    integrated into undergraduate programs it can positively impact . Cordell refashioned his Intro to DH course into an
                    upper-level experience in the English major. I kept the introductory framework
                    to serve first years while opening the subject to questions of Reading in the Digital Age — the course’s initial
                    title. Like many of the courses this essay mentions at the outset, mine explores
                    how historical and contemporary mediums reshape meaning, how modes of attention
                    change alongside, and how we might creatively and critically design our own
                    interventions in this landscape. We sample from ongoing academic research and
                    try creative activities that span book history, media studies, digital
                    humanities, electronic literature, and critical making. But those areas are not
                    the course’s avowed topic. Rather, they allow for multiple disciplinary pathways
                    and the hands-on, project-based, integrative learning that undergirds knowledge
                    transfer .
                The course title has evolved to Reading Machines,
                    inspired by Stephen Ramsay’s eponymous book, by the appeal to the mechanisms or
                    materiality of media in Kirschenbaum’s work, and by the name’s potential appeal
                    to students coming to NC State for STEM 
                    . Not quite a course about reading, it
                    might more properly be called comparative textual media (CTM) as proposed by Hayles and Jessica
                    Pressman . It endeavors to pursue the
                        productive tension and
                        interplay among analysis, critique, and an ethic of making that Hayles and Pressman
                    identify as CTM’s distinctive paradigm and that, I will argue, also encourages
                    transfer . In what follows, I will explain
                    how the course works and, by extension, how digital humanities pedagogy can
                    stimulate transfer at multiple levels.
                Few students enter the class knowing what its title means or what kind of class
                    they’re in for. Few have any experience in critical media analysis. Many of
                    these high-achieving students worry about uncertain expectations or their lack
                    of skills. This challenge is endemic to any intro to digital humanities course.
                    To get students involved, much less to establish the conditions for transfer,
                    depends on something like what Nancy Sommers and Laura Saltz have identified
                    about first-year writing. When do students start thinking with
                    writing, rather than just completing a writing assignment? In what circumstances
                    do they continue to use what they’ve learned, as opposed to clearing a course
                    requirement and moving on? According to Sommers and Saltz, this transformation
                    occurs when students are encouraged to see themselves as novices including 
                        an open attitude to instruction
                            and feedback, [and] a willingness to experiment
                        
                    . Comparative textual media requires an almost continuous apprenticeship
                    to new and old contexts — for students as well as the instructor. Indeed,
                    digital humanities pedagogy often puts the instructor and students on the same
                    playing field, experimenting together on questions or methods for which neither
                    definitive answers nor expertise may exist. The risks are also similar, as
                        some students do not easily adapt to this mindset, suspecting that
                        assignments are secrets to decode, a game mastered only by the instructor,
                        or irrelevant to their studies . Sommers and Saltz also found that writing mattered more to
                    students when they felt like they were entering a live debate which honored their own
                    perspectives, approaches, and projects as contributions to the discussion . Certainly debates about reading and media
                    are both current and lively, connecting students’ experiences to the evolving
                    questions of pundits, journalists, and scholars across different domains. Both
                    frameworks — the novice and the interlocutor — take work to develop, and depend
                    significantly on establishing trust and mutual respect.
                A course about reading, or about forms of attention, does not aim for expert
                    knowledge. Instead, it makes students reflect, turning their own experiences
                    into the subject matter of the course. In Hayles’s terms, it makes human
                    attention the design strategy as well as conceptual framework of the course . In terms of the conceptual framework, many
                    of the exercises in Reading Machines simply aim to
                    get students to notice and explain 
                        the critical insight of media
                            studies[:] that we should not separate medium from meaning
                        
                    . As Hayles suggests, this is best accomplished by blending instructional
                    styles: students analyze texts, experiment with hands-on practice, and explore
                    different collaborative spaces. Students should also be encouraged to reflect,
                    in informal as well as structured ways, about all of these course experiences.
                    Reflection underscores time and again the self-critical awareness at the heart
                    of comparative textual analysis. David Levy has described similar
                        mindfulness techniques for assessing and making
                    strategic changes to one’s uses of personal technology. Levy’s exercises
                    encourage attention to lived experiences of technology beyond the false binary
                    of whether or not Google is making us stupid .
                    Students must attend both to task
                        focus and to self
                        observation, developing habits of critical reflection as well as
                    metacognitive monitoring .
                What this looks like in the classroom varies according to instructor and
                    institution. In our course, we undertake several weeks of comparing platforms
                    for reading. We sample a single text in different formats including paperback,
                    on the Kindle, through the speed-reading browser plugin Spritz, and using a
                    web-based social reading and annotation platform. Along the way, students are
                    asked to read recent critical discussion about changes to reading, as well as to
                    respond to reflection prompts in their course journal. They also try assignments
                    that use other modalities, such as capturing data about and then visualizing
                    their own media diet, as well as hands-on exercises in craft. Bringing craft
                    into the classroom can really amplify attention to attention. Levy — who himself
                    took a two-year break from the tech world to study calligraphy — claims that
                    craft demands its own mode of attention to the 
                        interaction between body, materials,
                            and […] emerging forms
                        
                    . Pairing analysis with craft, theory with practice, can powerfully aid
                    the teaching of media analysis. For example, when we read about the fate of
                    handwriting in schools or a scholarly article about the different cognitive
                    circuits that handwriting might operate, we also try an exercise writing with
                    feather quills and ink on rag paper, sometimes with a guest visit from a
                    colleague who speaks about paleography. Inspired by assignments like Cordell’s
                    lab Simulating the Scriptorium and Jeffrey Makala’s
                        Reading by Candlelight, this exercise slightly
                    differs in asking students to compose artisanal tweets that
                    they subsequently post somewhere on campus. Afterwards, students reflect in
                    their journal on the materiality and experience of writing, as well as what they
                    learn from the distortions of simulating new media with old. When the class
                    listens to a portion of an audiobook, they also produce their own 1-2 minute
                    recorded snippet of our course text. Beforehand, we discuss the requirements of
                    a good performance, tuning the body as a speaking instrument with attention to
                    speed, cadence, facial expression, and posture. The experience of listening to
                    audiobooks usually encourages students to reflect on attention and distraction.
                    The attempt to actually craft a recording — with the option of sharing it with
                    the class — shifts their focus to the labor of voice actors, the ambient noises
                    of their own environments, and how their vocal embodiment might affect a
                    listeners’ experience or even trigger their prejudices.
                Exploring the book as a physical object can also deepen students’ attention to
                    things, interfaces, and uses of mediums. Like other classes, including Joanna
                    Swafford’s at SUNY New Paltz, we have scoured our library stacks for marginalia
                    to submit to the BookTraces project . The exercise
                    also offers the class an opportunity to hear from a librarian about the
                    collection itself: how did these books even get to the stacks, how has that
                    collection changed, and why? Thinking about the contingent circumstances not
                    only of marginal writing, but of the books themselves, deepens in a subsequent
                    visit to NC State’s Hunt Library, where practically the entire print collection
                    (1.5 million volumes) has been transferred to high, gleaming rows of aluminum
                    storage boxes, fetched by industrial robots (aka the bookBot). The rest of the
                    library comprises numerous spaces for casual and collaborative use. Now these
                    very spaces become the focus of our attention, as we walk through with the
                    library’s user experience director, discussing how its architects and experience
                    planners designed spaces for different kinds of interaction. Then students
                    reflect on their own uses of spaces to study and speculate on what they might do
                    differently going forward. These exercises double as an orientation to the
                    campus libraries, but because they are scaffolded by our concerns for acts of
                    reading, mediation, and attention, they invite students to realize the
                    significance of those spaces for their own pursuits.
                Comparative textual media benefits from the collisions of old and new forms, as
                    well as different instructional modalities. These are fully embodied in Amaranth
                    Borsuk’s book of pop-up electronic poetry Between Page and
                        Screen
                    . And even more so in Borsuk’s encouragement for
                    people to make the book from scratch. Thanks to the DIY edition Borsuk makes
                    freely available online as well as the generosity of NCSU Libraries’
                    preservation librarians, students learned a few bookbinding techniques and then
                    assembled their own copies of Between Page and
                        Screen. These workshops move the class into what Levy calls slow world practices, as students
                    thread needles, stitch signatures, and help each other through what is, to all
                    but a few of them, an entirely new skill .
                    Though Between Page and Screen is a challenging
                    text to read and interpret, the exercise ennobles participation from students
                    who don’t self-identify as critical readers. As Sommers and Saltz suggest,
                    students appreciate the simple fact of having produced something tangible, a
                    form of knowledge creation that inheres in the craftwork, collaborative
                    experience, and resulting object as much as from our critical insights .
                
                    Book binding workshop in the NCSU Libraries preservation lab
                    
                
                Having created a book, we also take one apart, using the experiences of each to
                    expand the dimensions of analysis. For this, Reading
                        Machines adapts Brian Croxall’s wonderful exercise of the life cycle
                    of digitization and text analysis . This begins with
                    another visit to the preservation lab where the instructor sacrifices his
                    paperback copy of our long-form reading (most recently Mr
                        Penumbra’s 24 Hour Bookstore) to the book guillotine. Biblioclasm is
                    a surprisingly affecting experience for students; several feel too squeamish
                    even to hold the sliced spine of a cheap paperback. Disbound pages in hand, we
                    meet a media production librarian in the Digital Media Lab who takes the class
                    quickly through a workshop on document scanning and OCR. Given sequential chunks
                    of the novel, students work in pairs to scan, OCR, correct against original
                    pages, and upload their e-text to a shared folder, which the instructor collects
                    and normalizes into a single file. I invite a colleague who talks from a
                    computer science perspective about how computers do and do not read, building up
                    in pseudocode and Perl a set of simple queries. Following Croxall’s model, the
                    class then pursues experiments in text analysis using a set of basic tools
                    including Textalyzer (http://textalyser.net) and Voyant (http://voyant-tools.org), recording
                    their methods and speculations in their journal, and sharing and refining those
                    inquiries collectively with the class.
            

                Teaching DH for Transfer
                As I hope these examples suggest, teaching comparative textual media can usefully
                    blend critique with hands-on experimentation, opening a course to multiple modes
                    of attention, to students of different skill sets, and to varied spaces for
                    collaborative work across campus. It affords an experience of apprenticeship
                    which may open students’ dispositions to become knowledge creators in new domains . Yet the next step for digital pedagogy, according
                    to Rebecca Frost Davis, is to transfer
                        the methodologies that have been developed for recognizing and studying
                        writing transfer into course design and student activity . For transfer to occur, students must also
                    recognize and apply their abilities in new situations. To this point in the
                    essay, I have described exercises that operate as low road
                    transfer, in which students might apply their existing abilities or insights
                    within a fairly familiar context. For instance, a student who already knows how
                    to sew readily sees its application in the unfamiliar domain of book binding.
                    More needs to happen for high road transfer, or the ability
                    to abstract, transform, and apply concepts or methods between unfamiliar domains
                        . High road transfer depends on greater
                    self awareness, a critical vocabulary which persists across domains, and
                    structured training in how and when to use transferable problem solving . There are extensive discussions about
                    teaching for transfer which instructors in digital humanities could incorporate,
                    bolstering the more implicit claims for transfer as DH bridges disciplines,
                    academic professions, and public humanities work.
                Courses which emphasize reflection and mindfulness go some way toward
                    establishing the base conditions for transfer. The next step may be to
                    foreground the subject of transfer itself. What skills, vocabulary, mindsets, or
                    processes might students use in other classes or professional situations? How
                    can they carry not only habits of self awareness but a plan for dealing with
                    challenges in other domains? Among the ways of addressing these questions, our
                    course used a structure called TH!NK currently in place at NC State University
                    as part of its quality enhancement program. The TH!NK program models a process
                    cycle for creative and critical thinking. This cycle moves through discrete
                    stages: a) assess the task, b) evaluate needs, strengths, and weaknesses, c)
                    make a project plan, d) set milestones and monitor performance, e) reflect and
                    make adjustments, and f) effectively communicate the results 
                    . This cycle means to be generalizable to any
                    problem-based or project scenario, in whatever discipline. Furthermore, it
                    builds upon a model of metacognition. Metacognition moves beyond student
                    reflections on a course topic to students’ awareness of their own thinking
                    process. Levy makes a similar distinction about mindfulness: attention on a task
                    compared to attention on one’s self. The advantage of metacognitive (or
                    mindfulness) training is how it helps students monitor and control their own
                    performance, which is especially vital for students new to higher ed. As Ambrose
                    et al. argue, one of the major
                        intellectual challenges students face upon entering college is managing
                        their own learning
                    . Thus, teaching students to think about
                    thinking — at which courses on reading or comparative textual media can excel —
                    can profoundly impact their educational career.
                
                    TH!NK model of critical and creative thinking behaviors
                    
                
                A metacognitive cycle implicitly shapes many project-based assignments. This
                    cycle also goes by other names, including the drafts, peer review, revision, and
                    reflection of writing essays, or the design process cycle. In fact, several of
                    my students recognized the metacognitive model as similar to an engineering and
                    design process cycle they learned in other classes. As Sheridan et al. explain, 
                        Design processes are usually
                            conceptualized in terms of an iterative sequence of ideation, or finding
                            a problem, drafting ideas, creating a product, reflecting, and
                            revising
                        
                     (see also ). Descriptions may vary for the
                    elements of this sequence. But its commonalities all support metacognitive
                    awareness. My goals in this course have been to foreground that cycle, get
                    students repeatedly to practice through different project-based assignments, and
                    emphasize its transferability to other disciplines. 
                Design and making present excellent opportunities for developing critical and
                    creative projects that meet the pedagogical goals of digital humanities as well
                    as establish models for transfer into other disciplines. Intro to DH courses and
                    kindred courses on reading offer some great approaches for turning comparative
                    textual media into project-based learning. For instance, I adapted a
                        design fiction inspired by Mark Sample and Owen Mundy:
                    students had to imagine and propose a new app for the iOS App Store — on the
                    condition that it broke Apple’s terms of service in an illuminating way. While,
                    unlike Mundy’s computer art class, we stopped short of creating any software,
                    this assignment provoked creative ideas for digital applications and required
                    their explanation in critical context. Yet asking students to submit a creative
                    project, or anything for which you cannot show them existing examples, can cause
                    unease about grading and assessment. What are the expectations? Foregrounding
                    the metacognitive process cycle helps here, too. Rather than grade the creative
                    substance of students’ ideas, instructors can weigh the sequential submissions
                    of the project cycle. For my assignment, students had to submit each of these on
                    the way to their finished project: a needs assessment, a plan, peer feedback,
                    responses to that feedback, and a process paper. Requiring these incremental
                    submissions also helps formalize discrete moments within that process cycle. 
                Reading Machines culminated in a more elaborate
                    project, one that required students not only to consider their own process cycle
                    but the role of extracurricular spaces and collaborations within it. This
                    assignment was largely inspired by the reflective design projects of Kari Kraus’s
                    students, described in their collaborative article Bibliocircuitry and the Alien Everyday, as well as by the
                    pedagogical opportunities of NCSU Libraries’ recently opened Makerspace.
                    Students were asked to read the Bibliocircuitry
                    article and, by following their design process cycle over several weeks, create
                    a reflective design prototype
                    of a reading machine, loosely construed .
                    Their prototype did not have to function so much as become an object to think
                    with, something that, like the examples from Kraus’s class, provocatively
                    altered our relations with a medium’s protocols, materials, or uses. The
                    prototype would be supported with a written rationale and a demonstration
                    session in which groups gave Pecha Kucha-style lightning talks. I also required
                    and collected project plans, self-generated milestones, and reflections from
                    individuals about the merits or shortcomings of their process. Librarians at the
                    Makerspace offered a safety orientation session, backgrounds on critical making,
                    and support for student groups as they developed their projects over multiple
                    weeks.
                Making adds an important material dimension to metacognitive process cycles
                    which, in much published criticism, can seem limited to what happens in
                    learners’ heads. Cognition is also an unfolding, embodied relation. The authors
                    of a recent study on makerspaces and learning use the concept of
                        constructionism to emphasize the 
                        centrality of developing an idea
                            and then designing and creating an external representation … which
                            supports learners’ conceptual understanding
                        
                    . Design-based pedagogy like Kraus’s shows constructionism at work,
                    binding the metacognitive process to the material insights of creating an
                    object. In fact, Kraus’s Bibliocircuitry experiment
                    is the first entry under the keyword for Praxis in Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities. That entry celebrates an ethos
                    of making within praxis, 
                        the process through which ideas
                            become objects in space or actions in time
                        
                    . As another way of bridging these domains, Jentery Sayers proposes transduction literacy,
                    cultivating in students the knowledge
                        of how this material becomes that material which involves strategic repurposing,
                    trial and error,
                    collaboration,
                    process documentation and 
                        self-reflexive building
                        
                    . It would take only a few tweaks to turn Sayers’s model into a
                    metacognitive process cycle, ready for praxis-based digital humanities
                        instruction. A related model of 
                            learning in the making in
                                the context of arts education focuses on metarepresentational
                                competence (MRC), the understanding of how tools support
                                communicating an idea, when to invoke certain tools, and for what
                                purpose
                            
                        .
                The projects in Reading Machines showed evidence of
                    low and high road transfer. Students were encouraged to build upon the strengths
                    they might already possess, or to pursue whatever new techniques (from 3D
                    printing to sewing to laser cutting to physical computing) or course concepts
                    most interested them. Faced with a very unfamiliar assignment, some students
                    gravitated to domains in which they already felt comfortable. For example, two
                    computer science students decided to mash up components of the Raspberry Pi
                    microcomputing system with our course paperback — that semester, The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes. They attached a
                    motion-sensing camera to peek over the top edge of the book, with the Raspberry
                    Pi taped to its back cover. The camera snapped a picture anytime it sensed
                    movement: capturing images of the reader as well as the book's movement in
                    space. Along the way, we discussed where their project was headed, what kinds of
                        alterity relations it
                    could expose, and how it connected to our course experiences . The students referred back to our
                    marginalia hunt and explained how their camera tried to answer the difficult
                    problem of the history of reading, or learning about a book’s physical passage
                    through the world. The project also transformed the paperback into a
                    surveillance machine. Much to these students’ surprise, when they shared their
                    working prototype with friends on their residence hall, their peers were far
                    more suspicious of the augmented paperback than the smart phones they owned —
                    machines far more capable of harvesting personal data. This led the students to
                    reflect upon smart phone design and users’ situational (sometimes paradoxical)
                    responses to technology.
                
                    Sherlock Holmes surveillance book by Ulises Gutierrez and Andrew
                        Mauk
                    
                
                As a critical making project, the Sherlock Holmes
                    surveillance book succeeds within the content framework of Reading Machines. But the project-based experience of critical
                    thinking, making, and reflection has a better chance of getting used in other
                    domains. Critical making projects encourage the metacognitive mindset and
                    process cycle which can lead to high road transfer. Recall that low road
                    transfer occurs at a relatively superficial level: see a physical computing kit,
                    remember that you already know a bit about hardware and programming. Higher road
                    transfer 
                        depends on deliberate mindful
                            abstraction of skill or knowledge from one context for application in
                            another
                        
                    . That is harder to accomplish; some scholars are skeptical that local,
                    context-specific knowledge can easily transfer at all . But student responses from these courses do suggest that many students
                    recognized metacognition and the process cycle as transferrable outcomes of the
                        course. The TH!NK program has its own approaches to comparative and
                        longitudinal assessment of students in these programs, which is
                        ongoing. A student from meteorology concluded that the most important result of this class
                        was … how we can apply similar creative and reflective strategies outside of
                        the context of this class, in our own fields. Another student
                    directly linked the course projects with transfer: I was given the liberty to do unique, non-conventional
                        projects and connect various aspects of my learning even from other classes
                        back to this class. That included disciplinary crossover, according
                    to a student initially skeptical of the humanities: [the course] challenged a lot of my views of the
                        humanities as being boring. It’s a great class for both
                        STEM and humanities students. Naturally, others resisted, unhappy
                    with the lack of clear expectations for finished projects, and recalling those
                    students Sommers and Saltz identified as skeptical of the paradigm of creative
                    novicehood . Yet, even among these
                    students, at least one of my skeptics conceded that, while the course content
                    seemed irrelevant, the structure still worked: The course objectives are very unclear, and it is
                        often difficult to understand what the point of the
                        course is. That being said, I really enjoyed the project-based learning
                        style upon which this class focuses. I also found that the required project
                        planning was a transferable skill that I utilized in other
                        courses. I have shared these comments and others from previous
                        semesters with incoming classes, attempting, from the first day, to clarify
                        our goals for interdisciplinary transfer as well as to perform my own
                        monitoring and adjustment of its delivery . Again inspired by Brian Croxall who creatively uses and publically
                        shares his teaching evaluations. See http://www.briancroxall.net/teaching/ and .
            

                Ambience and Acculturation
                Transfer is not just about skills or learning a project planning template to
                    reuse in different contexts. It is also about cultivating the creativity and
                    willingness to see yourself tackle new situations. In other words, transfer is a
                    disposition and one that DH instruction may uniquely help to engender. I
                    recently ran into a former student pursuing a degree in fashion and textile
                    design. Based on her early exposure in our class, she had successfully applied
                    for a position in the NCSU Libraries Makerspace. Notably, her final project for
                    our class utilized fabrics and paper to adapt the involution of Alice in Wonderland, delving into the relations of
                    text, textiles, and design. The Makerspace librarians were delighted by her
                    application for the job, expanding the space’s purview beyond the 3D printing
                    projects and white-male demography which initially dominated it. Kara
                        Kennedy explores these implications more fully, arguing that 
                            DH can also help women who
                                potentially face gender biases related to digital technology gain
                                competence and confidence with it through their humanities
                                courses
                            
                        . This student’s return to the Makerspace as an expert,
                    employed to guide her peers in all of its technologies, suggests another aspect
                    of transfer which digital humanities instruction might facilitate. That is, the
                    awareness of multiple spaces for knowledge creation on campus, and the
                    enculturation to the different kinds of work and professionals who inhabit them. 
                How do you recognize yourself in new spaces? Especially if you don’t see versions
                    of yourself there, or really grasp what you’d be doing in them? Students
                    entering college can get barraged by an endless orientation to campus services
                    and communities. We mitigate students’ orientation overload by making these
                    different domains into sites of interaction. Put more directly: 
                        You perceive the world largely
                            through what you can do with it
                        
                    . Digital humanities celebrates the active connections it makes across
                    disciplines, to extra-disciplinary partners, to other spaces of praxis on campus
                    and online. Digital humanities pedagogy, then, can be a kind of interaction
                    design for the distributed landscape of higher education, helping students to
                    realize what they can activate at different times in their career. According to
                    Malcolm McCullough, we now exist in an ambient commons where attention does not
                    necessarily have to mean constant focus. Rather than emphasizing individual
                    mindfulness, McCullough highlights the thoughtful design of interactions,
                    including how to manage all the things in our cognitive periphery: 
                        everything you were aware of
                            that didn’t consume your attention, and that could be brought to the
                            center of focus if necessary
                        
                    . In a sense, digital humanities pedagogy is a layered strategy for the
                    ambient commons of the university, in which multiple disciplinary pursuits,
                    activities, and resource infrastructures (like the library) may be available to
                    students but often remain peripheral to a focused academic trajectory.
                    McCullough implicitly offers a model of transfer more nuanced than just a domain problem. He
                    emphasizes embodiment, situational awareness, and extended cognition which uses 
                        the environment as an active
                            resource
                        
                    . Writing and rhetoric researchers now also emphasize these conditions,
                    using different terminology, but agreeing that transfer is an embodied and
                    socially sophisticated phenomenon: 
                        Adaptation and success require
                            continued situated practice and gradual enculturation
                        
                    . Digital humanities instruction might offer just such a set of
                    activity-based, situated practices in which students acculturate to the
                    different environments of their learning. 
                For our course, pedagogy aimed at situated practice not simply with hands-on
                    exercises involving our bodies, but in collaborating with different knowledge
                    professionals in their own environments. For an interesting take on the
                        pedagogical configurations specifically within makerspaces, see . According to Nowviskie, Boggs, and
                    Lundblad, such praxis helps students begin to move with confidence across disciplinary and
                        professional boundaries and acculturate to those different
                    environments . As transfer researcher Mary
                    Goldschmidt argues, when the
                        individual can see himself or herself as a member of the new community of
                        practice, they are far more likely to make consequential transitions
                    across disciplines . An intro to
                    digital humanities framework can open many such opportunities for membership.
                    While it does limit the depth of students’ discourse knowledge in any one
                    environment, it at least cultivates students’ ambient awareness of resources,
                    spaces, and skills they might at other times engage. Though I have focused
                        on first-year students, Nowviskie, Boggs, and Lindblad emphasize how,
                        through praxis, 
                            students learn to negotiate
                                more fluidly and at earlier stages between practices of classroom
                                spaces and those of the working world
                            
                        . It also extends the course community to members beyond the
                    enrolled students. We bring this community together at the very end of term,
                    inviting everyone who supported the course to students’ presentations. That
                    session raises the stakes for students’ projects, asks them to communicate to a
                    broader community of practice than simply their instructor, and ennobles their
                    work as of broadly interdisciplinary interest. Selected student projects are
                    later exhibited at the entrance to the Makerspace, each with an explanatory card
                    and credits, visible to all passersby for the next academic semester.
                The substance of these projects gets to the interests of comparative textual
                    media, critical making, and studies of reading. While I have some biases, those
                    topics could improve any student’s critical attention to attention. This paper
                    has suggested that project-based, situated pedagogies for teaching those topics
                    may be more vital to developing the transferrable skills in critical and
                    creative thinking that so many FYE programs would promote. Digital humanities
                    instruction may offer a unique context for that pedagogy, particularly as it
                    encourages and honors collaborative praxis across disciplinary and professional
                    settings. But as McGrail points out, 
                        the real work is
                            pedagogical
                        
                    . And that includes, perhaps, more explicit attention within digital
                    humanities pedagogy to metacognition and transfer.
            

                Acknowledgments
                My thanks to all the NC State first-year students in HON 202, HON 298, and HON
                    313 who cheerfully participated in this evolving course. Thanks also to the NCSU
                    Libraries, especially Adam Rogers, Lauren Di Monte, Cindy Levine, Markus Wust,
                    Eli Brown, Josh Boyer, Jamie Bradway, Robin Harper, Emily Schmidt, and Jason
                    Evans Groth. The support of the NC State University Honors program has been
                    vital, including Sue Carson, Aaron Stoller, Genia Sklute, Katy Leonard,
                    Priscilla Lunsford, Corey White, and Anne Auten. I am perpetually in debt to the
                    pedagogical inspiration of my DH peers, especially Kari Kraus, Brian Croxall,
                    Mark Sample, Miriam Posner, Ryan Cordell, Joanna Swafford, and Roger Whitson.
                    For a crash course in transfer studies, thank you to Chris Anson, Casie
                    Fedukovitch, and Liane Robertson. Insufficiencies in this paper’s discussions of
                    transfer and metacognition are entirely my own.
            
