Title:  Scaffolding and Play Approaches to Digital
                    Humanities Pedagogy: Assessment and Iteration in Topically-Driven
                    Courses
Volume:  011
Issue:  4
Date:  04 April 2018
Abstract:  
                Discussions of digital humanities pedagogy have often focused on discussions of
                        scaffolding and play
                    (alternatively, tinkering) approaches, and methods for
                    assessing student work appropriate to both techniques. While these approaches
                    may seem oppositional, we emphasize the need to balance them in most classroom
                    contexts, and explore challenges with integrating new digital humanities
                    platforms in topically-driven humanities classrooms. We examine our experiences
                    as an instructor and a librarian partnering to include a multimedia publishing
                    assignment sequence in a course on the history of children’s literature, and our
                    assessment of our approach to instruction in a distance graduate education
                    context that is not amenable to the lab-based learning
                    usually used in person for DH learning. While discussions of assessment of DH
                    classroom projects generally focus on the question of how to grade student work,
                    we argue that assessment is as important for reflecting on and evaluating
                    pedagogy, including how to balance and iteratively improve
                        scaffolding and play approaches.
                    These issues are important not just for experienced DH instructors, but also
                    humanities instructors without a DH background beginning to integrate digital
                    assignments as a new norm.
            
Full Body Text: 
 Instructors across humanities departments at the University of Illinois, as at other
                higher education institutions, have increasingly partnered with librarians to
                integrate digital humanities (DH) tools into their classroom — and not necessarily in
                courses titled Introduction to Digital Humanities. These
                instructors have already established topics courses in art history, media studies,
                history, writing studies, literature, and other topics. They want students to
                experiment with DH tools and methods for a single project in ways that support and
                enhance deep exploration into the class’s discipline-specific content and add to
                students’ abilities to synthesize and communicate arguments about this content
                through new technologies. As colleagues at other institutions report similar trends,
                this paper responds to an emerging need, anticipated in research by Amy E. Earhart
                and Toniesha L. Taylor, for portable strategies that instructors and librarians can
                use to embed DH skills in topics courses . This article
                reports lessons learned from the integration of a digital humanities publishing
                assignment sequence using the multimodal publishing platform Scalar in an online
                masters course on the History of Children’s Literature. Certain restrictions unique
                to this course — covering advanced history content, with heavy reading load, in an
                online synchronous distance education environment, while teaching an unfamiliar
                digital publishing platform (Scalar) — challenged the instructor and librarian to
                devise creative strategies for teaching DH tools using limited class time and
                without the usual in-person DH lab environment. These strategies are generally
                transferable as DH skills find their way into different classes and teaching
                environments. We also report the assessment methods we used to discover these
                lessons, with recommendations for how instructors and librarians can discover what
                works and doesn’t work in their own unique classrooms.
The fundamental challenge in pedagogical design that we draw attention to here is the
                balance between what others have discussed as scaffolding and
                    play (alternately, tinkering)
                approaches to digital pedagogy. As discussed at greater length below, various
                advocates have emphasized one or other of these approaches, sometimes as opposed,
                for teaching digital humanities methods and tools. Here we emphasize a more general
                need to consider these two approaches together to foster strong digital pedagogy
                appropriate to different course contexts across the curriculum. Thus, in a context
                such as the course described here, where time is limited and students are learning
                at a distance, we found that DH projects require careful scaffolding of the
                assignment to manage anxiety, as students have to learn a tool on their own time,
                supported virtually through peer discussion boards and online office hours. Indeed,
                our assessment indicated the need for further development of short lessons on
                targeted topics, choreographed to intervene at precise moments in the project. At
                the same time, students need space for some open-ended tinkering in order to develop
                DH skills that are transferable across tools, not the least of which is the
                confidence to teach themselves new skills as the need arises in their profession,
                using support from colleagues and online user communities. Our approach, therefore,
                might be described as directed tinkering, a strategic combination of scaffolding and
                play that uses structure to encourage students to experiment in those areas that
                match a course’s particular learning goals.

                Modeling and Assessing DH Instruction
                In designing the assignments and teaching strategies, we sought to balance the
                    benefits of structured and unstructured learning in ways that would ultimately
                    benefit the students. In the existing literature on DH pedagogy, structured and
                    unstructured approaches generally appear under the discourses of
                        scaffolding and play. Scaffolding
                    in these discussions borrows from instructional design to indicate a structured
                    series of shorter, simpler assignments sequenced to lead into a larger, more
                    complex product that synthesizes the material 
                    
                    . Other reports of digital humanities or scholarly
                    multimedia assignments in courses echo this approach of cumulative steps toward
                    a major project (often but not always published as an ultimate step) even when
                    not framing their work as scaffolding 
                    . Play approaches, by contrast, lend themselves to
                    more open-ended explorations of tools and of projects that may not work out
                    rather than a cumulative build toward a major product, and tend to emphasize
                    learning from experimentation and failure 
                    .
                It may be tempting to think of scaffolding and play as oppositional, but in
                    practice the distinction may blur. Chan and Green, for example, have discussed
                    classes where scaffolding approaches were used specifically to “encourage
                    playful student tinkering” . Sayers describes an
                    iterative, sequential assignment as a play approach — the
                    distinction in his case is that the final product is not necessarily considered
                    the best version of student work .
                    Moreover, although those arguing for play in its manifestation as tinkering
                    sometimes argue that collaborative work is a fundamental component , both types of classes as reported in the literature
                    are amenable to an emphasis on collaboration and team learning in a DH context
                        
                    
                    
                    .
                We consider scaffolding and play as different ways to structure learning that may
                    be blended and balanced depending on course goals. While extensive scaffolding
                    may close down opportunities for play, more often scaffolding prioritizes where
                    play and learning takes place. This balance of scaffolding and play will be
                    important to a future where digital humanities methods and tools have seeped
                    into the curriculum, and humanities students encounter a variety of DH
                    methodologies and platforms across their coursework. Amy E. Earhart and Toniesha
                    L. Taylor similarly reject the idea that DH should be limited to advanced
                    courses and propose teaching DH through embedded skills
                        development, so that students can more easily transfer these skills
                    across institutional and professional environments .
                    Likewise, Scott Selisker and Ryan Cordell have both recently pushed for a shift
                    to integration of DH approaches in more discipline-specific courses, instead of
                    (or in addition to) DH methods overview courses, as a way to focus on fewer
                    tools in the context of deeper topical research 
                    . One possible inference from the existing
                    literature, supported by our experience, is that play and failure work most
                    expansively in courses generally devoted to learning DH approaches or to writing
                    courses exploring digital or multimodal writing practices. Play with technology
                    functions in the DH classroom similar to low-stakes writing
                    in college writing courses. The instructor’s promise to evaluate the work
                    casually builds student confidence and encourages risk-taking in advance of
                    higher stakes assignments . Courses that have other
                    significant disciplinary work to do in covering topical content, however, may
                    have limited time for digital assignments, particularly for fairly
                    time-intensive play approaches, while still having legitimate needs to integrate
                    digital approaches to the topical content .
                Successfully developing some core DH capacities among students — including
                    collaboration and multimodal writing strategies — will require taking a
                    curriculum-level view of where these skills are integrated into various courses,
                    sometimes extensively, as the primary focus of instruction, but other times
                    strategically, while pursuing other primary learning goals. Rebecca Frost Davis
                    has noted collaboration needs to be taught not just via one course experience
                    but across repeated engagements given the varying nature of collaboration across
                    different types of projects . Likewise, students
                    need to practice DH skills across a variety of course contexts, much like they
                    have done with writing skills in traditional essay writing assignments in
                    humanities curricula, if those skills are going to become lasting learning
                    outcomes of a degree program rather than an experience sequestered in a
                    particular line-item of a transcript. Brandon Locke has recently called this
                    integration of digital humanities across the curriculum the digital liberal
                    arts, expanding the existing humanities mission to foster a skilled, literate,
                    critical culture in world of digital technologies .
                    At the level of individual courses, scaffolding and play are pedagogical tools
                    that instructors must balance to contribute to this digital liberal
                        arts mission.
                As with other teaching, finding the balance of play and scaffolding for any
                    particular course will require tinkering from semester to semester. In this
                    article we explore assessment as a strategy not for grading student work or
                    demonstrating the value of DH methods or tools in the classroom, but rather for
                    adjusting pedagogical approaches to achieve learning outcomes. Several
                    researchers have explored options for assessment in the context of grading
                    student DH or multimodal work 
                    
                    , including those that examine the problem of teaching
                    and grading soft skills like collaboration that are
                    essential to much DH work . Likewise, some research
                    seeks to establish the value of DH pedagogy through such evaluations of student
                    work. These two intentions for assessment are both important and share a focus
                    on student learning with our focus on assessment for (re)shaping pedagogy. But
                    it is not the case that the two approaches would necessarily come to similar
                    conclusions about quality. Student work that doesn’t meet an instructor’s
                    initial expectations, for example, might be graded highly in the context of a
                    course as it is taught in a particular instance , but
                    systematic problems in the student work, or simply ways it deviates from
                    intended course outcomes, may reveal a necessary adjustment to the teaching more
                    than they point to student problems. 
                Our assessment strategy draws from evaluation of student coursework in order to
                    identify ways to strengthen both specifically digital components of the pedagogy
                    (i.e., digital literacy issues related to publishing in Scalar), and the
                    integration of the publishing assignment with other components of the course. By
                        student work, here, we importantly do not mean only the
                    final products students created in Scalar (although it includes those); we also
                    mean their engagement in the course in a variety of ways that exhibit
                    collaboration or engagement with digital tools, and also reflections on their
                    work with digital tools. Julianne Nyhan, Simon Mahony, and Melissa Terras have
                    noted that reflective writing can exhibit student learning of key outcomes . Draxler, et al. have similarly made productive use of
                    student reflective writing in assessing student learning in DH assignments . We suggest this strategy applies more broadly in DH
                    learning, and that it is particularly important for assessing development of
                    skills (e.g. collaboration), as well as for students’ ability to think forward
                    to applying and teaching these skills in other situations, as students in the
                    class we discuss are likely to do as library and information science
                    professionals. 
                Such reflections are not just evidence of learning but pedagogical strategies in
                    and of themselves when they ask students to synthesize and externalize learning.
                    Regarding collaboration, for example, we hoped for students to think forward to
                    how they might approach future collaborations differently in light of successes
                    and failures in this experience. The multimodal assignment was, likewise, a
                    designed learning opportunity and not just a product that exemplifies learning.
                    When developing our own assessment rubric and examining student work for this
                    study, then, we sought to evaluate student learning, but for the purposes of
                    understanding the effectiveness of our pedagogy rather than to assign a
                    grade.
            

                History of the Class
                In our partnership, the instructor for a history of children’s literature course
                    and the subject librarian worked together to design a multimodal publishing
                    project combining technical and social learning objectives. Working in six
                    groups, students created a multi-media web resource on diverse
                        history in children’s literature. The class began this project
                    with a discussion of what is included or omitted from the narratives that
                    children encounter in historical fiction and history textbooks, before
                    contemplating this selection and canonization process in children’s literature
                    itself. We discussed: Why are some books taught and not others, or why do some
                    books or stories disappear from our historical record? What voices and
                    perspectives are not included in history through these omissions?There
                            is an opportunity in this discussion to tie these problems in the
                            history of children’s literature to similar issues of diversity and
                            inclusion in the creation of DH projects as well 
                            . This allows the students to think of the
                            class publication’s potential impact not just on the history of
                            children’s literature but the DH publishing landscape. The
                    librarian introduced students to the DH publishing landscape, the platform
                    Scalar, and to issues related to responsible use of multimedia, through in-class
                    sessions and a self-guided tutorial (completed outside of class). Then each
                    group chose an issue related to diverse history and built
                    one section of a Scalar book (or website) shared by the
                    whole class. 
                The long-term goal of this project is for successive classes of students who take
                    History of Children’s Literature to edit, revise, and expand this project so
                    that it can become a unique resource that provides high school and university
                    teachers with access to contextualized historical materials that supplement
                    available anthologies or commonly taught texts. The goal for this first class of
                    students was more modest. We imagined what this future resource might encompass
                    by having each group sketch out an introductory page to a topic their members
                    deemed important. The six groups chose to explore the following: selection and
                    canonization, K-12 reading instruction, prizing, publishing and power, diversity
                    in illustration, and censorship. Future classes will add more focused historical
                    case studies, including materials marginalized in the historical record.
                Our approach to scaffolding and play might be contrasted against the assignment
                    previous used in this course. Formerly, students worked individually to build
                    web pages that document a first edition of a historically prominent children’s
                    book, using a platform of their choice (e.g., Weebly, WordPress). Detailed
                    scaffolding predetermined the content and organization of the web pages that
                    students created. The instructor provided five extensive assignment prompts that
                    corresponded to five required web pages, and each prompt precisely stipulated
                    information for students to investigate. Play took place while hunting down and
                    synthesizing difficult-to-find materials, such as old reviews, author
                    obituaries, dust jackets, and book advertisements. These instructions corralled
                    students into creating a dependably professional final product, without lessons
                    or assistance from the instructor on using the publishing tool, which made the
                    project manageable for an online course with limited class time, but also
                    limited the complexity of decisions students had to make about how to best
                    select and arrange content to anticipate user needs.
                These pages were quality work, but the assignment had several limitations for LIS
                    professionals. Students lacked opportunities for collaboration that is more
                    typical of librarian involvement in online publishing, information work in
                    general, and particularly librarian partnerships with scholars on DH projects.
                    Although intended to showcase technology skills to employers, the pages quickly
                    looked outdated as students moved on, and the web pages were unlikely to be used
                    by the public because they were difficult to find with an online search of the
                    book’s title. Lastly, over the years, as student familiarity with online
                    publishing in the form of basic websites became commonplace, the assignment
                    seemed less likely to challenge students. LIS professionals continually learn
                    new and unfamiliar platforms on the job, and students in the iSchool’s
                    professional degree program frequently express a desire to learn more new
                    technologies in the classroom. Integrating a more advanced digital publishing
                    tool that meshed with the needs of the class offered an opportunity to further
                    students’ professional growth by encountering and troubleshooting an unfamiliar
                    technology while not detracting from the primary digital literacy learning
                    outcomes related to organizing digitized historical content with critical
                    reflection.
                The instructor hoped to adopt a different platform of the sort that librarians
                    and archivists increasingly encounter as they partner with others on DH
                    publications. Using another platform increased the need to support students
                    while they learn the tool, but the obvious solution, a DH lab, was impractical
                    for a distance learning course. To complicate matters, an evolution in the
                    department’s online program eliminated a previous mid-semester residency
                    requirement, when students traveled to campus for a few days and could work
                    directly at the library, using library references and troubleshooting with the
                    subject librarian. The nature of the partnership with the librarian needed to
                    change for the assignment to continue in an entirely distance-learning
                    environment. The course instructor explained the need to reimagine the project
                    as a collaboratively built online resource. The subject librarian suggested
                    Scalar, a platform that would suit an ongoing collaborative project needing
                    longer-term maintenance, revision, and supplementation in future semesters to
                    make it a strong public resource, and which had a growing community of users on
                    campus. 
                Developed by the Alliance for Networking Visual Culture, Scalar
                    (http://scalar.usc.edu/) is a multimodal publishing platform that offers a few
                    key features of interest for this course. First, it allows for simple and
                    attractive integration of media (including images, video, and audio) alongside
                    text so that authors can create long-form argumentative academic writing that
                    includes a broader range of evidence. Scalar is especially useful for
                    integrating digitized primary sources key to the study of any historical topic,
                    and the history of children’s literature offers especially rich content for such
                    integration due to the visual nature of the medium. Second, Scalar allows for
                    the creation of multiple paths through book content,
                    facilitating structures that might deviate from a single linear progression
                    through the content. While any single path is itself a linear reading structure,
                    authors can create path structures that overlap, merge, and diverge in ways that
                    could not be achieved as seamlessly in print, and even a Scalar site with a
                    single path allows readers to diverge into nooks and crannies by clicking on
                    particular media or on visualization options. These two organizational issues:
                    relation of text and media, and organization of reader flows through the book,
                    were two fundamental digital literacy challenges we wanted students to confront
                    in thinking through how to represent a multimedia historical argument in a web
                    environment.
                With no opportunity for a lab, we needed new scaffolding that would enable
                    tinkering with Scalar in a distance learning environment. The librarian created
                    a guide for discovering and using information resources and a tutorial that
                    streamlined the process of learning Scalar outside of a lab. He also presented
                    twice during class, which made the librarian’s expertise and support accessible
                    in a distance-learning classroom. The librarian was also embedded in the course
                    management system in order to be able to answer DH publishing related questions,
                    and especially technical questions, in a public forum. Using Scalar encouraged
                    students to tinker with an unfamiliar technology outside of class, supported by
                    posting questions in class message boards. Encouraged by Scalar’s affordances,
                    students also tinkered with integrating multimedia and organizing paths through
                    their content. 
            

                Integrating Digital Publishing in the Topic-Centered Humanities
                    Classroom
                One challenge of our collaboration was to integrate a digital humanities
                    publishing assignment into a course that already contains a heavy reading load
                    and challenging historical content. Teaching the history of children’s
                    literature requires orienting students in time (and these are not necessarily
                    humanities students with a comfortable knowledge of history), while challenging
                    what everyone knows about children by examining difficult
                    texts and unfamiliar constructions of childhood from the past. The course covers
                    children’s literature in English from the seventeenth century to 1980. Each
                    week’s reading selections juxtapose works from across history, which together
                    illuminate shared traditions and influences. In one week, students explore
                    allegorical quests with selections from Pilgrim’s
                        Progress by John Bunyan alongside The Golden
                        Key by George MacDonald and A Wrinkle in
                        Time by Madeleine L’Engle, or survey pastoral idealism through
                    William Blake’s Songs of Innocence, paired with
                    Maria Edgeworth’s Simple Susan and Francis Hodgson
                    Burnett’s The Secret Garden. Weekly student
                    presentations add further selections that round out these themes with
                    contemporary examples from the same tradition. Add additional lectures on book
                    history, child readers, and children’s illustration — and we have plenty of
                    material to shoehorn into two hours of class time a week, even before adding the
                    scaffolding for the multimodal publishing assignment sequence.
                As an additional challenge, we designed our assignment for a distance learning
                    course that meets synchronously one evening a week, the common model for online
                    courses in the university’s LIS master’s program. This program admits both on
                    campus and online students, with a majority completing their degrees remotely — a
                    common feature of LIS programs. In our curriculum, the course on the history of
                    children’s literature attracts students specializing in public libraries, youth
                    services, K-12 librarianship, and special collections, who can choose to take
                    the course for 2 or 4 credits. (This assignment is required for both credit
                    options.) More often than not, professional master’s degree students who take
                    evening distance courses have families and full-time jobs, which makes meeting
                    with project collaborators difficult. Students may feel additional stress
                    regarding playful assignments with unclear outcomes or uncertain grading because
                    their career goals are so immediate. Based on our prior experiences teaching
                    undergraduates, limited classtime and student anxieties are common challenges in
                    courses that integrate digital writing projects with topical course content. 
                We developed an iterative approach to teaching writing with Scalar based on our
                    experiences with the tool, previous experience teaching writing courses, and a
                    prior study of successes and failures with Scalar on campus conducted by the
                    librarian . Although the librarian's previous study of
                    use of Scalar on campus found the media upload process a pain-point with Scalar,
                    mulitmedia integration was, nevertheless, the Scalar capacity most
                    enthusiastically pursued by participants. By contrast, in prior course uses of
                    Scalar on campus, students seldom employed Scalar’s capacity for alternate book
                    structures with multiple paths, and they experienced some difficulties creating
                    paths, perhaps because assignments had primarily focused on creation of
                    single-author essays . The History of Children’s
                    Literature class offered a useful case for asking students to consider possible
                    deviations from the single-path Scalar book: groups would be working on
                    different sections of related content and figuring out how to put them together
                    as a whole work related to inclusion and exclusion in the history of children’s
                    literature.
                Students created and revised content through a series of scaffolded stages that
                    encouraged them to consider the strengths and weakness of traditional text-based
                    essays versus a multimodal publication. We developed these stages to minimize
                    unproductive levels of frustration that students reported in less successful
                    course integrations of Scalar on campus. In the first third of the semester,
                    student groups developed a traditional essay covering their topical area and
                    located media related to their topic. For this part, they used a custom research
                    guide prepared by the librarian for the course. Creating this more traditional
                    writing product before learning about Scalar served two purposes. First, it
                    allowed students to see more fully how the later multimodal product ultimately
                    required significant revisions to writing and presentation in order to fit the
                    new genre, an approach that echoes advice from Sayers to allow student
                    exploration of the affordances of different genres .
                    Second, drafting an essay first also ensured that students had content to work
                    with when they began authoring in Scalar. The librarian’s prior research into
                    use of Scalar had revealed that student frustration was maximized when they
                    tried so use Scalar as a content drafting platform, creating text and
                    integrating media on the fly.
                The librarian worked with the instructor to introduce students to Scalar over the
                    course of two classes, with an initial Scalar book creation assignment in
                    between these classes. In an initial class visit, placed mid-semester, the
                    librarian introduced the context of DH publishing projects generally and the
                    role of information professionals in such projects. Students learned about the
                    increasing variety of DH publications, and were introduced to ways in which
                    technical and social issues converge in their production. They also learned
                    about some of the existing tools for DH publication and why Scalar was chosen
                    for this particular class over other options such as a WordPress website, an
                    Omeka exhibit, or a TEI-based web publication. This included a discussion of
                    strengths and weaknesses of Scalar, and discussion of approaches to learning
                    Scalar. The primary goals of this class were to give students the broad context
                    of DH publishing; to mentally prepare students to think about what they might
                    expect when they started to use the platform; and to involve them in thinking
                    about how multimodal writing strategy relates to the platform used and the
                    ultimate goals for the publication.
                In between the first and second classes with the librarian, students completed a
                    self-paced text tutorial with screenshots introducing students to the Scalar
                    platform. The librarian created this text tutorial rather than a video tutorial
                    in order to allow true student self-pacing with the ability to quickly skim back
                    to earlier parts or move forward more quickly in sections that were easier for
                    individuals. An online course forum and direct email allowed options for
                    technical questions if they arose. For an in-person class, or previous semesters
                    in the LIS distance program where students would have attended an on campus day
                    for their distance course, it would be a default activity to teach the basic
                    technical procedures of using a tool like Scalar in a live session to allow the
                    librarian and instructor to help troubleshoot as needs arose . In this distance course, the lack of an in-person
                    component facilitated greater rethinking of delivery of technical instruction,
                    and the changes ultimately allowed for more in-class time to be spent on
                    discussion of the ideas that drive DH projects and conceptualization of the
                    multimodal writing issues that would materialize in the Scalar publication. 
                The self-paced tutorial, developed and organized by the librarian based on the
                    strengths and weakness of Scalar and writing issues discussed with students in
                    the first session, led students through the technical aspects of Scalar use in a
                    way that also suggested a creation strategy to minimize the most frustrating
                    features of the platform. For example, it introduced media importing as a
                    process to complete prior to page construction (for initial content), and then
                    introduced creation of a single basic path out of their pages. A few other
                    Scalar functionalities were suggested as areas for side exploration, but the
                    point here was for student to learn the most basic tasks in Scalar as a baseline
                    for being able to do more as their groups later revised and finalized their
                    Scalar content. In other words, the tutorial provided necessary scaffolding that
                    provided strong creation processes for students to go from media upload to page
                    creation and ultimately path creation, but it also encouraged them to
                        play with some optional elements. It is possible to
                    imagine a course situation where a less structured introduction to a platform
                    would be desirable in order to provoke (bigger) useful failures and reflection
                    on strengths and weaknesses of the platform. While we wanted students to achieve
                    some reflection of this kind, though, we wanted them to focus more on the issues
                    of how to successfully integrate multimedia and create unique and appropriate
                    organizational structures in Scalar, and we did not want frustrations with
                    Scalar to derail the progress of the groups.
                Students completed these tutorials individually, but used the text their groups
                    had drafted and media the group had gathered. This approach allowed everyone to
                    become familiar with Scalar, but it also required each student to think through
                    the process of how they would integrate media with text. Individuals were
                    encouraged to make whatever edits they thought necessary to their group’s text
                    and media selection as part of this process, and after the due date group
                    members shared their solutions so they could see how decision-making in this
                    process affected the final outcome and how they had produced different Scalar
                    books out of similar original content.
                For the librarian’s second visit, a week after the introduction of DH publishing
                    and Scalar, we began with some time for students to discuss their experiences
                    completing the tutorial, but then focused more generally on the idea of paths.
                    We wanted the students to think through the options for organizing content in
                    Scalar more substantially, and to begin discussing how they thought the
                    different groups’ pieces of the larger project should fit together. The class
                    discussed different ways paths could be organized, and the fact that the
                    drop-down table of contents in Scalar gives a second organizing principle to
                    Scalar books that may or may not mirror the structure of paths embedded on
                    pages. After the initial discussion, small groups broke out and used the digital
                    whiteboard to create their own imagined outlines of how the different groups’
                    content would relate in a structure of paths. Groups then presented their
                    visions for the book structure to the class as a whole for further
                    discussion.
                In subsequent weeks, groups compared their individual versions of their books,
                    revised text and media selections, explored ways to expand their use of Scalar
                    features, and created final versions of their pages. One student was assigned
                    the task of working to pull the different group products into a coherent
                    structure of paths and a Table of Contents.
                Our experience revising this assignment showcases how scaffolding supports play,
                    while different scaffolding shifts student play onto activities with different
                    learning outcomes. For the previous assignment iteration, scaffolding
                    prioritized the hunt for information by telling students what information to
                    find and how to organize it. By contrast, the revised assignment gave students
                    broader responsibility for content and synthesis of that content. Students
                    decided what a resource on diverse history should include, who might use this
                    resource, and how to best organize the information for those users within
                    Scalar’s interface. This revised scaffolding emphasized play in relation to
                    multimodal writing strategies rather than, for example, exploration and
                    evaluation of more fundamental user experience issues or the technical
                    structures of the Scalar platform, which might be the object of exploration in
                    other contexts. By evaluating what students learn, instructors can revise their
                    scaffolding between semesters to achieve their desired learning outcomes. 
            

                Assessment of Learning Technical and Multimodal Writing Outcomes
                Our goals for student learning in the course of the Scalar project included
                    several specific outcomes outlined for the students:
                
                    Beginning understanding of how the choice of digital publishing tools
                        effect users, staff training, and content (and vice versa).
                    Experience with collaboration on a DH publication.
                    Familiarity with Scalar as one particular digital publishing
                            platform.
                            Practice considering the unique organizational options of Scalar
                                and crafting an appropriate approach for authoring content that is
                                appropriate to the tool.
                            Ability to create Scalar content and navigate rough patches as a
                                natural part of learning new and evolving technology tools.
                            Ability to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of Scalar.
                        
                
                These outcomes related to the broader course and degree program outcome of
                    preparing students for the professional workforce as well as the course-specific
                    outcomes related to learning the history of children’s literature. As with other
                    courses with humanities content, a fundamental part of students’ mastery of that
                    content is the ability to synthesize it and communicate arguments about it with
                    a broader audience. As  notes, doing so with digital
                    humanities methods and tools updates and expands these fundamental liberal arts
                    skillsets. In the case of this course, where the historical content had
                    significant visual components and involved a variety of intersecting issues,
                    multimodal authorship in Scalar allowed building skills in the unique writing
                    organization issues that arise with integration of multimedia and text, and of
                    content that offered more than linear possibilities for structure.
                We assessed the success of our pedagogy through their individual Scalar pages and
                    the final Scalar product, contributions to the course conversation in the course
                    forums, and a final reflective essay that prompted students to discuss their
                    experiences. We used a rubric to score success for each of the above measures,
                    with some items scored by individual and others by group product. It is worth
                    emphasizing, though, that the rubric-based assessment we are reporting here is
                    an assessment of our pedagogy and not simply an assessment of student work.
                    Student products, as in most classes, included a range of more and less
                    successful work, and for grading purposes the same issues were examined as we
                    report here. However, our emerging understandings of challenges in the structure
                    of the assignments, as well as the fact that this was a significant evolution in
                    course design, factored in to reading of student products (particularly the
                    essay). As Harris notes, courses that integrate novel DH assignments require
                    accounting for unanticipated pedagogical challenges when assigning grades . As the discussion that follows indicates, we see
                    future iterations in pedagogical approach as a driving reason for this
                    assessment not just of students but of our own practice to account for what
                    worked and what did not.
                Our assessment of the individual sample pages created in Scalar, the final
                    product, and the changes and decisions groups made in the course of revision,
                    showed that the instruction related to Scalar successfully made students
                    comfortable with the platform. The class was almost universally successful in
                    creating a single path with pages that integrated annotated media, and in the
                    second Scalar-focused class, students reported that the self-paced tutorial was
                    straightforward and easy to understand. More promisingly, a number of students
                    also explored some of the options for creating a table of contents, background
                    images, footnotes, and links to external content, which were not required for
                    the assignment but encouraged for consideration. As the groups compared versions
                    and provided a final text, they extended this exploration by integrating more
                    unique kinds of media or Scalar options for organizing that media. 
                Few technical problems cropped up during the creation of the individual pages,
                    and students proved diligent at troubleshooting when necessary. One problem that
                    did come up revealed a bug in Scalar but provided a good opportunity to discuss
                    file management as part of digital work. Specifically, a few individuals created
                    image annotations that did not show up correctly when published. After some
                    investigation and troubleshooting, we discovered that these were all cases where
                    uploaded media files had spaces in the title, and that caused problems with the
                    appearance of annotations and some other media display features. This issue
                    presented a good opportunity to talk about file naming conventions and the
                    problems spaces and some special characters can present to a wide variety of
                    digital systems.
                Perhaps unsurprisingly, though, the technology itself was the easy part. As we
                    assessed the final Scalar products, we felt the biggest challenges students
                    faced were the writing and conceptual issues in the integration of media with
                    text. For example, a few groups made media choices that were conceptually
                    inappropriate: a background or chapter splash page image that did not have a
                    clear relationship with the text or was too frivolous for the imagined audience
                    for the resource. In other cases, some media integrated alongside the text,
                    although related to the topic, did not clearly help advance the argument. 
                While much of the content used was in the public domain or available via a
                    Creative Commons license for re-use, the lack of connection of some media to the
                    text poses a particular problem for in-copyright media. Students were introduced
                    to fair use guidelines for use of media in scholarly work that emphasized the
                    need for specific analysis of images and video rather than simple illustration,
                    similar to those described by Scalar’s partner organization Critical Commons and
                    in Best Practices in Fair Use guidelines for media.
                        http://www.criticalcommons.org/; http://cmsimpact.org/codes-of-best-practices/ Groups did
                    not consistently apply these principles, which means significant work would need
                    to be done for any final public availability of this work as originally
                    intended. The problem especially arose in relation to video, which caused
                    problems that would be familiar to composition instructors working with students
                    on the integration of textual secondary sources. Specifically, groups tended to
                    use video either decoratively or to provide expert quotes that were loosely
                    related to their page content, but without explanation of why the quote was
                    there or analysis of the content that would be transformative (in the sense used
                    for fair use analyses). There are opportunities here not just to improve the
                    understanding of the copyright issues but to see those as directly related to
                    the composition issues of how to integrate media sources in multimodal
                    writing.
                On the other hand, students engaged with class discussion about the
                    organizational possibilities with Scalar in thoughtful ways that showed a
                    willingness to explore the compositional possibilities of the tool. This
                    discussion took place after students had created their individual Scalar sites
                    with a single path integrating media. The librarian led the class in a
                    discussion about the ways Scalar could allow different kinds of content
                    organization, including different starting points and paths through the text,
                    paths that branch off, and other options. The students then broke into their
                    topic groups and used the whiteboard functionality of the distance learning
                    platform to imagine how their several group contents would combine into a shared
                    class project, by brainstorming possible reading flows through the class Scalar
                    book. Specifically, we asked students to sketch out how the six different
                    groups’ content paths would link up in Scalar. Should there just be a single
                    path that led from a starting page through a set sequence of topics, like a
                    print book? Or would they recommend some more unique arrangement?
                The groups imagined several arrangements of the group paths beyond a simple,
                    single linear structure. For example, one group projected that a reader should
                    start with a unified introduction and then read the path on canon formation in
                    children’s literature as a unifying first chapter, but then
                    allowed the reader to split off from there to choose any of the other paths.
                    This group also suggested specific links between the other five paths: a reader
                    might choose to go from canon formation to the section an awards, for example,
                    but then be able to go from awards to either the section on the publishing
                    industry or on illustration and design (See Figure 1). Another group ambitiously
                    proposed two alternate options. One would have readers start with the section on
                    awards, go to the section on the publishing industry, and then have the choice
                    of moving on into illustrations or diverging onto a separate path that would
                    take them through the sections on canon formation, corruption of youth, and
                    educational influences (See Figure 2, on the right). Their second option,
                    though, was perhaps the most radical proposal: they imagined an organization
                    where readers could choose between two starting points, either the canon section
                    or the awards section, and then have different options for continuation (See
                    Figure 2, lower left). 
                        First group’s brainstorming of path structure
                        
                    
                    
                        Second group’s brainstorming of path structures
                        
                    
                
                The final Scalar book produced by the class wound up with a simpler organization,
                    although more than just a linear progression: after a brief introduction,
                    readers can choose any of the sections, or proceed through sets of them as
                    possible paths. One particularly inventive group, working with the topic of
                    illustration and design, also made more advanced use of paths within their
                    section in order to create an offshoot, appendix-like path related to the
                    history of diversity within children’s literature illustrations. 
                However, while the students proved willing and able to think creatively about
                    organization, the actual process of creating multiple paths proved to have some
                    technical complications. In particular, as decisions about paths changed, the
                    management of paths within Scalar proved a challenge: old paths were left rather
                    than removed, for example. The primary method for managing paths in Scalar is
                    within the context of individual pages that serve as the beginning of paths.
                    What students (and instructors) really needed was an interface to solely manage
                    paths and the pages they contained that would more easily enable clean-up and
                    revision of path structures — that is, enable a greater ability to tinker with
                    organization. 
            

                Collaboration Challenges and Successes
                Students reported difficulty with communication and coordination, which was
                    complicated by distance learning. As one student explained, “The majority of us
                    have jobs, children, other classes, homework, chores,” and without a “physical
                    class together,” meeting is difficult. The group who worked on K-12 education,
                    which self-selected to include fulltime teachers with families, chose to divide
                    up their work so that each student completed one page, then linked these pages
                    together in a predetermined path. This up-front division of labor discouraged
                    members from reimagining alternative Scalar paths or reordering/expanding
                    content across pages, but this workflow was easier for these students because
                    they were employed as fulltime teachers. If instructors want distance-learning
                    students to work together throughout the creative process, they might need to
                    provide regular meeting time during synchronous class sessions.
                While students cited personal lives in relation to communication challenges,
                    their frustrations (most often with failure to answer email) were tempered with
                    satisfaction, mutual sympathy, and appreciation for the way peers stepped up as
                    each group member faced emergencies. Several groups used Google Docs to draft
                    text on their own initiative, a solution made familiar through other courses.
                    Students often remarked that difficulty with communication or group dynamics are
                    endemic to any group work, regardless of the publishing platform, but that
                    Scalar made collaboration possible among an entire class, all editing one
                    website simultaneously. In many ways these challenges, and their willingness to
                    push through them, reflect common issues with DH projects involving busy
                    colleagues, some of whom may be at other institutions. In that sense the
                    assignment was successful in giving students experience with issues in DH
                    collaboration, which may be messy and require good will among participants.
                Even though our assignment design and Scalar’s affordances both encourage
                    collaborative authorship and nonlinear writing, the way students coordinate
                    within groups is partly determined by their past experiences with other
                    publishing platforms. Familiar with web pages and blogs, students’ first
                    instinct was to assign each group member a page, allowing each person to pursue
                    their own separate project with little need to worry what other group members
                    are doing. But when groups allocated one page to each group member, they
                    circumvented the kind of tinkering with different ways of organizing information
                    that Scalar makes possible (and that we hoped to facilitate). The way Scalar
                    paths guide readers requires more coordination to create a consistent narrative
                    across each path. Exacerbating this issue, groups that divided up content
                    generation by page expressed more reluctance to edit and expand one another’s
                    writing, since each page seemed owned by a particular
                    author. One student recognized the difficulty of “figuring out how to combine
                    our different research areas and found literary objects into a single
                    book/website in a cohesive way” so that “the final project felt like one larger
                    project, and not three different projects lined up,” and connected this
                    challenge with Scalar’s unique organization which “keeps a
                    Scalar project from resembling much of the what the rest of the internet looks
                    like in terms of apps and webpages.”
                One way that students addressed this problem was to have a single person put
                    together the initial draft of their group page. They often describe delegating
                    work by different strengths, a phrase that usually meant
                    strong writers did the writing and people with digital publishing experience
                    created the first group draft. Celebrating this aspect of collaboration seems
                    most common among students who describe themselves as either
                        technology savvy or uneasy (inexperienced) with online
                    publishing. This solution echoes realities of DH projects that pull together
                    collaborators with different disciplinary and functional strengths, but in the
                    context of this class it could allow some students to evade engaging with the
                    opportunity to build specific strengths.
                The greatest amount of reorganization, expansion, and transformation of content
                    happened in groups that delegated work by project stages, with one or two
                    members taking over the editing process during the later weeks designated for
                    revision. While this strategy accidentally arose to accommodate personal
                    emergencies, it successfully encouraged revision and co-ownership of content
                    among group members. Instructors could purposefully structure this workflow by
                    scheduling groups to assume responsibility for a project at different stages,
                    before passing it along to new writers. We tried this strategy in a limited way
                    by assigning a single editor who linked together pages at the project’s
                    conclusion, an unplanned adaptation of the assignment that accommodated a
                    student who joined the project late. The entire project, however, could be
                    reorganized this way, for example with one group devoted to locating and
                    annotating multimedia, and another to investigating fair use, which may help
                    focus energy on aspects of the project we saw neglected.
                These challenges of meeting at-a-distance, balancing personal lives, dividing up
                    work, creating a unified publication, and tinkering with Scalar are all
                    interconnected. As one student explains:
                I felt like everyone worked independently and at the end, our
                    pages were put together one after the other. We had more of a pieces/parts type
                    of project, rather than a holistic project. For me this jigsaw approach was
                    challenging because I felt like we could have pulled resources together to make
                    a more harmonious product. Our group met twice via Skype, but not everyone was
                    able to make the meetings. I remember thinking at a certain point putting aside
                    my attempts to unify the project. I’m not sure if this is how my teammates
                    perceived the work. It might have just been me or, perhaps it might be part of
                    the conditions of online group work (this is the first time I take an online
                    class). For my next go around in online classes, this experience will definitely
                    be beneficial as I’ll understand some of the challenges of collaborating online.
                    So, I’m very grateful for this experience! Everything is a learning experience
                    (cheesy, but true for me!).
                Despite these reservations, this group’s project was quite successful and
                    innovative. The instructor interceded after a group’s first meeting, when they
                    reported dividing up the work by page in advance, and suggested that students
                    draft material and brainstorm content before deciding how many pages they would
                    need and how to link them. This group followed the instructor’s suggestions and
                    ended up producing one of the most expansive sections in terms of content and
                    media items. This group wrote the only section to implement multiple paths.
            

                Tinkering for Future Iterations of the Course
                The successes and failures described above suggest several lessons for
                    scaffolding and tinkering in the context of digital pedagogy. First, even highly
                    structured assignments allow room for tinkering, encounters with technology
                    failure, and resultant troubleshooting; but this type of play in the DH
                    classroom has a different focus and scale than it might in a methods or
                    writing-focused course. While the final product created by the class was
                        messy and would need revision for final publication, it
                    showed willingness by some groups to go beyond the minimally required
                    functionalities to explore some other Scalar options. Second, from a more
                    general perspective, valorizations of tinkering and encountering failure or
                    technical challenges in DH projects need to be contextualized in specific
                    learning outcomes, since usability challenges can interfere with specific
                    tinkering goals of greater interest to a particular course. The challenges
                    students faced in making edits to paths in Scalar without leaving odd remnants
                    of prior structures, for example, meant time spent troubleshooting path
                    management instead of actual tinkering with path and argumentation
                    organization — not necessarily productive in the context of this course. In short,
                    the user experience of particular tools is part of the scaffolding that
                    instructors need to include in their planning.
                Because it offers dedicated time to meet and tinker, the synchronous course
                    experience is indispensable in a distance learning course. We quickly discovered
                    the need for more structures to encourage tinkering during class. The assignment
                    revision most frequently suggested by students (unprompted by any question from
                    us) was having more time to discuss progress during class so that they can
                    coordinate with group members and seek inspiration from what other groups are
                    doing. Class time is at a premium in a content-heavy distance-learning course,
                    but fortunately our program has the option to add 30 minutes (increasing to
                    two-and-a-half hours per week), providing a structure to allow groups to work on
                    content and technical issues in class. This would help address the issue of busy
                    student schedules, but also provide a forum for more immediate feedback and
                    class learning with specific groups as they run into obstacles. The extra time
                    in other weeks could be used for additional interactive exercises related to the
                    issues of writing with multimedia that would address the intellectual property
                    and argumentation concerns with some of the media integration. As a more general
                    rule, play in the context of a topical course with a DH assignment needs a lot
                    of scaffolding to make students comfortable with imperfection and uncertain
                    outcomes. 
                Scaffolding creates opportunities for play by managing student anxiety, which is
                    elevated when the students know an assignment is graded, but they feel unable to
                    control the quality of the final product. Instructors may be satisfied with
                    evidence of intrinsic motivation in their students (experimenting, evaluating,
                    sharing ideas, inspiring one another, and revising their writing), even if
                    outcomes are messy. But messy products can make students uneasy. Not only are
                    some master’s students uncomfortable with failure, but their past experience
                    leads them to assume that teachers will grade assignments based on a final
                    outcome, especially when other assignments in the class conform to traditional
                    humanist writing formats with individualized grading of polished products (e.g.
                    a final research paper). 
                In future iterations of the assignment, the instructor plans to narrate more
                    explicitly to students the pedagogical approach of the assignment and explain
                    how play will be positively evaluated, which not only prevents anxiety but saves
                    instructors time. Since it is difficult for students to believe that process is
                    more important than product, tinkering should be not only built into the
                    assignment, but its uses and logic made explicit by discussing what tinkering is
                    and why we value it. If students do not realize that tinkering is a goal in
                    itself, they may assume the instructor has failed to give enough guidance and
                    ask endless clarifying questions, trying to avoid wasting
                        time or dead ends. These are negative labels
                    for tinkering outcomes, which show a misunderstanding of the assignment design.
                    The instructor can prevent some of this frustration by introducing the
                    assignment with a discussion of tinkering. Students can interview one another
                    about their experiences tinkering as they learn something new and compare
                    tinkering with technology, with writing, and with hobbies, before reporting back
                    as a class. 
                These fears are amplified in a professional degree, where students expect online
                    projects to yield material for job portfolios. The temptation to translate
                        play as wasted time is even
                    stronger among career-oriented masters students who may associate
                    experimentation with their early twenties in undergraduate education. We should
                    have anticipated that even though tinkering was built into the assignment design
                    (with students individually working on different configurations of their group
                    content before comparing and reconciling ideas by rebuilding in a shared class
                        book), students would try to circumvent this step. At
                    their first meeting, one group plotted out all of the pages they intended to
                    create and how they would link together, as well as the pages they imagined my
                    future students might add to the publication — all before conducting research,
                    drafting content, or experimenting with Scalar to learn its affordances. Later,
                    when students completed their individual portions (the tutorial), many of them
                    asked whether they need to do everything over again to
                    produce their collaborative group page. 
                Additional low-stakes exercises that do not directly lead to graded material
                    would help accustom students to play, graded informally by participation and
                    risk-taking. Students could investigate other Scalar publications and report on
                    features that they find attractive and innovative, allowing for a longer period
                    for dreaming and inspiration that would prompt students to investigate more
                    Scalar features; students would experiment linking together pages and save
                    different configurations, then try out the paths created by others and report on
                    the user experience. We would practice annotating images and evaluate whether
                    these images are fair use (areas where final projects showed the greatest
                    weaknesses.) For a topic-centered course, we would prepare these exercises in
                    advance, as much as possible, so that students do not feel that the technology
                    impedes their learning of the primary course material. (Scalar could use a new
                    feature that allows easy duplication of instructor-created
                        starter books that students can quickly manipulate and
                    discard.) Students also benefit from receiving an informal grade of their
                    assignment participation early in the semester so that they understand how play
                    is evaluated and participating in that grading process through frequent
                    reflection exercises.
                In the next iteration of the course,The instructor has since taught this
                        course again in fall 2017 using many of the revisions described in this
                        article, as well as others. Interested readers are welcome to contact the
                        instructor for assignment prompts and updated findings. the
                    instructor plans to experiment with an alternative way of structuring
                    co-authorship and group work, by creating groups devoted to specific tasks, such
                    as initial research and writing, locating and annotating multimedia, and
                    investigating fair use. Since this division of labor allows students to learn
                    fewer skills in greater depth, the instructor would retain the initial phase
                    when all students experiment with all of the writing and technical tasks while
                    using the self-guided tutorial; furthermore, groups could show drafts to their
                    peers and receive feedback and present what they learned at the close of the
                    semester. This strategy gives students flexibility to choose project deadlines
                    that work best with their personal schedules, and it forces students to
                    relinquish ownership over their work as new groups assume responsibilities,
                    which approximates how many professionals engage in collaborative online
                    publishing.
                While student reflections on collaboration indicated realistic challenges and
                    revealed ways for us to improve the structure of the course in the future, we
                    found that for future iterations of the course we would likely want to edit this
                    reflection prompt to improve student opportunities to reflect critically on
                    their collaborative processes. The original prompt, as framed, asked students to
                    discuss benefits and challenges of collaborative digital work based on their
                    experience, and this led to responses that were more general than we had hoped
                    for. For the future, we would specify the prompt to ask them to put their
                    experience to work more explicitly to frame some best practices for
                    collaborative work that they would employ in the future to address the
                    challenges they identified. This revision would better fit our desire for
                    students to further synthesize their experience in a way that would lead to
                    greater learning.
                While describing these changes, we cannot help but reflect with chagrin how often
                    pedagogical research describes classrooms with none of the discomforts and
                    failures, doubts and revisions, that are part of the teaching process. When the
                    classrooms described by the literature resemble machines without friction,
                    instructors, too, become uncomfortable with failure. One role of the digital
                    humanities is to encourage playful innovation with assignments, knowing these
                    changes may produce problems. When Katherine D. Harris describes how her own
                    pedagogy changed as a result of bringing digital humanities into her classroom,
                    she reflects that teaching assignments, like digital humanist work, involves 
                        productive failure for both me and my students
                        
                    . Some instructor failures are necessary tinkering.
                    As instructors of topical courses like the History of Children’s Literature
                    increasingly integrate small- to medium- scale assignments with DH methods and
                    tools in their courses, such failure and revision has a refreshed necessity.
                    When instructors experiment with and improve such projects, DH skills become
                    integrated across the curriculum, promising more frequent student encounters
                    with collaboration and technical troubleshooting. Learning these underlying DH
                    dispositions requires practice across different contexts, and they are as much a
                    part of future humanities education as particular technologies, methods, or
                    topical content.
            

                Acknowledgements 
                The authors would like to thank Sarah Christensen, Eleanor Dickson, Heather
                    Simmons, and Mara Thacker for feedback on an earlier draft of this article. The
                    instructor received additional help from Aaron McCollough, John Randolph, and
                    Megan Senseney while designing the assignment.

            
