Title:  Distracted Reading: Acts of Attention in the Age
                    of the Internet
Volume:  012
Issue:  2
Date:  12 September 2018
Abstract:  
                
                Our digital gadgets are often blamed for introducing unprecedented levels of
                    distraction, but how might we recognize and harness the attentional
                    possibilities such an environment offers? This editorial essay introduces a
                    special issue of DHQ devoted to thinking about distracted reading, and sets out
                    an agenda and a context for our exploration of distributed modes of attention.
                
            
Full Body Text: 


                The Project
                Central to the humanities is the theorization and practice of modes of attention.
                    Yet if digital technology has changed one thing above all else in the texture of
                    our everyday lives, it is precisely the nature of our attention to the world and
                    to the cultural artifacts within it. Indeed, within our teaching spaces many of
                    us devote much time to finding ways to redirect our students’ attention away
                    from the distractions of their multiple electronic gadgets. But what if we
                    consider how such distributed focus might enable new acts of attention and new
                    ways of reading? How might we think about pedagogically-inspired research
                    methods, in addition to the more usual research-led pedagogy? How might we
                    rethink our research methods and our pedagogy in an era of hyper-connectivity?
                    This is the context and these are the questions that motivated this special
                    issue, in which reading is taken to represent an act of critical
                    engagement with works in any medium (text, visual art, film, or music, for
                    example), and with the digital interfaces and devices through which we access
                    those media. Indeed, it is important that the essays in this issue engage with a
                    variety of art forms (from the visual arts, and cinema, to text) and with a
                    variety of digital contexts and information systems. This is a conversation that
                    has brought us together from across the humanities.
                This special issue emerged from a project that ran over two years at New York
                    University and which involved two symposia over the course of 2016: one
                    milestone event in the school of the interdisciplinary global liberal arts,
                    Liberal Studies, and one in NYU’s Centre for the Humanities. Both gathered
                    scholars from across the disciplines, the first within a school, and the second
                    from across the university and beyond. The project was designed initially to
                    catch energies for new ways of working with digital technologies, to bring them
                    together, and to give a space in which they could be fostered, developed, and
                    shared with others. The initial aim, then, was to give us the space to
                    experiment and to think afresh about our ways of working within the institution.
                    However, the project attracted considerable attention from outside the
                    university and began to connect with existing initiatives and inspire new
                    projects in the work of scholars from across the US, Europe and Australasia. As
                    a result, this special issue includes work from all three of those continents.
                    It is a project that grew from the local to the global and whose growth was, of
                    course, facilitated by the digital cultures it explores. 
                The project community often worked with digital tools in a way that has become
                    expected of the digital humanities – sometimes misusing tools and technologies
                    creatively for new purposes and to provide new ways of thinking; sometimes
                    creating new tools to enable new methods of engagement. Above all, though, the
                    project has been centred not around a tool-led approach, but around an
                    engagement with the broader concerns of digital cultures and our operation
                    within them. The aim, ultimately, was to bring a greater self-consciousness to
                    our use of digital tools and technologies and to our thinking about the acts of
                    attention they entail, enable, or disable. Overall, the aim has been to think
                    more about how we read with them and through them rather than about their
                    ability to bring, for example, quantitative methods to the humanities. Digital
                    humanities might often be focussed on what technology can bring to our study of
                    the humanities, but it also reflects on what the humanities can bring to our
                    engagement with our technological present. And in the case of the latter, what
                    the humanities have to offer is, above all else perhaps, an assessment of how
                    digital technologies are changing our experience of the world in the most
                    profound and general of ways. A change in the way we attend is just one of
                    these, but one particularly important to scholars and teachers. 
                It is worth clarifying two points at the outset, then. The first is that
                        distracted reading is not about simply celebrating the anarchy of
                    distraction, but rather about exploring how distraction might involve acts of
                    micro-attention or a distributed focus that can be harnessed constructively as
                    useful methods of engagement for certain goals. The second: for all that the
                    essays here frequently explore the uses of digital distraction as a method of
                    study, this is not a manifesto for the use of technology, and it is certainly
                    not an insistence on a revolution in pedagogy that will displace other methods.
                    It’s worth stressing again that the main point of the project is rather to
                    encourage a more self-reflexive engagement with these gadgets (perhaps one of
                    the most important skills for our current age) – and should lead to exactly the
                    opposite of a blanket adoption of digital tools: it should lead to a more
                    conscious decision as to when and why one might want to harness their
                    distractive power and, equally, when and why one might call for an avoidance of
                    them. The key to this project is to be more aware of fitting the methods to the
                    aims, and to see — in a way that has not been adequately recognized —
                    technological distraction as one legitimate method, among many others, but
                    certainly not the only method, or even one that should be privileged. The point
                    is to explore the potential of a range of practices we might add to our
                    repertoire. 
                Consider, for example, enlivening the large lecture format by offering an
                    electronic message board to which any of the students can send a question during
                    the lecture if they are puzzled, or want more elaboration on a particular point.
                    Then every fifteen minutes or so (which in reality is the length of most
                    people’s attention span) the lecturer stops to answer some of the questions. The
                    questions do in a sense distract from the onward flow of the lecture, and they
                    certainly break up its texture, but they do both in a way that promotes
                    understanding of the content and, I would argue, attention. The technique
                    results in the students feeling involved — the lecture becomes a two-way
                    interaction — and of course this method has a core pedagogical purpose: in such
                    a large group, without such techniques it is virtually impossible, otherwise, to
                    know whether most students are following the lecture or completely lost. The
                    lecturer can modulate the content in light of the level of understanding
                    demonstrated in the questions posted. Moreover, in such a large lecture format
                    it will always be impossible to strictly enforce a ban of technology, so it
                    might be an occasion on which embracing its potential is more appropriate.
                    However, there are still plenty of teaching sessions in which one might want to
                    insist on the absence of electronic gadgets and work with pen and paper alone.
                    There might be good reasons to do this for particular purposes; studies have
                    shown that the phenomenological engagement involved in the inscription of
                    cursive on the page is a better route towards certain types of mental activity
                    than typing on a keyboard . 
            

                Introduction to the Essays
                The essays in this issue fall naturally into three groups. The first two essays
                    begin by thinking about the processes of research and reading: how do
                    distraction and distributed attention function within economies of information?
                    We start with Jennifer Edmond’s insightful, detailed, and fascinatingly
                    evidenced analysis of distraction as a fundamental, but often undervalued, part
                    of the process of humanities research. Focussing particularly on historians, her
                    analysis of the methods of the humanities scholar is enlightening and
                    refreshing. Moreover, her call for an exploration and validation of the
                    distracted reading processes central to some research methods is essential.
                    Tully Barnett’s essay then goes on to think about distributed reading as
                    a generative concept for understating processes of reading in the digital era.
                    Barnett thinks about the impact of digitization on reading by exploring what it
                    means to read through interface. She draws our attention to reading as a process
                    within a network of devices,
                        platforms, features, networks, contexts, in order that these can usefully be understood as
                        forming an infrastructure of reading. These first two essays frame
                    the field in different ways, but both offer a good platform for rethinking the
                    informational economy of the humanities around notions of attention,
                    distraction, and distribution. 
                The next three papers outline particular pedagogical strategies, and experiments
                    with students, that are based on an interest in the type of distracted reading
                    our engagement with electronic gadgets encourages. These three papers focus,
                    respectively, on art history, cinema studies, and literature, providing a strong
                    disciplinary range. Writing in the context of art history, Martha Hollander
                    describes her experiments with student phone and tablet use. Using the capacity
                    of students’ individual electronic devices to call up a wealth of images to
                    supplement those that are the focus of the syllabus, Hollander incorporates them
                    into her teaching method. As she notes, with so many artworks being stored
                    rather than exhibited publicly, the smartphone becomes a vehicle for accessing
                    some of the hidden treasures of the museum. In requiring
                    the use of personal devices in this way, Hollander keeps students active as
                    individual participants, asking What constitutes distraction as opposed to associative or divided thinking?
                        How would we characterize a habit of mind enabled, rather than created, by
                        personal digital devices? For Hollander these methods have enabled
                    an importantly different approach to learning the history of art; one which
                    involves starting not with the reified canonical example, but with a mass of
                    examples that give a feel for the genre or the artist’s style before proceeding
                    to the particular images she has chosen as the focus for communal attention. In
                    other words, these new pedagogical strategies reflect and capitalize on the
                    abundance of data now at our fingertips. Also working with visual images, but in
                    the very different disciplinary context of cinema studies, Marina Hassapopoulou
                    explores distraction through the idea of play and gamification, asking how
                        social media, remixing, GIS
                        tools, and augmented reality can be incorporated into pedagogical
                    methods. Platforms and technologies that are more often experienced by students
                    as distractions from study are repurposed by Hassapopoulou to enable productive models of distributed
                        attention and collective intelligence. Countering claims that
                    shorter attention spans in younger audiences are damaging students' ability to
                    learn, Hassapopoulou explores the new cognitive skills that media theorists have
                    argued might be emerging: such
                        as the ability to process information more rapidly as a result of a less
                        linearly-constrained and more interactive thought process. Moving
                    next to literary studies, Sarah E. Kersh and Chelsea Skalak offer an analysis of
                    the development and use of an annotation tool that helps their students read
                    recursively. Noting that student assignments often presuppose a textual
                    environment very different from that which exists for the students in actuality,
                    they seek to enable them to create hypertext analyses. Working with the
                    understanding of hypertext-enabled
                        radial reading as a distracted form of reading, they show how such
                    acts of overlaying and interconnecting readings helped students to understand
                    the relationship between the theories and methodologies they were exploring. 
                The final two papers consider digital humanities courses themselves, asking what
                    role digital humanities pedagogy can play in helping us think about economies of
                    attention. Paul Fyfe argues that introductory digital humanities courses offer
                    unique opportunities for exploring the act of reading itself. Focussing
                    particularly on metacognition and transfer, he describes how a
                    focus on acts of attention might help students learn how to read in a more
                    self-aware manner, in addition to enriching their sense of the possibilities for
                    engaging with the distributed facilities
                        and extra-disciplinary partnerships across the university that can
                    help integrate their learning. He describes how his digital humanities pedagogy
                    can help make students aware of how attention itself is mediated. Focussing on
                    the relationship between medium and meaning, he uses this analysis of mediated
                    attention to encourage students to reflect upon the problems and possibilities
                    for knowledge creation within their own educational environment. In the closing
                    essay Grant Wythoff also writes about how the digital is both the object and the
                    method of study in his course Introduction to Digital
                        Media, describing various strategies he offers to think about acts
                    of attention. These methods include turning the distracted attention our digital
                    devices often elicit from us into a deep material literacy of those same devices. This is achieved by
                    having students literally deconstruct the physical make-up of those devices in
                    all their material complexity. In addition to this close attention, Wythoff
                    proposes another, rather more surprising pedagogical experiment. Thinking about
                    distraction as an act of attention, but one no longer directed by volition, discipline, or
                        desire, he explores something that we might sometimes think of as
                    the opposite of distraction: boredom. Using Kracauer to theorize acts of
                    attention, he considers boredom as a valuable experience of the self that we
                    rarely have to confront when we have our digital devices with us (which for many
                    is almost always). Yet what happens if we insist on preserving some spaces free
                    of digital distractions; What might
                        dwelling with our boredom open up to students?
                
            

                Some Context
                It might seem odd to be working with, rather than against, technological
                    distractions (even with the two important caveats introduced in the first
                    section of this essay) in an age in which distraction is often perceived as the
                    enemy of everything universities hold dear about education. Indeed, in May of
                    2017, a researcher at Oxford University was the first winner of the Nine Dots
                    Prize (awarded for work tackling cotemporary societal issues) for an essay
                    arguing that the distractions of digital technologies are fundamentally
                    undermining our political processes. James Williams’s essay Stand Out of Our light: Freedom and Persuasion in the Attention
                        Economy argues that digital technologies privilege our impulses over our
                            intentions and distract us from goals we may want
                    to achieve . The distraction is, of course, often
                    to the benefit of advertisers and other commercial interests, and Williams — who
                    himself worked in the tech industry for ten years — argues that the very design
                    principles of some of the digital platforms most central to our lives are guided
                    by the aim of hijacking our attention.
                        
                            [T]he sort of things we
                                measure and design for - clicks, app use - are not aligned to the
                                life goals of people. Technology is meant to help us, so this
                                suggests a profound failure. Reed Hastings of Netflix described
                                sleep as one of his competitors. This is not of benefit to
                                humans
                            
                        .  In Williams’ words, these technologies, 
                        can distract us from living the
                            lives we want to live, or, even worse, undermine our capacities for
                            reflection and self-regulation, making it harder, in the words of
                            philosopher Harry Frankfurt, to want what we want to want. A
                            primary effect of digital technologies is thus to undermine the
                            operation and even development of the human will. This militates against
                            the possibility of all forms of self-determination at both
                            individual and collective levels, including all forms of politics worth
                            having.
                        
                     As one reviewer summarises, 
                        Attention is our most precious
                            resource, and it’s being taken away from us
                        
                    . 
                There is an implicit assumption in many of these reports on Williams’s work that
                    the information environment we live in has changed categorically as a result of
                    the digital revolution: 
                        Back in an information-scarce
                            environment, the role of a newspaper was to bring you information — your
                            problem was lacking it. Now it’s the opposite. We have too much
                        
                    . Yet it is easy to imagine the information culture of, say, the
                    nineteenth century as similar to that of the present minus the digital
                    technology, when in fact the reality of up to twelve postal deliveries a day in
                    London in the late nineteenth century created a situation in which letters were
                    often exchanged with a frequency we now associate with emails: whole
                    conversations unfolded over the course of a day in quickly scribbled ink on
                    paper. The proliferating worlds of sales, advertising, journalism, and new
                    technologies in the later nineteenth century were also experienced as a
                    revolution in the demands on attention (for example, the distractions of a
                    constant onslaught of sales boys selling papers and candy and new novels to a captive audience on the train
                    is documented in Brander Matthew’s satiric pantoum En
                        Route
                    ). Modernity seems intrinsically tied
                    to concerns about distraction at least since the second industrial
                    revolution (the revolution of the commodity in the latter half of the nineteenth
                    century). 
                Moreover, from the turn of the twentieth century we can find examples of such
                    concerns informing theories of reading. Ezra Pound asserted in the 1930s, The main expression of nineteenth-century
                        consciousness is in prose. Why? Because 
                        The art of popular success lies
                            simply in never putting more on any one page than the most ordinary
                            reader can lick off it in his normally rapid, half-attentive
                            skim-over
                        
                    . Readers were too distracted to be able to attend to the density of
                    poetry, and its play with multiple resonances. According to this narrative, the
                    novel became much more popular than poetry in the second half of the nineteenth
                    century because it could be read while distracted. Whether or not this is the
                    reason for the dominance of the novel over poetry after the industrial
                    revolution, it is fascinating to see this articulation of a crisis in
                        modern culture, and in reading specifically, attributed
                    to the saturation of modern life with distractions that destroyed the capacity
                    for attention that was necessary for reading linguistically complex literary
                    forms. It feels so familiar, in spite of being written nearly a hundred years
                    ago. 
                 Of course, one might argue that whether unprecedented or not, the distractions
                    of new technologies are to be resisted. Many scientific studies show the damage
                    to IQ effected by distraction, and this has become a popular theme in some media
                    outlets . Adam Alter’s Irresistible: The Rise of Addictive Technology and the Business of Keeping
                        us Hooked (Penguin 2017, passim)
                    suggests our relationship with technology might actually be pathological. And I
                    would be lying if I did not admit that in the middle of this project I received
                    from a fortune cookie the following simple legend, on a thin piece of cheap
                    paper: 
                
                    
                    
                    A fortune cookie fortune reading focus your attention
                
                 Yet distracted reading as we frame it in this issue is not about simply
                    succumbing to the random demands on our attention from pinging phones, screen
                    notifications, and step monitors. The project asks instead how we might harness
                    these delicious distractions as attentional devices - and in the process develop
                    much greater self-awareness of the role these technological tools play in our
                    lives, and, crucially, the role we want them to play in our lives.
                    Experimenting with distraction is about exploring how we regulate attention, and
                    becoming more aware of how we distribute our attention. After all, our acts of
                    attention are, arguably, rarely other than partial. For some cognitive
                    theorists, attention requires a state analogous to an orchestra playing in
                    unison: the synchronised activity of relevant processes (see , passim). Under such a
                    definition, focussed attention is a rare achievement. As Christopher Mole notes,
                    Philipp Koralus has suggested that such approaches could better encompass
                    divided attention if we think of attention as something structurally analogous
                    to the answering of a question 
                    . Naomi Eilan also characterizes attention as 
                        the means by which we answer
                            questions about the environment
                        
                    
                    . Needless to say, the means are more and more likely to involve our
                    electronic devices. 
            

                Distributed Cognition?
                Recent thinking about distributed cognition might offer a useful framework for
                    furthering this idea and for reconsidering the role such gadgetry can play in
                    our cognitive economy. This is a framework psychologists and philosophers are
                    using for thinking about cognitive processes (what we might call mind) as not
                    being solely brain-based but being distributed across the body, across social
                    groups, and also across the electronic gadgets that become extensions of our
                    cognitive selves. What does it mean to think about mind as dispersed across
                    objects external to our bodies? One of the key examples used to launch a central
                    line of enquiry in this field focuses on the cognitive function of memory and
                    the possibility for its extension outside of the body. In The Extended Mind (from 1998), Andy Clark and David Chalmers offer
                    the thought experiment of Otto, an Alzheimer’s sufferer
                    whose process of remembering relies on consulting a
                    notebook in which he has key facts written down. Exploring the role the notebook
                    plays in Otto’s beliefs and action, the authors argue that it constitutes a
                    technology of the extended mind because of the way it drives cognitive processes
                    – it 
                        plays the role usually played by a
                            biological memory
                        
                    . (It is important to note that it is not the processes of
                    consulting the notebook or referring to biological memory that are thought to be
                    equivalent here; what is similar is the role of the notebook and/or memory in
                    acting as the basis for beliefs and actions.) Otto himself, they conclude, 
                        is best regarded as an extended
                            system, a coupling of biological organism and external resources
                        
                    : 
                        Clearly, Otto walked to 53rd Street because he wanted to go to the
                            museum and he believed the museum was on 53rd Street. And just as Inga had her belief even before she
                            consulted her memory, it seems reasonable to say that Otto believed the
                            museum was on 53rd  Street even before
                            consulting his notebook. For in relevant respects the cases are entirely
                            analogous: the notebook plays for Otto the same role that memory plays
                            for Inga. The information in the notebook functions just like the
                            information constituting an ordinary non-occurrent belief; it just
                            happens that this information lies beyond the skin.
                        
                     This seminal journal article has generated much discussion among
                    philosophers and psychologists over the past couple of decades, and the issues
                    it raises for our relationship with our smartphones, for example, are clearly
                    very interesting. In their later work, Clark and Chalmers sometimes use
                    technology in examples of extended mind theory, with Chalmers starting his
                    Foreword to Clarke’s book, Supersizing the Mind,
                    with the claim that his iPhone has
                        already taken over some of the central functions of my brain. Friends joke, he goes on, 
                        that I should get the iPhone
                            implanted into my brain, but if Andy Clark is right, all this would do
                            is speed up the processing, and free up my hands. The iPhone is part of
                            my mind already
                        
                    . The implication of this for our relationship with technology has been
                    picked up by bloggers and commentators who have explored, for example, the
                    complex issues this theory raises for the real-life case of the rights of the
                    police to access a suspected terrorist’s smart phone . 
                Theories of extended mind ask us to rethink the nature of our relationship with
                    our electronic gadgets, and in turn we must rethink our relationship with the
                    possibilities for distributed attention they offer. Perhaps our tendency to keep
                    facts to hand in Wikipedia rather than in the brain, and to keep our sense of
                    direction in a map app rather than in our heads, is not so much a failure as a
                    success by other means: demonstrating a suitable deployment of extended mind
                    technologies. Perhaps our constant need to consult with these devices is not
                    necessarily a sign of lack of attention so much as a different kind of
                    attention. So, while distraction by new technology is not a new phenomenon, the
                    idea of distracted reading has a new currency and relevance in our
                    current moment in key part because of changing thinking about cognition. As we
                    begin to understand better the role digital gadgets play in our cognitive
                    economy, the capacity they hold for forms of distributed attention might be more
                    easily recognized and used constructively. What happens if we take this idea
                    into our research and our teaching, and harness the relationship between the
                    student or scholar and their electronic devices as a mode of distributed
                    cognition? What then (to follow up on the second and third strands of the
                    distributed cognition framework introduced at the start of this section) if we
                    also consider cognition as embodied, or as a social phenomenon among groups of
                    students and/or researchers? 
                The contributors to this issue were not asked to engage specifically with the
                    concept of extended mind, or the framework of distributed cognition, but it is
                    interesting to see how much those ideas resonate with what is written here.
                    Edmond’s analysis of the process of research, for example, is one that speaks
                    profoundly to ideas of distributed cognition. She notes how the piling and
                    arrangement of papers on the top of a scholar’s desk becomes what we might call
                    an extended mind system for arranging
                        ideas, building a knowledge organization system. The messy, crowded
                    desk might facilitate the distracted processes of reading necessary for the type
                    of research practices she explores, or the systems of arrangements of papers on
                    the desk might optimise certain kinds
                        of concentration. Either way, the surface of the desk might become a
                    kind of cognitive technology. In the third essay, Hollander’s sense of the
                    personal digital device as as a sort of technologically extended mind has
                    important consequences for her pedagogical vision: taking on board the extended
                    mind capacities of the devices in the classroom she notes that her assessment is
                    now geared toward test[ing]
                        research skills rather than memorization. Similarly, Paul Fyfe
                    gestures towards this kind of cognitive extension when he points to Malcolm
                    McCullough’s work in Ambient Commons: Attention in the Age
                        of Embodied Information, which notes how interface design is often
                    geared not toward demanding our focussed attention but toward introducing new
                    things to the periphery of our attention – making them available for more
                    central focus as and when needed. His interest in such extended cognition within our digital
                    environments might sound very familiar to extended mind theorists. In a rather
                    different way, Hassapopoulou’s interest in collaborative learning resonates with
                    the idea that social groups and networks can also provide extended-mind
                    environments. Finally, the claims for embodiment made repeatedly through this
                    issue make a great deal of sense in relation to work on embodied cognition.
                    Hassapopoulou writes of moving away from ocular-centric paradigms of media
                        reception to challeng[e] our bodies to, literally, make sense of mediated
                        information using other modes of perception besides vision. And
                    note, particularly, Fyfe’s comment about how critical-making projects can render
                    us aware of cognition as an unfolding,
                        embodied relation. Clearly, then, the recent interest in distributed
                    cognition (and its claims for the extension of mind across external devices,
                    social groups, and our bodies) makes itself felt in the concerns of this issue,
                    and creates a timely context in which to think about distraction and distributed
                    attention. 
            

                Conclusion
                This special issue aims to showcase and prompt new thinking around how we might
                    harness modes of attention that have been embedded in our everyday lives by
                    digital technologies. Our aim is to inspire new techniques for research and for
                    pedagogy, and to inspire innovation in method as much as we seek innovation in
                    content. More broadly, though, this special issue suggests that a new wave of
                    work in digital humanities is taking on, and will have to take on, the
                    revolution in cognition that is quickly transforming the way we think about our
                    relationship with digital technologies. The speed with which the digital
                    revolution changed older industrial processes is being matched by the speed with
                    which the cognitive revolution is, in turn, transforming our use of digital
                    technologies. Whether of the distributed or in unison kind,
                    more attention needs to be devoted to our cognitive engagement with digital
                    tools, and we need to continue to become more self-reflexive in our use of
                    them.
            
