Title:  The Writeprints of Man: a Stylometric Study of
                    Lafayette's Hand in Paine's 'Rights of
                    Man'
Volume:  012
Issue:  1
Date:  9 May 2018
Abstract:  
                
                Thomas Paine's Rights of Man (Part I, 1791; Part II,
                    1792) is one of the most influential political tracts ever written. Recently,
                    Clark (2015) has queried the long-established notion that Part I is the work of
                    a single author, Paine himself. Clark argues that a passage of approximately
                    6000 words just prior to the Declaration of the Rights of
                        Man and Citizens, near midway through the book, was written by
                    Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette, and inserted by Paine into his book,
                    perhaps with some editing. Clark's assertion rests mainly on judgement of the
                    tone and content of the queried passage, as well as a hint in a letter by
                    Lafayette to George Washington. This paper presents the results of a stylometric
                    study of this question. Three computational approaches to stylistic analysis —
                    one involving a consensus of six attribution techniques — were applied to the
                    text of the Rights of Man, Part I, along with a
                    corpus of comparison texts from the same period. Our findings tend to
                    corroborate Clark's contention, as well as identifying two other short passages
                    in which Lafayette may have had a hand, thus rendering this important document
                    ripe for re-interpretation.
            
Full Body Text: 

                1. Introduction
                More than the writings of any other writer, those of Thomas Paine (1737-1809)
                    illustrate the transformation in the meaning of the term
                        revolution from the mid-eighteenth century to the
                    beginning of the nineteenth century; indeed Paine could lay claim to be the
                    world's first truly international revolutionary. Christopher Hitchens, in his
                    portrait of Paine  argues for three possible sources for the fermentation at work within him:
                    (i) his upbringing with a Quaker father in the quasi-feudal Norfolk town of
                    Thetford; (ii) the time that Paine spent on the lower deck of the ship King of Prussia in 1756 surrounded by a Royal Navy
                    crew of nonconformists; (iii) the influence of the London scene of taverns and
                    the working-man's lecture hall. On presenting himself to Benjamin Franklin and
                    receiving a rather tepid letter of recommendation, Paine set sail for
                    Philadelphia in 1774, arriving just as the colonial crisis with the British
                    motherland was mounting. From his own experience of being an ill-used civil
                    servant as an Excise officer, Paine was readier than most to advocate separation
                    and independence.
                
                    1.1 Paine's Career as a Writer
                    With the help of Dr. Benjamin Rush, who had suggested the title and also
                        found him a printer, in 1776 Paine published Common
                            Sense. The result was a best seller on a scale hitherto unknown.
                        Linking an earthy appeal with an inspirational style, it did more than any
                        other publication to persuade America of the justice and necessity of
                        independence. Thereafter, Paine became a major figure in the pamphlet and
                        newspaper controversies of the Revolution, bringing his pen to bear whenever
                        he felt the American cause needed upholding, not least with his rallying cry
                        in The American Crisis.
                    In the five years after the end of the American Revolutionary War, Paine more
                        or less left politics behind and became absorbed in a series of scientific
                        experiments, in particular the design and construction of a single-arched
                        iron bridge. In 1787, again following the advice of Benjamin Franklin, who
                        told him he would do well to seek sponsors for his bridge in either Paris or
                        London, Paine returned to Europe at the very time when revolutionary and
                        radical pressures were building there. He did not lack for well-placed
                        friends. His admirer Thomas Jefferson had been appointed to be American
                        Minister to France, and his old friend The Marquis de Lafayette, wreathed
                        with American laurels, was also at his disposal. Lafayette kept a copy of
                        the American Declaration on one panel of his study, leaving the opposite
                        panel empty hoping it would be adorned one day by a similar French one . Lafayette had been prominent in the
                        parliamentary exchanges that led to the isolation of the French ruling
                        dynasty, was also the commander of the National Guard and in the thick of
                        the street demonstrations that had culminated in the fall of the Bastille on
                        14th July 1789. The French Revolution, which split British politics in
                        several directions, struck Paine as a natural extension of the American
                        one.
                    Paine's Rights of Man, written as a defence of
                        the French Revolution, was issued in two parts. The first part (March 1791)
                        was dedicated to George Washington and the second part (February 1792),
                        calling for the spreading of the French Revolution across mainland Europe,
                        to Lafayette. At this point, the gloves started to come off with Paine
                        receiving a summons to appear in a British court and answer a charge of
                        seditious libel. The hand-picked jury outlawed him in his absence and Paine
                        never again returned to England. His time in France also turned out to be a
                        hazardous enterprise when he spoke out against the execution of Louis XVI
                        and backed the Gironde faction rather than the Jacobins. He was arrested in
                        December 1793, held in the Luxembourg prison, and only narrowly escaped the
                        guillotine due to a warder's error. The arrival in Paris of a new ambassador
                        — the future president James Monroe — saw Paine's release in November 1794.
                        His remaining years in France give the impression of the sour aftermath of a
                        love affair . In September 1797, the
                        irruption of the army into politics was confirmed by a military coup and in
                        November 1799 Napoleon arrogated all power to himself, proclaimed himself
                            First Consul and announced that the Revolution was
                        at an end.
                    Now Paine had fallen victim to a gigantic counter-revolution in revolutionary
                        disguise which had succeeded in entrenching his original foes — the
                        monarchy. Hearing from his old friend Thomas Jefferson that he was welcome
                        to return to America he gave up France as a bad job and in September 1802
                        sailed to Baltimore. His writings bear witness to his revolutionary
                        activities and provide us with a detailed picture of the evolution of social
                        and political change at the end of the eighteenth century.
                
                
                    1.2 The Rights of Man
                    Jonathan Clark, the Hall Distinguished Professor of British History at Kansas
                        University, calls into question the belief that Thomas Paine wrote the whole
                        work, in an article on the authorship of Rights of
                            Man . Clark focuses on a 6000-word long passage, located just
                        before the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of
                            Citizens" (henceforth, for brevity, the
                        Declaration), which forms the central historical passage in
                        Part I. Paine prefaces this passage with the words 
                            I will here, as concisely as I can, trace out the
                                growth of the French revolution, and mark the circumstances that
                                have contributed to produce it
                            
                        . Clark argues that (i) the passage differs in tone from the rest of
                        the work; (ii) the prose is unlike Paine's; (iii) it is mostly written in a
                        mandarin third person and does not display Paine's typically prominent
                        authorial voice; (iv) the content of the passage is unlike anything else in
                        Paine's writings since, elsewhere, he showed no significant knowledge of
                        French history and, more tellingly, did not elsewhere reveal knowledge of
                        French high politics. Clark asserts that, examined more closely, its prose
                        seems not to be that of an Englishman at all, reading instead like the
                        English prose of a native French speaker.
                    Who, then, could have written this 6000-word narrative? Clark suggests that
                        its author was probably The Marquis de Lafayette. It seems to embody not
                        neutral history but his very personal perspective on events and has as hero
                        none other than Lafayette himself. Clark thinks that this passage was
                        expressed in the third person in order to conceal the
                            vanity of its author and points out that earlier in
                        the Rights of Man Paine acknowledges that
                        Lafayette had provided him with information and at least one document. The
                        strongest piece of evidence that Lafayette had supplied Paine with the
                        substance of the 6000-word narrative comes from Lafayette's own hand since
                        on 12th January 1790 he had written to George Washington Common Sense
                            [Paine] is writing a Book for you — there you will see a part of My
                            Adventures.
                    Clark concludes that this passage is very probably not a history primarily
                        written by Paine but Lafayette's self-serving publicity, part of his attempt
                        to become the George Washington of the French
                        Revolution. What better way for Lafayette to publicize his own version of
                        events, with himself at the centre, than feeding his own interpretation to
                        his English friend? The consequences of accepting such an attribution would
                        be to render Paine's important writings open to general re-interpretation. A
                        computer-based stylometric investigation of this attribution is thus
                        merited.
                
            

                2. Materials: Corpora Collected
                For our main study, related to the Rights of Man, we
                    collected 106 texts altogether, details of which are given in Appendix 1. We
                    organized this collection in four main groups, as summarized in Table 1. The
                    median size of these 106 text files is 2535 word tokens.
                
                    Tom-Paine Corpus, summary statistics.
                    
                        Category
                        Text files
                        word tokens
                    
                    
                        Controls
                        45
                        128217
                    
                    
                        Marquis
                        19
                        45023
                    
                    
                        Paine
                        29
                        161287
                    
                    
                        Queried
                        13
                        18674
                    
                    
                        Sums:
                        106
                        353201
                    
                
                As the works available by the Marquis of Lafayette in English are much fewer than
                    those of Paine, and in genres (letters and memoir) that are absent or rare in
                    Paine's writings we selected works by a number of additional control authors to
                    contrast with Tom Paine's written style. These authors were all contemporaries
                    of Paine, active in the American Revolution (like Paine and Lafayette), with
                    whom he interacted. The texts from these control authors are summarized in Table
                    2.
                
                    Breakdown of control authors. [* Four of the Queried
                        texts are probably mostly by James Madison as well.]
                    
                        Control authors
                        Text files
                        word tokens
                    
                    
                        Franklin, B
                        1
                        2207
                    
                    
                        Hamilton, A
                        19
                        63384
                    
                    
                        Jay, J
                        2
                        3962
                    
                    
                        Jefferson, T
                        12
                        31812
                    
                    
                        Madison, J *
                        11
                        29168
                    
                    
                        Sums:
                        45
                        128217
                    
                
                Having examples from this set of control authors allows us to make comparisons
                    not just between Paine and Lafayette (where the genre distribution is inevitably
                    unbalanced) but between Paine's works and representatives of the kinds of
                    writing on topics of concern to him which were being written and read (by Paine
                    among others) during the time when he was active. The
                        Queried texts include the suspect sections of The Rights of Man, along with several
                        distractors, whose role in our analyses will be
                    explained later.
                Not all of the text files in our corpus represent individual whole works. Some
                    are sections or chapters of longer works. The 2 cases where a larger work was
                    split into more than 2 files were Lafayette in America,
                        First Voyage and Campaign (split into 6 segments of approximately
                    3000 words each) and the book central to this investigation, Paine's Rights of Man, Part I, . The latter work
                    (henceforward for brevity referred to as TROM) was broken into 8 portions, as
                    detailed in Table 3.
                
                    Division of TROM into separate text files.
                    
                        File name
                        description
                        assigned category
                        word tokens
                    
                    
                        TROM_Preface
                        Author's Preface, criticizing Edmund Burke
                        Paine
                        821
                    
                    
                        TROM_Rights_1
                        Main text from start up to the suspect 6000-word passage
                        Paine
                        21460
                    
                    
                        TROM_Mid1
                        First approximately-half of suspect passage, beginning The
                                despotism of Louis XIV., ...
                        Queried
                        2950
                    
                    
                        TROM_Mid2
                        Second approximately-half of suspect passage, beginning For this
                                purpose, the Court set about ...
                        Queried
                        3140
                    
                    
                        TROM_Declaration
                        Declaration of the Rights of Man and of Citizens
                        Queried
                        828
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Observations
                        Passage immediately following the Declaration
                        Paine
                        711
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Miscellaneous
                        Section headed Miscellaneous
                            Chapter
                        Paine
                        8791
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Conclusion
                        Section headed Conclusion
                        Paine
                        2534
                    
                
                In addition, as part of a subsidiary study on the theme of co-authorship and its
                    stylistic signals, we also collected a parallel corpus, summarized in Table 4,
                    further detailed in Appendix 2. This will be used in subsections 3.4 and 4.1 to
                    study of how well our analytic tools can detect co-authorship, in a
                    naturally-occurring case where we have the great advantage of knowing just where
                    each author's contribution begins and ends.
                
                    Co-authorship corpus, summary statistics.
                    
                        Category
                        Text files
                        word tokens
                    
                    
                        Co-authorships & distractor
                        6
                        44837
                    
                    
                        DH
                        14
                        54802
                    
                    
                        RF
                        20
                        71818
                    
                    
                        Sums:
                        40
                        171457
                    
                
                The median size of these texts was 3094 word tokens. Additionally, five
                    individually authored sections of The Federalist
                        Revisited
                     were saved as separate files.
            

                3. Exploratory Analysis using High-Frequency Words
                In a pioneering work first published in 1964, Mosteller and Wallace used relative
                    frequencies of commonly occurring words — mainly words such as prepositions,
                    conjunctions and articles — as discriminators to investigate the mystery of the
                    authorship of the Federalist Papers
                    . Their scholarly analysis opened the way to the
                    modern, computerized age of stylometry. The use of (mostly non-contextual)
                    high-frequency words as tools in attributional problems was continued by J. F.
                    Burrows and since then multivariate statistical analyses involving large sets
                    (50-100) of such words have achieved some significant successes . Some noteworthy examples in a wide array of authors
                    and genres have been the attribution of the 1583 Consolatio, shown to be not a lost work of Cicero but a
                    sixteenth-century forgery , the investigation into
                    the authorship of the so-called Pickett Letters of the
                    American Civil War , the identification of the
                    author of the 15th Book of Oz , and the new look at
                    the authorship of the Book of Mormon
                    . This Burrows-style approach
                    essentially picks the N most common words in the corpus under investigation and
                    computes the normalized occurrence rate of these N words in each text-unit,
                    typically per 100 or per 1000, thus converting a set of P text-units into a
                    P-by-N array of numbers. Multivariate statistical techniques, most commonly
                    Principal Components Analysis and Cluster Analysis, are then applied to the data
                    to look for patterns. The former aims to reduce the dimensionality of the
                    problem by transforming the N variables to a smaller number (usually 2) of new
                    variables and the latter technique provides an independent and objective view of
                    groupings amongst the textual samples by means of a tree-diagram or dendrogram.
                    The Burrows-style approach has become the first port-of-call for attributional
                    problems and will be the initial technique adopted in this investigation.
                The choice of text size in stylometric studies is always problematic. Smaller
                    text units are too short to provide opportunities for stylistic habits to
                    operate on the arrangement of internal constituents, while larger units are
                    insufficiently frequent to provide enough examples for reliable statistical
                    inference. Forsyth and Holmes found the median text block size in a selection of
                    stylometric studies to be around 3500 words . On the
                    other hand, in their study of the Book of Mormon,
                    Jockers et al. claim that even the smallest chapters are of
                    adequate size for stylometric analysis, finding no correlation between the
                    correct assignment of an author and the length of text sample . Eder examined a number of attribution methods in
                    several languages on a variety of text lengths and concluded that 2500 words or
                    more were needed for reliable attribution, though the figure varied somewhat
                    across genres and languages . More recently, Eder has
                    found that a diversity index can be computed prior to attribution which will
                    indicate whether conditions are such that samples down to 1500 words in length
                    or even slightly smaller can be reliably attributed .
                    This issue is thus still subject to active research, so it was decided in this
                    initial phase of the analysis to start conservatively by working with texts of
                    2500 words or more in length. This criterion selected 55 text files including
                    the two prime queried texts TROM_Mid1 and TROM_Mid2, of 2950 and 3140 words
                    respectively.
                The value of N used varies by application and genre but typically lies between 50
                    and 100, the implication being that these words should be among the most common
                    in the language and that content words should generally be avoided.
                    Attributional studies have achieved success with N set as low as 50 
                    , but Hoover, Eder and others have found somewhat
                    larger feature sets to be more effective 
                    . We selected our features by first generating a list
                    of the most frequent 144 words in our full corpus of 106 texts, then winnowing
                    out any word occurring in fewer than 75 texts (i.e. less than 70% of documents)
                    as well as excluding first-person and second-person and gendered third-person
                    pronouns and possessives. This filtering strategy follows the practice of Hoover
                        .
                As it happened, 44 words were removed by this procedure, leaving 100 words to be
                    used as features. These 100 words, as well as the 44 words excluded can be seen
                    in Appendix 3. Using these words, a grid of size 55 by 100 was produced, with
                    each of the 55 rows representing a text and each of the 100 columns giving the
                    occurrence rates (per hundred) of a particular word in those texts.
                
                    3.1 Paine versus the Founding Fathers
                    The first phase in this investigation was designed to assess the validity of
                        the proposed technique. We were interested to discover how clearly the texts
                        of the three founding fathers (Hamilton, Jefferson and
                        Madison) that were included in this collection of 55 documents could be
                        separated. More important, we wanted to know if the texts by Tom Paine could
                        be distinguished from those other three authors.
                    For this purpose, a Principal Components Analysis was performed on 42 rows of
                        this dataset, representing 10 works by Hamilton, 5 by Jefferson, 5 by
                        Madison and 22 unquestionably by Paine. This reduced the 100 variables in
                        the original data to 8 composite variables which between them accounted for
                        51.74% of the overall variance. Figure 1 shows the 42 texts plotted the
                        space of the first two (most important) of these components (PCs). PC1
                        accounted for 11.18 percent and PC2 for 9.38 percent of the overall variance
                        (20.56% together).
                    
                        Works by Paine and founding fathers plotted in
                            the first 2 components (PCs) of a Principal Component Analysis based on
                            100 word-rate variables.
                        
                    
                    This diagram shows an imperfect yet encouraging degree of separation. The
                        first, horizontal, component, clearly expresses a strong authorial signal.
                        Taken together with the second, vertical, component, we find a nearly
                        perfect separation of Paine, in the upper right-hand area of the graph, from
                        the other authors. It also looks as if Hamilton and Jefferson are quite easy
                        to differentiate, mainly on the basis of the vertical dimension.
                    Broadly speaking, this pattern recapitulates the finding of Sigelman et al.
                             that Paine's style is quite distinct from
                        the style(s) of his contemporaries, a finding also attested by Berton et al.
                            . However, some caveats are in order.
                        Firstly, one of Madison's texts falls among a group of texts by Hamilton.
                        Given the effort that Mosteller and Wallace needed to separate these two
                        authors, that is unsurprising . Somewhat more
                        troublesome is the fact that one of Hamilton's longest works, the Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress,
                        penetrates the Paine cluster. This is a juvenile work, written when Hamilton
                        was only 17, so we can still argue that Hamilton's mature style can be
                        distinguished from Paine's; but the fact that Hamilton's 1778 letter to Holt
                        also appears on the borderline of Paine's cluster indicates that we must be
                        wary of drawing firm conclusions from such a graph.
                    The appearance of three State of the Union addresses, by Jefferson and
                        Madison, towards the lower left of the graph suggests that dropping
                        pronominals has not eliminated genre effects, as does the tendency of
                        letters (including part 1 of Paine's rebuttal of the Abbé Raynal, which is
                        framed as a letter) to have low scores on the second component.
                    To assist in interpreting this graph, the 6 words loading most positively and
                        negatively on these two Principal Components are listed in Table 5. The
                        contrast of was with is as part of
                        the vertical dimension, PC2, suggests that it taps into differences of genre
                        or stance, thus is not a pure authorial signal. Hence we proceed with
                        caution.
                    
                        Strongest negatively and positively loaded words on first two
                            Principal Components.
                        
                            Negative loadings on PC1
                            of, the, well, which, by, its
                        
                        
                            Positive loadings on PC1
                            now, were, not, could, but, out
                        
                        
                            Negative loadings on PC2
                            on, their, them, at, general, was
                        
                        
                            Positive loadings on PC2
                            or, any, upon, it, than, is
                        
                    
                
                
                    3.2 Lafayette versus the Founding Fathers
                    The next step is to see how well our sample of texts by Lafayette can be
                        distinguished from those of the founding fathers. For
                        this purpose we extracted 30 rows from our 55-item grid — the same 20 by
                        Hamilton, Jefferson and Madison as in section 3.1, plus the 10 Lafayette
                        samples that are at least 2500 words long.
                    Another Principal Components Analysis was performed, this time requiring 6
                        components to account for more than 50% of the overall variance in the data.
                        Figure 2 shows the 30 texts plotted in the space of the first 2 components
                        (PCs). PC1 accounts for 21.48 percent and PC2 for 9.11 percent of the
                        overall variance (30.59% together).
                    
                        Works by Lafayette and the founding fathers
                            plotted in the first 2 components of a Principal Component Analysis
                            based on 100 word-rate variables.
                        
                    
                    This presents an interesting picture. The samples from Lafayette in America are clearly distinct from all the rest,
                        but these seven samples represent sections of only 2 different books, both
                        autobiographical; and the rest of the samples are not well separated by
                        author. Once again Hamilton's Vindication
                        stands apart from his more mature writings.
                    Of particular interest are the three letters by Lafayette, to Dayen,
                        Rochambeau and Vergennes, which are poorly distinguished from Jefferson.
                        These letters were written originally in French and translated into English
                        when Lafayette's collected works were published. We have retained them in
                        our sample out of curiosity. That may be said to introduce noise into the
                        system, but studies by Rybicki (2012) and Forsyth & Lam (2014) have
                        shown, rather counter-intuitively, that authorship attribution is possible
                        in translated works 
                        . Moreover, they remind us not to underestimate
                        the potential variability of Lafayette's style if he had written in a wider
                        range of English genres. They can also be seen as proxies for how his style
                        might vary when collaborating with an English-speaking co-author.
                    Overall then, this part of the analysis shows that Lafayette in America, parts I & II are very easy to
                        distinguish from the writings by our sample of the "founding fathers". The
                        three of Lafayette's letters which have, in effect, been edited by another
                        hand differ noticeably from his memoirs, Lafayette in
                            America. Despite this, all 10 of Lafayette's samples, including
                        the three translated letters, have positive scores on the first Principal
                        Component, whereas 19 of the 20 texts by the other authors have negative
                        scores on this dimension, the sole exception being Jefferson's Autobiography. So here we have a mixed signal
                        which is nevertheless mainly authorial.
                    The most negatively and positively loaded words on the first two Principal
                        Components are shown in Table 6. The presence of was
                        and were as opposed to is on the
                        dimension that separates Lafayette in America from the rest again suggests a
                        genre effect, while the presence of general indicates a
                        topic effect: it arises from the fact that General Washington is frequently
                        mentioned in descriptions of the Revolutionary campaigns. The strong
                        negative loadings of they and them
                        on PC2 suggests that even third-person, non-gendered pronouns are affected
                        by other aspects of language than authorship.
                    
                        Strongest negatively and positively loaded words on first two
                            Principal Components.
                        
                            Negative loadings on PC1
                            is, or, be, it, as, are
                        
                        
                            Positive loadings on PC1
                            two, general, at, were, had, was
                        
                        
                            Negative loadings on PC2
                            them, they, could, should, but, do
                        
                        
                            Positive loadings on PC2
                            under, in, of, which, an, the
                        
                    
                
                
                    3.3 Lafayette, Paine and the Rights of Man
                    Thus we have imperfect discrimination, where authorship is to some extent
                        confounded with other signals. Nevertheless Paine in general is relatively
                        well distinguished from his contemporaries and a pair of works by Lafayette
                        is very different from a variety of works by those contemporaries. Even
                        Lafayette's translated letters are atypical when compared to texts by
                        Hamilton, Jefferson and Madison. In short, this approach does offer clues to
                        authorship when applied to writings of the relevant vintage, provided that
                        those clues are taken as evidence rather than proof.
                    We next examine whether our two principal authors of interest, Lafayette and
                        Paine, are distinguishable; and, in particular, whether the queried parts of
                        TROM resemble one of these authors more than another. To do this we apply
                        PCA to the 10 texts by Lafayette and the 22 by Paine already analyzed in the
                        preceding sections, along with three further samples from TROM.
                    Figure 3 shows a plot of these 35 texts in the space of the first 2 Principal
                        Components (PCs). PC1 accounts for 20.81 percent and PC2 10.48 percent of
                        the variance in the data (31.29 percent together). Table 7 shows the words
                        with the strongest loadings on these dimensions.
                    
                        Works by Lafayette and Paine plotted in the first 2 components of a
                            Principal Component Analysis based on 100 word-rate variables.
                        
                    
                    Again Paine's sample contains an outlier, his letter to Franklin of 1778.
                        Lafayette's texts split into two well-separated groups. Even so, it is
                        possible to separate the undisputed Paine samples from the undisputed
                        Lafayette samples on the first Principal Component with only one
                        exception.
                    TROM_Rights_1, the first part of Rights of Man
                        leading up to the disputed passage falls almost centrally into the Paine
                        cluster. The two parts of the disputed passage, TROM_Mid1 and TROM_Mid2,
                        stand somewhat apart from both authorial groupings, slightly closer to the
                            Lafayette in America samples than to the
                        centre of Paine's cluster. To the extent that PC1 represents an authorial
                        dimension, they are more like Lafayette than Paine; but they are not typical
                        of either author. The two dotted lines show that it is possible, with a
                        single exception, to separate Paine's from Lafayette's texts by a straight
                        line — either with a line that has both queried segments on the same side as
                        Paine or with a line that has both segments on the side of Lafayette.
                    This graph is thus highly compatible with the assertion that TROM_Rights_1 is
                        solely or mainly by Paine. It is also compatible with the proposition that
                        the queried passage is by neither of them. The idea that it could be a
                        co-authorship is by no means ruled out, an idea that will be followed up in
                        the succeeding section.
                    
                        Strongest negatively and positively loaded words on first two
                            Principal Components.
                        
                            Negative loadings on PC1
                            general, was, had, were, two, at
                        
                        
                            Positive loadings on PC1
                            any, can, are, it, or, is
                        
                        
                            Negative loadings on PC2
                            would, if, have, should, might, make
                        
                        
                            Positive loadings on PC2
                            of, each, the, government, its, other
                        
                    
                    To gain another perspective on the relations among these texts we performed a
                        hierarchical cluster analysis using Ward's method on a distance matrix
                        obtained from the first 6 Principal Components (enough to account for at
                        least half of the overall variance, 53.46% to be precise). Figure 4 shows
                        the result of this clustering.
                    
                        Hierarchical cluster analysis using Ward's method on the first six
                            Principal Components derived from texts by Lafayette and Paine as well
                            as the queried texts.
                        
                    
                    This clustering presents a twofold grouping at the top level. In the
                        left-hand group are the seven chunks of Lafayette in
                            America, tightly bound, with the two parts of the queried
                        passage in TROM as well as two epistolatory texts by Paine linked more
                        distantly. To the right is a group of texts predominantly by Paine. This
                        group also divides rather naturally into two subgroups — a central group all
                        by Paine including the initial section of TROM and, further to the right, a
                        group by Paine except with the three translated letters of Lafayette
                        intermixed. This supports the idea that TROM_Rights_1 is a typical Paine
                        text. However the two queried passages do not behave unambiguously like
                        texts by either of our two primary authors. The contrast between the two
                        halves of the queried passage (TROM_Mid1 and TROM_Mid2) and the larger
                        section that leads up to it (TROM_Rights_1) is striking.
                    To summarise this phase of the analysis, it is fair to say that TROM_Rights_1
                        behaves overall like a typical text by Thomas Paine, while the queried
                        sections do not. There is some evidence linking them to Lafayette, but it is
                        inconclusive. The notion of co-authorship remains plausible.
                
                
                    3.4 Reflexive Co-authorship investigation
                    To gain a fuller idea of what might be expected in cases of co-authorship, we
                        applied the same approach to the small corpus described in Table 4, above.
                        In other words, we performed a self-examination on texts written by
                        ourselves, including co-authorships, as well as a
                            distractor, i.e. a text by another author on the
                        topic of authorship. With this corpus we have the great advantage of knowing
                        who wrote what, in particular who wrote which parts of a particular
                        co-authored text.
                    Like most researchers, we have been co-authors ourselves on several
                        occasions. We decided to exploit this fact by focussing on a paper with
                        particular relevance to the era of Tom Paine, The
                            Federalist revisited: new directions in authorship attribution,
                        which we wrote jointly . Thus this part of our
                        study is effectively a self-examination. We trust that this unseemly degree
                        of self-absorption can be excused by the fact that we have access to a "gold
                        standard" as far as class membership is concerned. In short, we know very
                        well who wrote which sections of the document concerned. This level of
                        certainty is only rarely available in comparable studies, and it provides a
                        background against which to interpret the findings, above, regarding our
                        main focus, Paine and Lafayette.
                    Co-authorship can take many forms (see: 
                        
                        
                        ) including cases where almost every sentence is
                        the product of more than one hand and the contributors themselves cannot
                        state definitively who wrote which paragraph. Our case, however, is one of
                        the simpler ones. We have divided our Federalist article into five segments, very nearly co-extensive
                        with headed sections as published, each of which was written by one author
                        with virtually no interference by the other.
                    In total, as tabulated in Appendix 2, we collected 45 text files for this
                        subsidiary study, of which 20 were singly authored by Forsyth and 14 by
                        Holmes. In addition, this corpus contains the co-authored text of The Federalist revisited as a whole (8979 words)
                        and its five individual subsections, two by Forsyth and three by Holmes.
                        Four further co-authored papers were added (
                        
                        
                        ) each jointly written by one of the two authors
                        under scrutiny, with a different co-author. These have file names prefixed
                        with CO_. Finally, a distractor
                        was added — pages 1-25 of Chapter 1 by Michael Oakes  on the topic of author identification.
                    Initially, we performed a Principal Components Analysis, comparable with that
                        in subsection 3.3, on 43 of these files, excluding only the two sections of
                        The Federalist Revisited with lengths less than 800 words. For this purpose
                        100 words were again selected as features, using the same procedure as
                        described previously in section 3, namely, taking the 144 most frequent
                        words of the corpus and then first removing gendered pronouns (one example)
                        and then 43 other words which were found in fewer than 32 of the 43
                        documents. The complete list of words, and exclusions, is shown in Appendix
                        4.
                    Figure 5 shows these texts plotted in the space of the first 2 Principal
                        Components (PCs) which together accounted for 27.55% of the overall
                        variance. PC1 accounted for 14.92% of the total variance and PC2 for
                        12.63%.
                    
                        Works by Forsyth (RF), Holmes (DH) and others plotted in the first 2
                            components of a Principal Component Analysis based on 100 word-rate
                            variables.
                        
                    
                    Here the picture is not clear-cut. The horizontal axis (PC1) does not
                        distinguish the authors. Even knowing the texts concerned it is not simple
                        to interpret this component, although it is influenced by topic: only one of
                        the texts scoring higher than 2.5 on this component relates to linguistic
                        themes, whereas the majority of those scoring lower than this (to the left
                        of the diagram) do relate to linguistic or textual analysis.
                    However, some degree of authorial discrimination is achieved by PC2. Items in
                        the lower part of the diagram, scoring less than zero on this component, are
                        predominantly by RF, while the majority of points in the upper part are by
                        DH. However, the lower left quadrant is mixed, and rather difficult to view.
                        In fact, a plot of the second and third Principal Components illustrates the
                        situation more clearly, as shown in Figure 6, even though PC3 (which
                        accounts for 7.76% of the total variance) discriminates only weakly between
                        the two main authors. Table 8 shows for each of the first three Principal
                        Components, the five words that load most positively and most
                        negatively.
                    
                        Strongest negatively and positively loaded words on first three
                            Principal Components.
                        
                            Negative loadings on PC1
                            used, each, words, by, using
                        
                        
                            Positive loadings on PC1
                            so, at, will, all, had, it
                        
                        
                            Negative loadings on PC2
                            is, or, a, be, if
                        
                        
                            Positive loadings on PC2
                            were, was, the, and, had
                        
                        
                            Negative loadings on PC3
                            on, test, well, here, over
                        
                        
                            Positive loadings on PC3
                            analysis, known, their, being, when
                        
                    
                    
                        Works by Forsyth (RF), Holmes (DH) and others plotted in the second
                            and third components of a Principal Component Analysis based on 100
                            word-rate variables.
                        
                    
                    In Figure 6, PC2, the horizontal axis, still carries the only strong
                        authorship signal, but at least the points are better spread for
                        interpretive purposes. The 34 texts singly authored by either DH or RF (i.e.
                        all except co-authorships, parts of CO_Feds and the distractor,
                        MO_Authorid), can be separated by a straight line, shown dashed in the
                        diagram, with just 2 mistakes. To the left of this line we find all 20 main
                        texts by RF, as well as the two co-authored texts by RF and someone other
                        than DH, and one part (RF_Fed4) of the Federalist paper (CO_Feds). However,
                        we also find two texts written solely by DH and the distractor written by
                        Michael Oakes.
                    To the right of this dashed line we find 12 of the 14 main texts by DH, as
                        well as DH_Fed2, the longest of the sections of CO_Feds written by DH. We
                        also find the two papers co-authored by DH with someone other than RF. If we
                        were to treat this demarcation line as definitive, however, we would not
                        only assign the whole of CO_Feds to DH, we would also assign part of that
                        paper written by RF (RF_Fed1) to DH as well. It can be seen that while
                        CO_Feds falls near the centre of the DH distribution on PC2, it represents
                        an outlier on that dimension for RF. Interestingly enough, RF_Fed1 is even
                        more of an outlier on that dimension, yet it was written solely by RF.
                    A conclusion to be drawn from this side study is that while Principal
                        Component Analysis using high-frequency words does very often reveal
                        authorial signals, it cannot on its own be relied on to tease out
                        contributions in a co-authorship. This conclusion is reinforced by Figure 7,
                        which shows the results of a hierarchical cluster analysis, using Ward's
                        method, based on the first 6 Principal Components derived from this data,
                        which between them account for 51.77% of the overall variance.
                    
                        Hierarchical cluster analysis using Ward's method on the first six
                            Principal Components derived from texts by Forsyth (RF), Holmes (DH) and
                            others.
                        
                    
                    Ignoring the isolate (RF_TeskeyRev) which happens to be the shortest of these
                        texts, we can form five groupings by cutting the vertical lines in Figure 7
                        horizontally at about level 15 on the vertical axis (though this number has
                        no unambiguous interpretation). The leftmost of these five clusters is a
                        group of 3 DH texts that can be seen as an outlying subgroup in Figures 5
                        and 6. They are relatively informal writings compared with the rest of the
                        corpus. Next, reading from the left, is a group of 6 texts all by RF on
                        topics other than authorship. Then come five texts of which four are by DH
                        on stylometric themes but one, RF_Foreword, is an introduction by RF to a
                        book on finance. Next from the left comes a large group of 15 texts of which
                        12 are by RF, 2 are co-authorships by RF and someone other than DH, and one
                        (MO_Authorid) is the distractor written by Michael Oakes. Finally, the
                        rightmost grouping contains 8 texts by DH, 2 co-authorships by DH with
                        someone other than RF and the prime focus text, CO_Feds, written by both DH
                        and RF. But it also contains 2 texts solely by RF (RF_Cons1to4 and
                        RF_Fed1).
                    On the basis of this phase of the analysis, if we suspected that the paper on
                        the Federalist Papers (CO_Feds) contained input
                        from both DH and RF but had no inside information, we could not reject the
                        hypothesis that the whole paper was written by DH, though we might lean
                        towards ascribing part 4 (RF_Fed4) to RF — rather tentatively. The behaviour
                        of the distractor would, rightly, prevent any more definitive attribution.
                        Of course the distractor had to fall somewhere, so its linkage with RF
                        doesn't invalidate the whole approach; but ideally it would have been an
                        obvious outlier.
                    Thus it can be said that this classic multivariate approach, based on
                        occurrence rates of high-frequency words, does provide suggestive clues in
                        cases of this type, but cannot be regarded as conclusive. It is, after all,
                        explicitly a mode of exploratory data analysis. To be more definitive, we
                        turn to other, complementary, modes of analysis.
                
            

                4. Trials with TOCCATA
                To gain another perspective on the probable authorship of the queried passages in
                    TROM, we employed the TOCCATA text-classification system, version 9, available
                    at the following address: http://www.richardsandesforsyth.net/software.html.
                TOCCATA (which stands for Text-Oriented Computational Classifier, Applicable To
                    Authorship) is designed as a test harness for various text-categorization
                    strategies. It comes supplied with software libraries that enable five different
                    text-classification techniques to be used. In addition, the user may write
                    bespoke libraries (in Python3) to implement other techniques. It allows methods
                    to be assessed by cross-validation on a training sample of texts with known
                    class membership (known authorship in this context) and also applied to classify
                    holdout texts that may include disputed items or classes unseen in the training
                    data.
                Experience in this field has taught us that no single method is likely to emerge
                    as champion in such exercises, so we decided to apply 6
                    different methods to the question in hand, one specifically written for this
                    investigation. These methods are briefly outlined in Table 9, and more fully
                    described in Appendix 5. (Unless specifically noted, default values were used
                    for all software options.)
                
                    Text Categorization Methods Used in TOCCATA.
                    
                        Method name
                        Feature type
                        Inference mode
                        Brief description
                    
                    
                        deltoid
                        frequent words
                        proximity measured by z-scores
                        This is essentially Burrows's Delta , but
                            converted to a similarity score from a difference score as 1/D, since
                            TOCCATA works with similarities.
                    
                    
                        maws
                        frequent words
                        naive Bayesian probability estimation
                        This is a naive Bayesian word-based classifier
                            based on an adaptation  of the robust
                                hand-calculated Bayesian analysis described in .
                    
                    
                        vote
                        all word tokens
                        voting
                        This simple method uses every word-type in the training corpus as a
                            feature. To classify a new text, the frequency of every word in that
                            text is counted; then, for each category, a score is computed by adding
                            a vote to a running total. The vote is sqrt(f) if
                            the token is relatively more common within that category than in the
                            full corpus or else zero. The category yielding the highest score is
                            chosen.
                    
                    
                        tokspans
                        spans of frequent words
                        rank correlation
                        This method attempts to capture some information inherent in
                                syllexis, the co-occurrence of words in close
                            proximity, especially sequential co-occurrence. It starts by finding the
                            most common words in the corpus. As distinctive attributes it uses short
                            spans containing these frequent words. In the experiments reported, the
                            span size was 3, thus such items as ('as', 'well', 'as') or ('the',
                            'number', 'of') appear as features. Since infrequent words are ignored,
                            tuples of fewer than 3 items are common as attributes, such as ('of',
                            'the'), ('the', 'of') and indeed ('the',) — the last case indicating a
                            triple containing "the" and two less frequent words.
                    
                    
                        tagsets
                        POStag span-sets
                        rank correlation
                        This method actually uses the same software module as Tokspans, above,
                            but using sets, not tuples, i.e. with sequence ignored; and with
                            part-of-speech tags (see Appendix 6) not words. The span size used was
                            5. An example of a feature derived by this procedure is ['dt', 'in',
                            'nn', 'prp', 'vbd'].
                    
                    
                        taverns
                        word n-grams (n=2-4)
                        proportional non-overlapping text coverage
                        Taverns borrows a technique from the formulib package, developed to
                            explore formulaic language (available at http://www.richardsandesforsyth.net/software.html). A list of
                            the most frequent n-grams of selected sizes is compiled. Then the
                            similarity of a text to a category is computed as the proportion of
                            tokens in that text covered by any combination of n-grams from the
                            category's high-frequency list. 
                    
                
                The first three of these methods use individual words as features. Thus they
                    follow what has become the conventional bag-of-words
                    approach, in which texts are treated as collections of tokens, with ordering
                    information completely ignored. However, to quote Z. Harris (1954), 
                        language is not merely a bag of words
                        
                    . Accordingly, we wanted also to attempt to tap into sequential/syntactic
                    information — at least to some degree — sequence being essential to language. So
                    half of these six methods, the last three, employ sequences (tokspans &
                    taverns) or co-occurring sets (tagsets) of tokens. As well as using six
                    different feature sets, these methods between them employ five different
                    inferential strategies (tokspans and tagsets being variants of the same
                    procedure).
                
                    4.1 The Federalist Re-Revisited
                    Prior to applying our toolkit of text-classification techniques to the main
                        problem under study, we thought it instructive to discover how the methods
                        performed in a case study where we possess privileged information.
                    Once again, this preliminary investigation concerns the corpus summarized in
                        Table 4 and detailed in Appendix 2. These texts are those investigated by
                        exploratory methods in subsection 3.4, above, including the co-authored text
                        of The Federalist revisited as a whole (8979
                        words) and its five individual subsections, two by Forsyth and three by
                        Holmes. Four further co-authored papers are included, each jointly written
                        by one of the two authors under scrutiny, with a different co-author. These
                        have file names prefixed with CO_. Finally, a
                            distractor was added — pages 1-25 of Chapter 1 by
                        Michael Oakes  on the topic of author
                        identification. For the present study, 29 of these 45 texts were used as
                        training data, leaving 16 as a holdout sample.
                    The TOCCATA program initially runs a subsampling phase on the training data.
                        In this phase, it repeatedly picks a random subsample of n texts from the
                        training data of N texts, where n = int(sqrt(N)). It then builds a model
                        using the remaining larger sample (size N-n) and uses that model to predict
                        the categories of the items in the smaller sample. In the present case, the
                        larger subsample would contain 24=29-5 texts and the smaller 5 texts. This
                        random subsampling is repeated until the required number of held-out items
                        have been classified (255 trials in the present instance). This implements a
                        mode of cross-validation, meaning that the success-rate statistics printed
                        at the end of this process should be a relatively unbiased estimate of how
                        the method would perform with fresh unseen data.
                    Part of the output from this phase, using repeated subsampling on the 29
                        training texts, using the MAWS method, is reproduced below.
                    
    Confusion matrix :
    Truecat =       DH  RF
    Predcat :   DH  100 32
    Predcat :   RF  7   116
    
    Kappa value = 0.6929
    Precision (%) by category :
    DH  75.7576
    RF  94.3089
    Recall (%) by category :
    DH  93.4579
    RF  78.3784
    
    cases = 255
    cases with unseen category labels = 0
    hits = 216
    percent hits = 84.71 
                    
                    Here the cross-validated success rate is 84.71 percent, respectable though
                        not outstanding in a 2-class problem. We can see from these figures a slight
                        bias, in that Recall is higher (and Precision lower) for DH than RF. This
                        indicates that the method is slightly more likely to predict DH than it
                        should.
                    More interesting is what happens in the third phase, when the system applies
                        the model generated from all 29 training texts to classifying the 16 holdout
                        texts, which it did not see during the training phase. Here the system
                        classifies each text as belonging to whichever class it estimates to be more
                        likely. It also ranks them according to a certainty measure, called
                            credence. This is simply the geometric mean of two
                        other scores, labelled confidence and
                            congruity. The system will always assign a class to
                        each holdout case: the point of this ranking is to alert users to cases
                        where this assignment is uncertain.
                    All TOCCATA models work by assigning similarity scores to each text that
                        measure the similarity of that text to the models of each category in the
                        training data. Confidence is calculated from the
                        difference between the maximum of these similarity scores, which determines
                        the category assigned, and the mean of the other similarity scores. A larger
                        difference indicates higher confidence, but the number used in this output
                        isn't the difference itself but an index of how far up in the ranking it
                        would fall among the difference scores obtained during the subsampling phase
                        (of which there were 255 in this example). To be specific, if W is the
                        number of correct decisions with lower difference scores during the
                        subsampling phase and L is the number of incorrect decisions with lower
                        difference scores during that phase, then "confidence" is (W+L/2+0.5) /
                        (S+1), where S is the number of subsampling trials.
                    The value labelled congruity assesses how well the text
                        matches its assigned category, independent of how well it matches other
                        categories. It measures the actual similarity score compared to all
                        similarity scores of the assigned category calculated during the subsampling
                        phase. Congruity is computed as (0.5 + B) / (S+1), where B is the number of
                        cases during the S subsampling trials in which the class selected had a
                        lower similarity score. Thus congruity uses the randomized trials to
                        estimate the empirical strength of similarity of the present case to its
                        assigned category, while confidence estimates how the gap between the chosen
                        category and the rest compares with those encountered during those
                        trials.
                    Overall, therefore, ranking by credence should give an empirically based
                        indication of how much credibility to attach to each decision on the holdout
                        sample. For the 16 holdout texts under consideration, the output is listed
                        below.
                	
    ==== Posthoc ranking :
    rank    credence    filename                    pred:true   confidence  congruity
    1       0.9436      DH_ProphetVoice_1991.txt    DH + DH     0.8945      0.9954
    2       0.9185      CO_Zulu_2012.txt            DH ? CO     0.8555      0.9861
    3       0.8702      RF_Robayes_1996.txt         RF + RF     0.8516      0.8893
    4       0.7525      DH_EvoStylo_1998.txt        DH + DH     0.6758      0.8380
    5       0.6804      DH_Fed2_1995.txt            DH + DH     0.6211      0.7454
    6       0.6355      RF_Fed4_1995.txt            RF + RF     0.6172      0.6544
    7       0.6314      DH_Fed3_1995.txt            DH + DH     0.5703      0.6991
    8       0.5717      CO_PublicMan_2010.txt       DH ? CO     0.5078      0.6435
    9       0.5509      CO_Formulang_2015.txt       RF ? CO     0.5352      0.5671
    10      0.4783      DH_Fed5_1995.txt            DH + DH     0.4297      0.5324
    11      0.4593      CO_FoundTran_2014.txt       RF ? CO     0.4336      0.4866
    12      0.4593      RF_Stylochron_1999.txt      RF + RF     0.4336      0.4866
    13      0.1955      MO_Authorid_2014.txt        RF ? MO     0.1406      0.2718
    14      0.1941      RF_BullBear_1989.txt        RF + RF     0.1387      0.2718
    15      0.1681      CO_Feds_1995.txt            RF ? CO     0.1094      0.2584
    16      0.0784      RF_Fed1_1995.txt            RF + RF     0.0273      0.2248
    +?+++++??+?+?+?+
                    
                    Thus, for example, DH_ProphetVoice_1991 with credence 0.9436 is very
                        confidently ascribed to DH; while RF_Fed1_1995 with credence 0.0784 is
                        ascribed to RF but with very little confidence. It is correct, but only
                        just. (In this example all 10 holdout texts of known authorship are
                        correctly classified.)
                    The above listing illustrates the use of a single method, MAWS. Table 10,
                        below, collates the results of six such runs. The 16 holdout texts are
                        listed in Table 10 along with their rankings when each of the 6 chosen
                        methods was used to create a model on the training data and that model
                        applied to the holdout texts.
                    
                        Holdout texts ranked on the DH-RF polarity, consensus of 6
                            methods.
                        
                            filename
                            total
                            deltoid
                            maws
                            vote
                            tokspans
                            tagsets
                            taverns
                        
                        
                            DH_ProphetVoice_1991.txt
                            87
                            16
                            16
                            12
                            14
                            14
                            15
                        
                        
                            CO_Zulu_2012.txt
                            78
                            14
                            15
                            13
                            13
                            15
                            8
                        
                        
                            DH_EvoStylo_1998.txt
                            65
                            10
                            13
                            15
                            10
                            8
                            9
                        
                        
                            CO_PublicMan_2010.txt
                            61
                            15
                            9
                            5
                            16
                            11
                            5
                        
                        
                            DH_Fed2_1995.txt
                            46
                            7
                            12
                            11
                            5
                            -2
                            13
                        
                        
                            DH_Fed3_1995.txt
                            35
                            1
                            10
                            8
                            -1
                            3
                            14
                        
                        
                            DH_Fed5_1995.txt
                            12
                            3
                            7
                            1
                            -2
                            5
                            -2
                        
                        
                            RF_Fed1_1995.txt
                            9.5
                            6
                            -1
                            -2.5
                            3
                            1
                            3
                        
                        
                            CO_Feds_1995.txt
                            -6.5
                            8
                            -2
                            -2.5
                            -7
                            -4
                            1
                        
                        
                            MO_Authorid_2014.txt
                            -36
                            -2
                            -4
                            -4
                            -9
                            -10
                            -7
                        
                        
                            RF_BullBear_1989.txt
                            -38
                            -4
                            -3
                            -10
                            -6
                            -9
                            -6
                        
                        
                            RF_Stylochron_1999.txt
                            -45.5
                            -9
                            -5.5
                            -9
                            -4
                            -6
                            -12
                        
                        
                            CO_FoundTran_2014.txt
                            -51.5
                            -5
                            -5.5
                            -6
                            -12
                            -13
                            -10
                        
                        
                            RF_Fed4_1995.txt
                            -55
                            -11
                            -11
                            -14
                            -8
                            -7
                            -4
                        
                        
                            CO_Formulang_2015.txt
                            -65
                            -12
                            -8
                            -7
                            -15
                            -12
                            -11
                        
                        
                            RF_Robayes_1996.txt
                            -86
                            -13
                            -14
                            -16
                            -11
                            -16
                            -16
                        
                    
                    The entries in this table are ranked according to the values in the column
                        labelled total. This is simply the sum of the values in
                        the last 6 columns. Each column contains the rank position of the text
                        concerned when a model of the method named, trained on the 29 training
                        documents, is applied to this holdout sample. Because this problem has been
                        framed as a dichotomy (DH versus RF) the rank position in the output has
                        been signed, positive if the class assigned is DH and negative if it is RF.
                        Sixteen texts were under consideration, so 16 means a very certain decision
                        for DH, -16 a very certain decision for RF; while 1 or -1 would mean that
                        the decision was ranked last on creditworthiness; and so on.
                    Overall, this aggregation of results from 6 methods shows that
                        DH_ProphetVoice_1991 was judged most surely by DH and RF_Robayes_1996 most
                        surely by RF. Of the top 6, four are by DH and two by DH with a co-author
                        not present in the training sample. Of the bottom 6, four are by RF and two,
                        again, by RF with co-authors absent from the training sample.
                    The interesting items are the middle four, i.e. those decisions where the
                        system is most uncertain. Two of these are portions of The Federalist revisited; a third is the full paper itself, and
                        the fourth is the distractor by Michael Oakes (also
                        absent from the training sample), on author identification.
                    This output is more naturally interpreted with the aid of a graph. Figure 8
                        shows this data in 2 dimensions. The horizontal axis simply shows the scores
                        used to rank Table 4b divided by 96, its theoretical maximum. The vertical
                        axis is the average credence score given by TOCCATA to the decision. It is an index
                        of certainty, as explained above.
                    Since these scores are related, an approximate U-shape or V-shape of the
                        plotted points is inevitable. However, the valley of
                        the V is useful in identifying more clearly than in a table the dubious
                        texts, those that do not belong securely at either end of the polarity.
                        Dotted lines demarcate this area.
                    
                        Holdout co-authorship texts plotted according to credence (vertical)
                            and direction (horizontal).
                        
                    
                    This gives us an idea of what to expect when the same procedure is applied to
                        a more genuinely problematic case. It is apparent that the document written
                        jointly by both the contrasted authors (CO_Feds_1995) sits almost exactly on
                        the borderline of the polarity between them. Interestingly, we see that
                        co-authored pieces where the second author isn't part of the contrast in
                        focus can be assigned quite confidently to the author who is part of that
                        contrast. The single distractor, MO_Autho_2014, does not gravitate strongly
                        towards either pole, although appearing somewhat more Forsythian than
                        Holmesian. The two pieces that land so close together as to render them
                        illegible are CO_FoundTran_2014 and RF_Fed4, both on the RF side.
                    From this graph it would seem that anything with a mean credence score of
                        less than about 0.4 cannot confidently be ascribed to either of the two
                        authors being compared, as this implies a relatively neutral polarity whose
                        small difference from zero could easily be due to chance. This would put 6
                        of the 16 texts into a zone of uncertainty. The two texts deepest into this
                        zone of uncertainty are RF_Fed1 and DH_Fed5. These are the (historical)
                        introduction and conclusions sections respectively. Although we wrote these
                        individually, they are the most general sections, arising out of many
                        discussions and attempting to convey a coherent overall message. Perhaps it
                        is unsurprising that we achieved something like a common style for this
                        joint enterprise. By contrast, in parts 2, 3 and 4, we were describing the
                        results of applying our own specialized analytical techniques. It is
                        evident, therefore, that despite using methods that rely mainly on frequent
                        function words or part-of-speech tags, the factors of topic and/or genre
                        still have some influence on the classification process. Hence this method
                        is only partially immune to effects other than authorship.In principle
                            the fact that the TOCCATA methods aren't immune to the effects of
                            content and/or register could be ameliorated by weighting the more
                            content-free methods, such as Delta, more heavily when the system is
                            used for authorship attribution; though this was not attempted in the
                            present investigation, as it would require nontrivial amendments to the
                            software.
                    Thus, turning towards Paine and contemporaries, it must be acknowledged that
                        we have no magic bullet, but we do have a way separating some of the
                        stronger signals from the noise.
                
                
                    4.2 Paine and Contemporaries
                    For the corresponding experiment on the Rights of
                            Man, we used the 106 text files detailed in Appendix 1. The same
                        six methods (Table 9) were applied using the TOCCATA software. This time, 20
                        texts were chosen as a holdout sample, using the other 86 as training data.
                        The holdout texts are listed in Table 12, along with their (signed)
                        rankings, derived as explained in the previous section. Again, the task for
                        the classifier was framed as a dichotomy, to distinguish Paine from all
                        other authors in the corpus.
                    The idea of treating Non-Paine as distinct text category raises several
                        issues, not least of which is: how could anyone sample the writings of this
                        composite author? This choice is primarily dictated by
                        the practical consideration that we have many fewer documents in English by
                        the prime suspect for the other contributor to TROM, namely the Marquis of
                        Lafayette, than by Paine -- and those only in genres (autobiography and
                        letters) which are relatively rare in Paine's corpus. Nevertheless, we find
                        encouragement in taking this route from the finding of Sigelman et al.
                        (1997) that Paine's writing style is indeed markedly different from 14 other
                        authors contemporary with him . Thus, posing a
                        contrast of Paine versus the rest (where the rest includes Lafayette among
                        seven other authors: see Appendix 1) is not purely fanciful. The ultimate
                        justification is pragmatic: does it shed light on the question at stake?
                    As illustration, an extract from the output listing using tokspans method
                        with spansize of 3 is reproduced below.
                	 
    ==== Posthoc ranking :
    rank    credence    filename                    pred:true               confidence  congruity
    1       0.9130      TROM_Rights_1.txt           Paine + Paine           0.8397      0.9926
    2       0.8424      Queried_Federalist_19.txt   NonPaine + NonPaine     0.7710      0.9205
    3       0.8120      PaineT_Government.txt       Paine + Paine           0.7061      0.9338
    4       0.7883      PaineT_Rubicon.txt          Paine + Paine           0.6870      0.9044
    5       0.7529      PaineT_AgeReason_2iii.txt   Paine + Paine           0.7634      0.7426
    6       0.6525      Lafayette_InAmerica_2b.txt  NonPaine + NonPaine     0.7252      0.5872
    7       0.5705      Queried_Federalist_20.txt   NonPaine + NonPaine     0.4332      0.7513
    8       0.5462      Queried_Federalist_57.txt   NonPaine + NonPaine     0.5363      0.5564
    9       0.5348      JohnsonS_Idler103_1760.txt  NonPaine + NonPaine     0.5840      0.4897
    10      0.4821      PaineT_AbbeRaynal_1.txt     Paine + Paine           0.2748      0.8456
    11      0.4783      Queried_Federalist_52.txt   NonPaine + NonPaine     0.6069      0.3769
    12      0.3063      TROM_Mid1.txt               Paine ? Queried         0.3645      0.2574
    13      0.2893      JeffersonT_NotesVirginia.t  NonPaine + NonPaine     0.0992      0.8436
    14      0.2823      Lafayette_toWashington_177  NonPaine + NonPaine     0.3416      0.2333
    15      0.1829      TROM_Declaration.txt        NonPaine ? Queried      0.2557      0.1308
    16      0.1689      Queried_AfricanSlavery.txt  NonPaine ? Queried      0.2099      0.1359
    17      0.1479      TROM_Mid2.txt               Paine ? Queried         0.1565      0.1397
    18      0.1437      Queried_UnhappyMarriages.t  NonPaine ? Queried      0.1202      0.1718
    19      0.0293      Shax_sonn109.txt            Paine - NonPaine        0.1164      0.0074
    20      0.0202      Theo_749f.txt               Paine - NonPaine        0.0553      0.0074
    +++++++++++?++????--
                   
                    Once again the credence ranking does what it is meant to do: there are 2
                        mistakes, but they lie at the bottom of the ranking; in fact, the last 6 of
                        these 20 items consist of four queried cases and two errors, both the latter
                        by authors outside the training data — the final item even in another
                        language.
                    The top 10 NonPaine & top 10 Paine token spans actually chosen in this
                        run are shown in Table 11.
                    
                        Distinctive NonPaine & Paine token 3-spans.
                        
                            Most discriminatory NonPaine token spans
                            ('of', 'the') ('the',) ('to',) ('to', 'the') ('of',) ('the',
                                'of') ('by', 'the') () ('their',) ('in', 'the')
                        
                        
                            Most discriminatory Paine token spans
                            ('is',) ('and',) ('and', 'the') ('it',) ('it', 'is') ('or',)
                                ('they',) ('of', 'a') ('as',) ('has',)
                        
                    
                    This shows that many of the items are shorter than the maximum spansize of 3.
                        For example, the span ('it', 'is') defines a triple containing 'it' and 'is'
                        in that order along with one other word not in the high-frequency list,
                        which in this case consisted of 112 words. Thus perhaps it
                            is, it surely is and it is
                            unlikely would all count as examples of this feature. The
                        results of aggregating the six selected methods are summarized in Table
                        12.
                    
                        Holdout texts ranked on Paine-NonPaine polarity, consensus of 6
                            methods.
                        
                            filename
                            total
                            deltoid
                            maws
                            vote
                            tokspans
                            tagsets
                            taverns
                        
                        
                            Queried_Federalist_19
                            96
                            17
                            17
                            13
                            19
                            15
                            15
                        
                        
                            Queried_Federalist_52
                            94
                            14
                            16
                            16
                            10
                            18
                            20
                        
                        
                            Queried_Federalist_57
                            84
                            11
                            11
                            17
                            13
                            13
                            19
                        
                        
                            Lafayette_InAmerica_2b
                            82
                            13
                            10
                            20
                            15
                            10
                            14
                        
                        
                            Queried_Federalist_20
                            69
                            16
                            8
                            10
                            14
                            12
                            9
                        
                        
                            TROM_Declaration
                            44
                            5
                            15
                            3
                            6
                            9
                            6
                        
                        
                            Lafayette_toWashington_17790613
                            40
                            9
                            9
                            8
                            7
                            3
                            4
                        
                        
                            JeffersonT_NotesVirginia
                            38
                            10
                            -2
                            2
                            8
                            8
                            12
                        
                        
                            Theo_749f
                            30
                            4
                            20
                            5
                            -1
                            1
                            1
                        
                        
                            JohnsonS_Idler103_1760
                            5
                            -2
                            1
                            -7
                            12
                            -7
                            8
                        
                        
                            Shax_sonn109
                            4
                            1
                            18
                            -18
                            -2
                            2
                            3
                        
                        
                            TROM_Mid1
                            -7
                            8
                            5
                            -9
                            -9
                            5
                            -7
                        
                        
                            Queried_AfricanSlavery
                            -17
                            -3
                            -6
                            -15
                            5
                            4
                            -2
                        
                        
                            Queried_UnhappyMarriages
                            -18.5
                            -6
                            -4
                            -11
                            3
                            -6
                            5
                        
                        
                            TROM_Mid2
                            -42.5
                            -7
                            -4
                            -4
                            -4
                            -14
                            -10
                        
                        
                            PaineT_Government
                            -58
                            -19
                            -14
                            1
                            -18
                            -19
                            11
                        
                        
                            PaineT_AbbeRaynal_1
                            -69
                            -15
                            -7
                            -6
                            -11
                            -17
                            -13
                        
                        
                            PaineT_Rubicon
                            -89
                            -18
                            -13
                            -12
                            -17
                            -11
                            -18
                        
                        
                            PaineT_AgeReason_2iii
                            -92
                            -12
                            -12
                            -19
                            -16
                            -16
                            -17
                        
                        
                            TROM_Rights_1
                            -109
                            -20
                            -19
                            -14
                            -20
                            -20
                            -16
                        
                    
                    This holdout sample includes five texts treated as being uncontentiously
                        ascribed to Paine (including TROM_Rights_1 which is the initial part of the
                            Rights of Man, roughly 21400 words in
                        length, leading up to the queried passage). There are also four dubious
                        texts. AfricanSlavery and UnhappyMarriages have been de-attributed by
                        scholars working at The Institute for Thomas Paine Studies at Iona College:
                        http://thomaspaine.org/pages/writings.html#deattributed.
                    The two other dubious texts are TROM_Mid1 and TROM_Mid2, the first and second
                        half of the 6000-word passage immediately preceding the Declaration identified by Clark (2015) as likely to be by
                        Lafayette  (See Table 3). The other 11 texts are
                        unambiguously not by Paine, including the Declaration itself, which is identified in Paine's book as a
                        quotation. The four Federalist essays are only
                            queried in the sense that James Madison probably
                        wrote most of them, but Alexander Hamilton may have contributed to some
                        extent (mainly to numbers 19 and 20). In any case, they definitely weren't
                        written by Paine.
                    Finally, the non-Paine texts include three distractors
                        which are by authors absent from the 86 training texts. One is William
                        Shakespeare's sonnet 109 (at a mere 117 words easily the shortest in the
                        whole corpus); another is an Idler essay by Samuel Johnson; the third is a
                        letter by Theo Van Gogh to his brother Vincent, written in March 1889, which
                        is in French! We believe that subjecting such outsiders
                        to the same analytic techniques as more directly relevant documents provides
                        valuable clues regarding the interpretation of the results, which are
                        portrayed graphically in Figure 9.
                    
                        Paine/non-Paine holdout texts plotted according to credence (vertical)
                            and polarity (horizontal).
                        
                    
                    In this case, all five texts unambiguously by Paine are clearly shown as
                        such. In addition the four Federalist papers
                        (Quer_Feder_19, _20, _52 and _57) and the extract from Lafayette in America, Part 2, are clearly marked as unlike
                        Paine. Thus all 10 items with a credence score above 0.4 are correctly
                        attributed, five to each side. Two of the non-Paine texts with authors
                        present in the training data, namely Lafayette's letter to George Washington
                        (Lafa_toWas_1779), written in June 1779, and Jefferson's Notes on the State
                        of Virginia (Jeff_Notes) fall on the non-Paine side of the polarity, but
                        with relatively weak confidence. In the case of Lafayette's letter, it is
                        interesting to note that it falls almost exactly in the same position as
                        TROM_Declaration, i.e. the Declaration, English
                        translation. Lafayette is known to have played a part in drafting this
                        famous declaration, so the idea that he assisted Paine with rendering it
                        into English is very plausible.
                    The three clear-cut distractors, by Shakespeare, Johnson
                        and Theo van Gogh, all fall deep into the zone of uncertainty, across the
                        half-way point away from Paine, though not by much. Here the method is
                        performing exactly as required. As regards the genuinely queried items, all
                        four of them also fall into the zone of uncertainty. On this evidence, there
                        is no reason to doubt Iona College's de-attribution of both African Slavery in America and Reflections on Unhappy Marriages (Quer_Afric,
                        Quer_Unhap). They certainly do not typify Paine's writing style. Nor do the
                        two halves of the suspect 6000-word section identified by Clark. Given that
                        TROM_Rights_1, the part of the book leading up to them, emerges as the most
                        strongly Paine-like of all 20 holdout texts, this corroborates the
                        contention that the queried passage is unlikely to have been written by
                        Paine alone. In fact, these two pieces behave under this form of analysis
                        almost exactly like the unquestioned co-authorship (by Holmes & Forsyth)
                        of section 4.1, falling near the borderline on this polarity between
                        non-Paine and Paine.
                    We repeated this procedure a number of times, selecting different training
                        and holdout sets at random, though keeping African
                            Slavery in America, Reflections on Unhappy Marriages,
                        TROM_Rights_1, TROM_Mid1 and TROM_Mid2 always in the holdout sample. The
                        results were essentially similar, as exemplified by the plot in Figure
                        10.
                    
                        Paine/non-Paine holdout texts plotted according to credence and
                            polarity, alternative training/holdout split.
                        
                    
                    We regard these results as further supportive evidence for Jonathan Clark's
                        contention. In this connection it may be worth noting that TROM_Mid2, the
                        second half of the doubtful passage is rated somewhat more similar to Paine
                        than the first half. This could be a genre effect, in that the former
                        section is a brief history of the dramatic events leading up to the King's
                        journey from Versailles to attend the Parliament in Paris in which a
                        starring role is played by a certain M. de la Fayette — rather like some
                        parts of the autobiographical work Lafayette in
                            America. TROM_Mid2 also deals with stirring events, including
                        the storming of the Bastille, but this mainly consists of a reference to a
                        fuller description earlier in the book, and in general this part is rather
                        more in keeping with the reflective parts of the book which come after the
                            Declaration, and are presumably by Paine
                        himself. It is not unreasonable to suppose that, even if Lafayette provided
                        a ready-made account, Paine might more heavily edit the more philosophic
                        portions than accounts of events to which Lafayette was personally a
                        witness. Still, this difference is minor: neither portion is typical of
                        Paine's writing.
                    In summary, this form of analysis, based on using the TOCCATA package, tends
                        to support the findings of our analysis in section 3, based on a
                        Burrows-style approach. This lends further weight to the assertion that the
                        queried 6000-word portion of the Rights of Man
                        was probably not written solely by Thomas Paine.
                
            

                5. Rolling Stylometry
                Up to this point, we have used prior knowledge, in the case of our own paper, or
                    prior hypothesis, in the case of TROM, to divide our questioned texts into
                    portions for individual scrutiny. This approach could be viewed as falling
                    within a hypothesis-testing paradigm. Recently, however, an alternative, more
                    exploratory, mode, known as rolling stylometry, has been
                    developed by a number of researchers. (See, for example: 
                    
                    
                    
                    ).
                In this approach, a questioned text is divided sequentially into fixed-length
                    blocks, usually overlapping, and each block is compared to a training sample of
                    texts with known authorship (or, more generally, known class membership). Then
                    some measure of proximity or distance to the known texts (or an aggregation of
                    them by category) is computed for each block, and these scores are plotted as
                    y-values against sequential position in the questioned text.
                This approach suits our research question very well, so we decided to apply the
                    rolling-stylometry functions of the stylo package 
                    to the full text of TROM and plot the results.
                
                    Rolling Delta scores of successive 1000-word blocks of TROM compared to 14
                        other texts.
                    
                
                To produce Figure 11, we selected 14 of our larger texts, nine by Paine, four by
                    Lafayette and one by Hamilton, for comparison with TROM and used the
                    rolling.delta() function of the stylo package. (For this purpose we joined
                    together the separate portions of Lafayette In
                        America I & II, to restore them as two whole works; we also
                    joined the two parts of Paine's pamphlet entitled Letter to
                        the Abbé Raynal.) The x-axis gives the starting position of each
                    block within the 40000+ words of TROM. The y-axis uses Burrows's Delta as a
                    distance measure, based on the 100 most frequent word tokens. Block size chosen
                    was 1000 words with an increment of 500; thus the first block consists of words
                    1-1000, the second of words 501-1500, the next of words 1001-2000 and so on.
                The black points and lines show the Delta-distances of each block from the texts
                    by Paine; the green and red lines show distances to Lafayette's works; and the
                    blue line, for reference, shows distances to the control text by Hamilton. The
                    red line is in almost all places the most distant from the TROM sections,
                    presumably indicating a genre difference: it is an inter-personal letter
                    (written in English). However, there are three sections where the lowest, i.e.
                    most similar, text is by Lafayette. The first of these starts at position 6000;
                    the second at position 9000; and the third falls between 23000 and 25000, almost
                    in the middle of the passage queried by Clark.
                We take this third section as further corroboration of the results reported above
                    in sections 3 to 4. More interesting in this context, perhaps, is the indication
                    that two earlier sections of the work are also atypical of Paine's style, and
                    indeed similar to Lafayette's. To investigate this further, we applied a second
                    function supplied with the stylo package, namely rolling.classify(). For this we
                    again used a block size of 1000 words with a step size of 500. Other settings
                    were system defaults. We used the same comparison texts, except that Hamilton's
                    was omitted, to give a simple 2-class classification problem. The program
                    produced the graph shown here as Figure 12.
                
                    Rolling.classify() using Delta, applied to TROM.
                    
                
                Here the portions ascribed to Paine are coloured green, while those ascribed to
                    Lafayette are coloured red. The three horizontal bars of colour indicate the
                    system's first, second and third choice category. Again we see a work mostly
                    attributed to Paine, but with three places where the text resembles writing by
                    Lafayette. The dotted vertical lines labelled Q,
                        D1 and dx show, respectively, the
                    beginning of Clark's questioned portion; the end of that portion; and the end of
                    the Declaration itself. Within these limits, the
                    program finds Lafayette as a plausible author of a majority of the text.
                The earlier portions, just after position 5000 and just before position 10000 are
                    also intriguing. To investigate these in particular, we developed a sequential
                    version of the TOCCATA software described earlier which allows us to use
                    TOCCATA's methods in a rolling fashion on a single queried
                        text.This software, slabsim.py, has not yet been integrated with the
                        TOCCATA package online, since it is presently undocumented and still being
                        refined. This made it possible to supplement the results obtained
                    from stylo with a method that differs significantly from Delta by using a larger
                    feature set and a different way of calculating similarity (the Vote method,
                    described in Appendix 5). It also made it slightly easier to identify the
                    precise locations of the passages rated atypical of Paine.
                This Python3 program (slabsim.py) operates in two distinct phases. Phase 1 uses
                    the leave-1-out method of cross-validation in which one text at a time is
                    removed from the training sample and a block of the requested size is taken at
                    random from this left-out text (or two blocks if the text is large enough), to
                    be classified by a model formed from the remaining training texts. Since TOCCATA
                    models produce similarity scores, this permits collection of a series of
                    similarity scores of text blocks not used to form the model when compared with
                    that model. This set is sorted and can be used in the subsequent phase to yield
                    empirical centile scores for each block in the queried
                    text. 
                For example, let us consider a case using deltoid similarity (1/Delta, since
                    TOCCATA works with similarities not dissimilarities). If the training texts
                    yield 80 blocks of the requisite size having deltoid similarity scores ranging
                    from 0.8 to 2.5 with reference to the models built by excluding each of those 80
                    blocks in turn, these 80 numbers can be sorted and saved for phase 2. Let us
                    further suppose that the 8th and 9th largest of these 80 similarity values are
                    1.7 and 1.6.
                In phase 2, the program runs sequentially through the blocks of the test text.
                    For each block a similarity score is computed comparing the text block to the
                    training-set model. This score is not used directly; instead it is expressed as
                    a centile or percentage with reference to the set generated during the
                    leave-1-out phase. To continue the above example, if the deltoid similarity for
                    a given block were 1.65 this would place it between the 8th and 9th highest of
                    the values retained from phase 1. This beats all but 8 (=72) of the 80 scores, so would be given a centile score of 72/80, or 90 in percentage terms. Thus
                    the centile score for each block in the test text is the percentage of
                    similarity scores obtained during the cross-validation phase which are beaten
                    by, i.e. lower than, the score obtained for the block concerned by applying the
                    classification model to the text under consideration.
                A reason for this 2-step procedure is that many different similarity measures are
                    available in TOCCATA, some of which have no natural interpretation, and this
                    puts them all onto a common scale. Another point is that the initial
                    cross-validation phase gives an unbiased empirical estimate of the expected
                    distribution of similarity scores for unseen blocks of this size, of known
                    category, when compared with a model formed from a training set of that
                    category.
                Figure 13 shows results of applying the Vote method to successive 1000-word
                    blocks of TROM, again with a 500-word step size, using 86 training texts, 24 by
                    Paine and 62 by our other authors, including 17 by Lafayette, all categorized
                    for this exercise as NonPaine. The y-axis, labelled
                        cent is a centile score computed as described above.
                    The point to re-emphasize is that these scores are not themselves similarities,
                    but rather indices of how the calculated similarities compare with the
                    similarities computed during the leave-1-out phase when comparing unseen blocks
                    by Paine with the rest of his works.
                
                    Centile similarity scores of 1000-word blocks of TROM, Vote method.
                    
                
                Here the vertical lines mark the start of the section queried by Clark and the
                    end of the Declaration. The heights of the points
                    are centiles assessing how similar each block is to the Paine training-text
                    model, with reference to the values computed during the cross-validation phase.
                    The dashed line results from applying the loess() function in R  with degree=2 and other parameters as default.
                    This function produces a smoothed curve from a series of
                    points, assumed to be spaced at equal intervals. The jagged red line is a
                    different kind of smooth curve produced by taking a rolling
                    median along the series, in this case the median of nine items — the point
                    concerned and the four points on either side of it.
                The graph broadly agrees with the results of rolling stylo,
                    but we can extract a little more information from it in this case. The queried
                    section appears very clearly as atypical of Paine. Of the total of 80 points,
                    eighteen fall below the 20th centile, of these, twelve fall within the section
                    demarcated by vertical lines. The rolling median dips dramatically in this
                    section, once again tending to support Clark's contention.
                Nearly as dramatic is the dip before word-position 10000. This is due to two
                    groups of 3 points which on this measure are unlike Paine's style. The first of
                    these defines a segment of 2000 words starting at position 5000. The second of
                    defines a segment of 2000 words beginning at position 8000.
                It is natural to wonder what these sections of the work contain. Referring to the
                    two earlier, smaller, atypical sections as Block 1 and Block 2, and the main
                    atypical section as Block 3, Appendix 7 shows the paragraphs nearest the
                    beginnings and ends of these blocks. All three blocks describe historical events
                    leading up the Declaration of Rights: the storming
                    of the Bastille; the expedition to Versailles followed by the journey of King
                    and Queen to Paris; the deliberations of the assemblies, including the historic
                    tennis-court oath. Block 3 ends just prior to a brief quotation — introduced as
                    an energetic apostrophe by M. de la Fayette.
                To illustrate what sort of plot would result from applying this technique, with
                    the same training set and the same block size and step size, to a different
                    text, we created an artificial composite text-file consisting of the following
                    four files: Lafayette_In America_2b, Queried_Federalist_19 (jointly written by
                    Hamilton & Madison), PaineT_AgeReason_2iii, and
                    Lafayette_toWashington_17790613. None of these were present in the training
                    sample used of 86 texts. The part by Paine of this mixed-author text begins at
                    position 5306 and ends at position 10080.
                Of course, concatenating slabs by different writers is not how co-authorship
                    operates in reality, except perhaps in extreme cases. Among other things, the
                    topic focus of each part of this synthetic document is
                    different. Nevertheless, it does give a point of comparison as a basis for
                    interpreting the plot produced on a real-life putative mixed-author text such as
                    TROM. Figure 14 shows the result.
                
                    Centile similarity scores to Paine, 1000-word blocks of composite
                        mixed-author text.
                    
                
                As might be expected, this gives a more clear-cut picture. The vertical lines
                    delimit the portion by Paine. Note that the point preceding the left vertical
                    line, at startpos 5000, does contain some text from Tom Paine's section.
                    Likewise, the two points preceding the right vertical line contain text by
                    Lafayette.
                What this highlights, in comparison with Figure 13, is that the section of TROM
                    following the Declaration resembles the pure-Paine
                    portion of this composite text much more than does the part preceding Clark's
                    questioned passage. It would seem that the latter part of TROM is consistently
                    more similar to Paine's normal style of writing than the part preceding the
                    questioned passage. The earlier part, although it is confidently ascribed to
                    Paine when taken as a whole (subsection 4.2), exhibits signs of mixed authorship
                    throughout.
                A plausible explanation for this pattern would be that Lafayette supplied Paine
                    with a historical account of events leading up to the Declaration, portions of which were inserted piecemeal &/or
                    heavily edited into the first half of TROM, and almost verbatim into the passage
                    immediately prior to the Declaration. The later
                    portion, representing Paine's reflections on the Declaration and its historical antecedents, was then written by
                    Paine alone.
                This conjecture is compatible with the stylometric evidence, and indeed suggested
                    by that evidence, though it would require corroboration by information external
                    to the texts here examined to be accepted as historical fact.
            

                6. Discussion
                The results from the foregoing investigations lead us to believe that the
                    contention of Jonathan Clark (2015) is highly credible . A long passage of text within TROM leading up to the Declaration of Rights
                    itself is very uncharacteristic of Tom Paine's famously distinctive writing
                    style. We have also identified two earlier, shorter but still substantial,
                    passages that are atypical in language with respect to Paine's other
                    writings.
                All three passages refer to momentous historical events, so the possibility
                    remains that Paine adapted his habitual language when writing in a genre that he
                    seldom otherwise used. Nevertheless, Paine's familiarity with Lafayette, who had
                    first-hand knowledge of these events, along with the fact that the main queried
                    passage yields results very like those of our known co-authorship (subsection
                    4.1), leads us to believe that some degree of co-authorship is the most likely
                    explanation. The fact that all three passages assign a central role to Lafayette
                    merely strengthens this belief.
                A likely scenario is that Lafayette supplied written descriptions of the events
                    about which he knew more than Paine, which Paine then inserted into his book at
                    points he considered suited to the thrust of his argument, with greater or
                    lesser degrees of editing. Stylometry alone cannot prove this. The putative
                    co-authors are dead. But the stylometric evidence presented here is entirely
                    consistent with such a supposition.
                From a methodological viewpoint, we believe this study shows that the TOCCATA
                    package warrants consideration as an addition to the toolkit of stylometric
                    researchers. Furthermore, using rolling" stylometry, as
                    developed by Eder (2016) in particular, on this problem has confirmed the value
                    of this method within the field of computational stylistics . We consider that our use of more than one
                        smoothing method in visualizing the results produced by
                    such procedures represents a contribution to this subfield, and intend to work
                    to further refine such techniques in future, and make the software
                    implementation freely available.
            

                Acknowledgements
                We wish to thank Juliana Hessel of The College of New Jersey for collecting some
                    of the electronic texts used in this investigation and for performing a pilot
                    study on this question. We would also like to thank two anonymous reviewers for
                    helpful comments on a previous draft of this paper.
            

                Sources of Software Employed
                
                    formulib software: http://www.richardsandesforsyth.net/software.html
                    GoTagger: http://web4u.setsunan.ac.jp/Website/TreeOnline.htm
                    Python3: https://www.python.org/downloads/
                    R: https://www.r-project.org/
                    stylo: https://sites.google.com/site/computationalstylistics/stylo
                    toccata program: http://www.richardsandesforsyth.net/software.html
                
            

                Appendix 1: Paine Corpus Catalogue
                A zipped file containing these texts is available for research purposes at: http://www.richardsandesforsyth.net/pubs.html.
                
                    
                        filename
                        author
                        work
                        source
                    
                    
                        FranklinB_WesternColonies
                        Franklin
                        Plan to settle 2 western colonies
                        http://www.gutenberg.org
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_Continentalist_5
                        Hamilton
                        Continentalist No. 5
                        http://press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_Continentalist_6
                        Hamilton
                        Continentalist No. 6
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_Federalist_13
                        Hamilton
                        Federalist paper 13
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_Federalist_25
                        Hamilton
                        Federalist paper 25
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_Federalist_69
                        Hamilton
                        Federalist paper 69
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_Federalist_77
                        Hamilton
                        Federalist paper 77
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_Manufactures_2
                        Hamilton
                        Report on Manufactures, part II
                        http://www.constitution.org/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_MilitarySupplies
                        Hamilton
                        Plan for Military Supplies
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_Pacificus_1
                        Hamilton
                        Pacificus No. 1
                        http://press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_PlanGovernment
                        Hamilton
                        Plan of Government
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_PublicCredit_1
                        Hamilton
                        Public Credit Report 1
                        http://www.schillerinstitute.org/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_PublicCredit_2
                        Hamilton
                        Public Credit Report 2
                        https://founders.archives.gov/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_PublicLands
                        Hamilton
                        Report on Disposition of Lands
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_toHolt_1778
                        Hamilton
                        Letters to Mr Holt, NY Journal
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_toJay_17790314
                        Hamilton
                        Letter to John Jay
                        http://press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_toLafayette_17891006
                        Hamilton
                        to Lafayette, 061089
                        https://founders.archives.gov/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_toMorris_17820813
                        Hamilton
                        Letter to Robert Morris
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_toWashington_17890505
                        Hamilton
                        Letter to General Washington
                        http://press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/
                    
                    
                        HamiltonA_VindicationCongress
                        Hamilton
                        Full Vindication of Measures
                        https://founders.archives.gov/
                    
                    
                        JayJ_Federalist_4
                        Jay
                        Federalist paper 4
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        JayJ_Federalist_64
                        Jay
                        Federalist paper 64
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_Autobiography_1
                        Jefferson
                        Autobiography, part 1
                        en.wikisource.org
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_Inaugural_1805
                        Jefferson
                        Second Inaugural address
                        en.wikisource.org
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_Independence
                        Jefferson
                        Declaration of Independence
                        www.archives.gov
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_NotesVirginia
                        Jefferson
                        Notes on State of Virginia, 17-20
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_StateofUnion_1801
                        Jefferson
                        First State of Union address
                        en.wikisource.org
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_StateofUnion_1808
                        Jefferson
                        Eighth State of Union address
                        en.wikisource.org
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_toGovernorDunmore
                        Jefferson
                        Address to Governor Dunmore
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_toHenry_17790327
                        Jefferson
                        Letter to Governor Patrick Henry
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_toMadison_17851028
                        Jefferson
                        Letter to Madison
                        en.wikisource.org
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_toMason_17910204
                        Jefferson
                        Letter to Gerorge Mason
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_TonnageLaw
                        Jefferson
                        Report on Tonnage Law
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        JeffersonT_UsefulArts
                        Jefferson
                        Draft Bill to Promote Useful Arts
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_BillofRights_1789
                        Madison
                        Bill of Rights
                        https://founders.archives.gov/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_Federalist_42
                        Madison
                        Federalist paper 42
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_Federalist_48
                        Madison
                        Federalist paper 48
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_Inaugural_1809
                        Madison
                        Inaugural Address 1809
                        http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_Inaugural_1813
                        Madison
                        Inaugural Address 1813
                        http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_Money
                        Madison
                        Observations on Money
                        https://founders.archives.gov/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_StateofUnion_1809
                        Madison
                        State of Union address 1809
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_StateofUnion_1816
                        Madison
                        State of Union address 1816
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_toJefferson_17871024
                        Madison
                        Letter to Jefferson
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_toWashington_17870930
                        Madison
                        Letter to General Washington
                        http://oll.libertyfund.org/
                    
                    
                        MadisonJ_UniversalPeace
                        Madison
                        Universal Peace in Nat. Gazette
                        https://founders.archives.gov/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_InAmerica_1a
                        Lafayette
                        First Voyage and Campaign
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_InAmerica_1b
                        Lafayette
                        First Voyage and Campaign
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_InAmerica_1c
                        Lafayette
                        First Voyage and Campaign
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_InAmerica_1d
                        Lafayette
                        First Voyage and Campaign
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_InAmerica_1e
                        Lafayette
                        First Voyage and Campaign
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_InAmerica_1f
                        Lafayette
                        First Voyage and Campaign
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_InAmerica_2a
                        Lafayette
                        Second Voyage and Campaign
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_InAmerica_2b
                        Lafayette
                        Second Voyage and Campaign
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_MapExplanation1781
                        Lafayette
                        Appendix Explaining Campaign Map
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toDayen_17780911
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to Duc D'Ayen, wife's father
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toRochTern_17800809
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to Rochambeau & Ternay
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toVergennes_17790718
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to Comte de Vergennes
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toVergennes_177908 
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to Comte de Vergennes
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toVergennes_17800202 
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to Comte de Vergennes
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toWashington_17790111
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to General Washington
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toWashington_17790613
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to General Washington
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toWashington_17791007
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to General Washington
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toWashington_17801030
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to General Washington
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Lafayette_toWife_17780913
                        Lafayette
                        Letter to Marie Adrienne, wife
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        JohnsonS_Idler103_1760
                        Johnson
                        Last Idler Essay by Dr Johnson
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        LincolnA_Gettysburg1863
                        Lincoln
                        Lincoln's Gettysburg Address
                        
                            http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                        
                    
                    
                        Queried_AfricanSlavery
                        Queried
                        African Slavery
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        Queried_Federalist_19
                        Both
                        Federalist paper 19
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        Queried_Federalist_20
                        Both
                        Federalist paper 20
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        Queried_Federalist_52
                        Queried
                        Federalist paper 52
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        Queried_Federalist_57
                        Queried
                        Federalist paper 57
                        http://avalon.law.yale.edu/
                    
                    
                        Queried_UnhappyMarriages
                        Queried
                        Reflections on Unhappy Marriages
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        Shax_sonn109
                        Queried
                        Shakespeare's sonnet 109
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        Theo_749f
                        Queried
                        Theo Van Gogh to brother in French
                        http://vangoghletters.org/vg/letters/
                    
                    
                        TROM_Declaration
                        Anon
                        TROM Declaration of Rights
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        TROM_Mid1
                        Queried
                        TROM Queried Part1
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        TROM_Mid2
                        Queried
                        TROM Queried Part2
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AbbeRaynal_1
                        Paine
                        Letter to Abbe Raynal 1
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AbbeRaynal_2
                        Paine
                        Letter to Abbe Raynal 2
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AgeReason_1vii
                        Paine
                        Age of Reason 1vii
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AgeReason_1xvii
                        Paine
                        Age of Reason 1xvii
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AgeReason_2iii
                        Paine
                        Age of Reason 2iii
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AgrarianJustice_1
                        Paine
                        Agrarian Justice 1
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AgrarianJustice_2
                        Paine
                        Agrarian Justice 2
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AmericanCrisis_1
                        Paine
                        American Crisis 1
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AmericanCrisis_13
                        Paine
                        American Crisis 13
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AmericanCrisis_2
                        Paine
                        American Crisis 2
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AmericanCrisis_7
                        Paine
                        American Crisis 7
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_AmericanCrisis_Sup1
                        Paine
                        American Crisis Supernumery 1
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_CommonSense_1
                        Paine
                        Common Sense 1
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_CommonSense_4
                        Paine
                        Common Sense 4
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Fisheries_3
                        Paine
                        Newfoundland Fisheries, part 3
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Government
                        Paine
                        Dissertations on Government
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                        
                    
                    
                        PaineT_PublicGood_A
                        Paine
                        Public Good, up to Diagram 2
                        
                            http://www.bartleby.com/
                        
                    
                    
                        PaineT_QuakerEpistle
                        Paine
                        Epistle to Quakers
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Rights_2i
                        Paine
                        TROM Part 2 Intro & Chapter 1
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Rights_2iv
                        Paine
                        TROM Part 2 Chapter 4
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Rights_Conclusion
                        Paine
                        TROM Conclusion
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Rights_Miscellaneous
                        Paine
                        TROM Miscellaneous Chapter
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Rights_Observations
                        Paine
                        TROM Observations
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_Rubicon
                        Paine
                        Prospects on the Rubicon
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_toFranklin_17780516
                        Paine
                        Letter to Benjamin Franklin
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_toJefferson_18050125
                        Paine
                        Letter to Jefferson
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        PaineT_toMonroe_17941013
                        Paine
                        Letter to James Monroe
                        http://thomaspaine.org/
                    
                    
                        TROM_Preface
                        Paine
                        Preface to Rights of Man, Part I
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                    
                        TROM_Rights_1
                        Paine
                        Up to: The despotism of Louis XIV
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/
                    
                
                These texts were only lightly pre-processed before analysis. Normalization was
                    limited to standardizing the character-representations of apostrophes, dashes,
                    hyphens and quotation marks. Embedded quotations were not deleted except in the
                    single case of TROM_Declaration itself, which we believe
                    is the longest quoted passage in any of these works. This was extracted into an
                    individual file (listed above).Six of the 10 letters by Marquis de
                        Lafayette, i.e. all except those to General Washington, were written
                        originally in French. They were translated into English for the 1837 edition
                        of Lafayette's works, but the editor does not state by whom. Thus it is safe
                        to treat them as not being by Thomas Paine, although treating them as
                        definitely by Lafayette is problematic. In this connection, however, it is
                        worth noting the fact that both Rybicki (2012) and Forsyth & Lam (2014)
                        have found that attributing authorship in translation is, surprisingly,
                        almost as easy as in the original language 
                        .
            

                Appendix 2: Reflexive Co-authorship Corpus Catalogue
                
                    
                        filename
                        doctype
                        authors
                        textname
                    
                    
                        CO_Feds_1995.txt
                        CO
                        Holmes & Forsyth
                        Federalist Revisited
                    
                    
                        CO_Formulang_2015.txt
                        CO
                        Forsyth & Grabowski
                        Formulaic Language
                    
                    
                        CO_FoundTran_2014
                        CO
                        Forsyth & Lam
                        Found in Translation (van Goghs)
                    
                    
                        CO_PublicMan_2010.txt
                        CO
                        Holmes & Crofts
                        Diary of a Public Man
                    
                    
                        CO_Zulu_2012.txt
                        CO
                        Holmes & Johnson
                        Anglo-Zulu War
                    
                    
                        DH_Authorship_1993.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Authorship Attribution
                    
                    
                        DH_Crane_2001.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Stephen Crane study
                    
                    
                        DH_EvoStylo_1998.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Evolution of Styometry
                    
                    
                        DH_LettAmerica_2008.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Letter from America
                    
                    
                        DH_LitStyle_1985.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Analysis of Literary Style
                    
                    
                        DH_Mormons_1992.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Mormon Scriptures
                    
                    
                        DH_Oxford_1992.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Oxford Conference Report
                    
                    
                        DH_Pickett_2012.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Pickett Letters
                    
                    
                        DH_ProphetVoice_1991.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Vocabulary Richness & Prophetic Voice
                    
                    
                        DH_Sorbonne_1994.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Sorbonne Conference Report
                    
                    
                        DH_Stylometry_2003.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Introduction to Stylometry
                    
                    
                        DH_Widow_2002.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Widow & Soldier
                    
                    
                        DH_Xmas_2004.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Christmas Message
                    
                    
                        DH_Zululand_2009.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Zululand Field Trip
                    
                    
                        MO_Authorid_2014.txt
                        MO
                        Oakes
                        Author Identification
                    
                    
                        RF_Anns_1993.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Artificial Neural Nets
                    
                    
                        RF_Beaghelp_1988.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        PC/Beagle Help File
                    
                    
                        RF_BullBear_1989.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Bulls & Bears & Floppy Discs, FT
                    
                    
                        RF_Cons1to4_1999.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Consolatio Paper, parts 1 to 4
                    
                    
                        RF_DDDD_1997.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Deriving Document Descriptors
                    
                    
                        RF_Exclusion_2003.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Authorship Exclusion
                    
                    
                        RF_Experts_1983.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Expert System Architecture
                    
                    
                        RF_Foreword_1994.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Foreward to Chorafas book
                    
                    
                        RF_Ioga_1996.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Instance-Oriented Genetic Algorithm
                    
                    
                        RF_MLchapter1_1988.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Machine Learning, chapter 1
                    
                    
                        RF_NeuroNottm_1990.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Neural Learning Trials, Nottm report
                    
                    
                        RF_Ockhams_1992.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Ockham's Razor
                    
                    
                        RF_Phd7_1995.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Thesis Chapter 7
                    
                    
                        RF_PopFlops_2000.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Pops & Flops
                    
                    
                        RF_Robayes_1996.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Robust Bayesian Classifier
                    
                    
                        RF_Stylochron_1999.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Stylochronometry with substrings
                    
                    
                        RF_Teaboat_2012.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Teaboat Software Overview
                    
                    
                        RF_TeskeyRev_1983.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Review of Teskey Text Processing
                    
                    
                        RF_TextCat_2008.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Authorship & Text Classification
                    
                    
                        RF_Wism_1991.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Grounded Morality
                    
                    
                        DH_Fed2_1995.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Feds Part 2 (& a little of Part 1)
                    
                    
                        DH_Fed3_1995.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Feds Part 3
                    
                    
                        DH_Fed5_1995.txt
                        DH
                        Holmes
                        Feds Conclusion
                    
                    
                        RF_Fed1_1995.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Feds Part 1 (most of)
                    
                    
                        RF_Fed4_1995.txt
                        RF
                        Forsyth
                        Feds Part 4
                    
                
                These texts were pre-processed in the same way as those listed in Appendix 1;
                    i.e. apostrophes, dashes, hyphens and quotation marks were standardized. In
                    addition, in those papers where Reference Lists were present, they were
                    removed.
            

                Appendix 3: Words used in Burrows-style analysis of Paine &
                    contemporaries
                
                    Retained words (n=100)
                    
                        the
                        of
                        to
                        and
                        a
                        in
                        that
                        it
                        is
                        be
                    
                    
                        as
                        which
                        for
                        by
                        not
                        with
                        have
                        this
                        or
                        on
                    
                    
                        they
                        are
                        but
                        was
                        from
                        their
                        will
                        at
                        an
                        would
                    
                    
                        all
                        them
                        has
                        had
                        been
                        may
                        if
                        one
                        other
                        were
                    
                    
                        its
                        any
                        no
                        more
                        government
                        than
                        who
                        there
                        so
                        those
                    
                    
                        can
                        what
                        such
                        general
                        should
                        shall
                        some
                        time
                        every
                        upon
                    
                    
                        when
                        into
                        state
                        only
                        power
                        people
                        same
                        these
                        must
                        made
                    
                    
                        part
                        great
                        country
                        could
                        being
                        without
                        new
                        two
                        now
                        under
                    
                    
                        first
                        most
                        might
                        own
                        out
                        do
                        then
                        make
                        against
                        each
                    
                    
                        much
                        very
                        before
                        well
                        necessary
                        place
                        present
                        good
                        too
                        either
                    
                
                
                    Excluded words (n=44)
                    
                        i
                        he
                        his
                        we
                        you
                        our
                        my
                        your
                        him
                        man
                    
                    
                        states
                        right
                        her
                        us
                        war
                        nation
                        me
                        america
                        public
                        men
                    
                    
                        france
                        england
                        bank
                        whole
                        constitution
                        itself
                        therefore
                        money
                        mr
                        case
                    
                    
                        up
                        interest
                        congress
                        national
                        because
                        cannot
                        themselves
                        de
                        she
                        ought
                    
                    
                        act
                        rights
                        united
                        between
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                    
                
            

                Appendix 4: Words used in Burrows-style analysis of present co-authors
                
                    Retained words (n=100)
                    
                        the
                        of
                        and
                        in
                        to
                        a
                        is
                        that
                        as
                        for
                    
                    
                        this
                        by
                        it
                        be
                        on
                        are
                        with
                        from
                        which
                        not
                    
                    
                        have
                        at
                        but
                        one
                        an
                        than
                        has
                        all
                        they
                        most
                    
                    
                        also
                        so
                        being
                        was
                        or
                        two
                        these
                        each
                        more
                        i
                    
                    
                        can
                        such
                        other
                        their
                        only
                        well
                        very
                        been
                        first
                        into
                    
                    
                        would
                        some
                        had
                        their
                        its
                        them
                        about
                        were
                        used
                        between
                    
                    
                        number
                        if
                        both
                        work
                        will
                        then
                        when
                        out
                        should
                        time
                    
                    
                        known
                        what
                        we
                        may
                        found
                        who
                        use
                        any
                        many
                        over
                    
                    
                        data
                        using
                        1
                        no
                        different
                        written
                        given
                        however
                        could
                        how
                    
                    
                        words
                        analysis
                        three
                        same
                        problem
                        where
                        here
                        text
                        2
                        test
                    
                
                
                    Excluded words (n=44)
                    
                        his
                        e
                        word
                        he
                        set
                        new
                        function
                        case
                        present
                        our
                    
                    
                        results
                        approach
                        features
                        study
                        method
                        table
                        author
                        based
                        example
                        texts
                    
                    
                        n
                        sample
                        program
                        authors
                        variables
                        thus
                        length
                        authorship
                        corpus
                        style
                    
                    
                        samples
                        textual
                        language
                        frequency
                        p
                        letters
                        book
                        papers
                        vocabulary
                        training
                    
                    
                        principal
                        rules
                        poems
                        diary
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                    
                
            

                Appendix 5: Text Classification Methods used by TOCCATA
                In the studies reported above, the setting of parameter
                        wordonly was 1, meaning that only tokens beginning with
                    an alphanumeric character were considered. Thus in the following
                        words and tokens are
                    interchangeable (provided that numbers are considered as words). In particular,
                    punctuation symbols were ignored, although in many circumstances — e.g. when
                    known to be under authorial control — they can be effective stylometric
                    markers.
                
                    Deltoid
                    Module Deltoid is an implementation of Burrows's delta  which has become a standard technique in
                        authorship attribution studies. In a nutshell, this method first finds the
                        most frequent N word tokens in the corpus; then computes the means and
                        standard deviations of the relative usage rates of these words across the
                        various documents of the corpus. This allows it to consider the mean usage
                        rates of these words in each category as a model of that class. To compare a
                        single text with a class model, it computes the absolute z-scores of all
                        these words and averages them, a z-score being computed by subtracting the
                        usage rate of the word under consideration in the text from the mean rate in
                        the class model and dividing this difference (ignoring sign) by the standard
                        deviation of that word in the corpus as a whole. This process yields a mean
                        absolute z-score, which is a dissimilarity measure. Because TOCCATA works
                        with similarities, these mean dissimilarities (di)
                        are converted to similarities as 1.0/di. The
                        number, N, of most-frequent words to employ is a user-selectable parameter
                        but if this is absent the system sets N to be the square root of the
                        vocabulary size V (i.e. total different vocabulary items, not total running
                        tokens), which is usually a reasonable choice. In the present study the
                        default, N=round(sqrt(V)), was used. 
                
                
                    MAWS
                    This library module implements a method inspired by what Mosteller &
                        Wallace, in their classic work (1964/1984) on the disputed Federalist
                        papers, call their robust Bayesian analysis (hence
                        MAWS, Mosteller And Wallace System) . The implementation in TOCCATA is a
                        slight revision of the software originally in Forsyth's PhD thesis  to automate this approach. Essentially this is a
                        naive Bayesian classifier using frequent word tokens. It takes 2 parameters,
                        toks2get and multivox (default values 144 and 1.618034 respectively) and
                        computes the rounded value of toks2get multiplied by multivox. It then takes
                        the resulting number of the most common words in the corpus, according to
                        document frequency, and reduces them to toks2get again by discarding the
                        least discriminatory items. Then Bayes factors are computed from the
                        training data for each remaining token according to how often the relative
                        frequency of that token exceeds the median frequency of that token in the
                        whole corpus.
                
                
                    Vote
                    Module Vote is exceptional in that it actually uses every single word-type in
                        the training corpus as a feature. The model developed
                        for classification consists simply of frequency-tables for every text
                        category, containing the frequency of that word in that category. To
                        classify a new text, the frequency of every word in that text is counted;
                        then, for each category, a similarity score is computed by adding a
                            vote by each word in the text to a running total.
                        The vote is either sqrt(f) or 0, where f is the frequency of that word in
                        the text being classified , according to whether the word's relative
                        frequency is more common in the category concerned than in the corpus as a
                        whole, or not. The category yielding the highest total is chosen. This
                        simple procedure was intended merely to establish a baseline, but various
                        trials have shown that it works rather well, perhaps because information
                        from the whole vocabulary structure is utilized.
                
                
                    Tokspans
                    This method attempts to capture some of the information inherent in
                            syllexis, the co-occurrence of words in close proximity,
                        and especially sequential co-occurrence. Being aimed at authorship
                        attribution it starts, conventionally enough, by finding the most common
                        words in the corpus. The number kept can be set by the user but by default
                        is the square root of the vocabulary size, rounded to an integer, with an
                        enforced maximum of 1024. Frequency is defined not by gross count but by the
                        number of snippets in which a word occurs. Default snippet size is 144
                        tokens. Thus dispersed words that occur throughout the corpus are favoured
                        over "bursty" words that occur often but only in few segments. This
                        preliminary word-selection can be considered step 0 of the overall
                        procedure, after which follow a further four steps: (1) accumulate; (2)
                        eliminate; (3) correlate; (4) discriminate. Steps 1 and 2 constitute the
                        model-building phase; steps 3 and 4 form the model-using phase.
                    Step 1 goes through the texts examining each segment of S consecutive words,
                        where S is a parameter called spansize, set by the user. With spansize=3, as
                        in the trials reported above, the triplet by the user,
                        for example, would be examined and — presuming by and
                            the were in the frequent word list but
                            user was not — the tuple
                            (by,the) would be retained
                        with 1 added to its occurrence tally. This typically generates a very large
                        number of token tuples, most of which are shorter than spansize in length.
                        In fact, the zero-length tuple is normally one of the most frequent —
                        implying a segment of S tokens all absent from the high-frequency list. Most
                        of these tuples are winnowed out in step 2. In this step any such tuples
                        occurring in fewer than 2 texts are removed, and, more significantly, the
                        tuples are rated by how strongly they are associated with each category,
                        with only the most distinctive retained. The default mode of calculating
                        distinctiveness is to compute (r1-r2)*sqrt(df), where r1 is the rate in the
                        category under consideration, r2 is the rate in all other categories
                        combined and df is the number of documents of the category under
                        consideration in which the token occurs. The highest-scoring items in each
                        category are kept. The number to keep for each category is the rounded
                        square root of that category's vocabulary size. The lists for each category
                        are then merged and become a list of distinctive features. In phase 3 this
                        distinctive-feature list is used to calculate a correlation coefficient
                        (rank correlation by default) for each test text with each category in the
                        following manner. The frequencies of every distinctive feature in the text
                        under consideration, including zero, form one vector which is correlated
                        with vectors of the total frequencies of those features in each category,
                        giving C correlations, where C is the number of categories. In step 4, the
                        highest of those correlations is chosen to assign a category to the text
                        concerned.
                
                
                    Tagsets
                    This method actually uses the same software library as Tokspans, above, with
                        different parameter settings. Among the chief differences are that sets of
                        tokens were collected, not tuples, i.e. that sequence within spans was
                        ignored, and that part-of-speech tags (as assigned by the GoTagger; see
                        Appendix 6) were used as tokens not orthographic words. In addition, the
                        spansize parameter was set to 5. Hence, again, many sets chosen as features
                        consist of less than 5 items. For example, the quintet the point
                            of this method would be tagged as dt nn of dt nn and
                        would thus generate the potential feature ['dt', 'nn', 'of'], since sets
                        don't include replications. (On output, the items are listed in alphabetic
                        order, which may not reflect the order in the original text.)
                
                
                    Taverns
                    Taverns is another method exploiting sequential information. The name stands
                        for (Textual Affinity Values Employing Repeated N-gram Sequences). It
                        employs a technique borrowed from the formulib package, developed to explore
                        formulaic language, which is available at the website below.
                    
                        http://www.richardsandesforsyth.net/software.html
                    
                    Essentially this method allows short n-grams to overlap. In the experiments
                        reported above, n-grams of length from 2 to 4 items were generated for each
                        text category and the most frequent at each size retained. Thus, for
                        instance, in Tom Paine's writings the following 4- and 3-grams were kept,
                        among many others:
                    
                        ('of', 'the', 'united', 'states')
                        ('united', 'states', 'of', 'america')
                        ('the', 'people', 'of').
                    
                    When classifying a fresh text using the list of frequent n-grams in each
                        category, the occurrences of each are not just counted. Rather, the
                        proportion of the text covered jointly by all the n-grams in the list is
                        computed. Thus, if the text contained the 8-gram "the people of the united
                        states of america" that would count as 8 tokens covered by a combination of
                        the three items above: "the people of" would be marked as covered by the
                        3-gram; "of the united states" would be covered by the first 4-gram; "united
                        states of america" would be covered by the second 4-gram. The fact that some
                        words were covered twice wouldn't matter. The eventual similarity score
                        would only depend on what proportion of tokens in the text being classified
                        had been covered overall, not on how many times each word was covered nor
                        how many times particular n-grams had been found in the text. Note that any
                        word can appear in an n-gram: in our experiments there was no preliminary
                        exclusion of words on the basis of their individual frequencies.
                
            

                Appendix 6: GoTagger Part-of-speech Tags, after post-processing
                
                    GoTagger codes (after post-processing)
                    
                        Tagcode
                        Description
                    
                    
                        BE
                        Any form of verb to be
                    
                    
                        CC
                        Coordinating conjunction
                    
                    
                        CD
                        Cardinal number
                    
                    
                        DT
                        Determiner
                    
                    
                        EX
                        Existential there
                    
                    
                        FW
                        Foreign word
                    
                    
                        IN
                        Preposition/subord. conjunction
                    
                    
                        JJ
                        Adjective
                    
                    
                        JJR
                        Adjective, comparative
                    
                    
                        JJS
                        Adjective, superlative
                    
                    
                        LS
                        List item marker
                    
                    
                        MD
                        Modal
                    
                    
                        NN
                        Noun, singular or mass
                    
                    
                        NNS
                        Noun, plural
                    
                    
                        NNP
                        Proper noun, singular
                    
                    
                        NNPS
                        Proper noun, plural
                    
                    
                        OF
                        of
                    
                    
                        PDT
                        Predeterminer
                    
                    
                        POS
                        Possessive ending
                    
                    
                        PRP
                        Personal pronoun
                    
                    
                        PRPS
                        Possessive pronoun
                    
                    
                        RB
                        Adverb
                    
                    
                        RBR
                        Adverb, comparative
                    
                    
                        RBS
                        Adverb, superlative
                    
                    
                        RP
                        Particle
                    
                    
                        SYM
                        Symbol
                    
                    
                        TO
                        to
                    
                    
                        UH
                        Interjection
                    
                    
                        VB
                        Verb, base form
                    
                    
                        VBD
                        Verb, past tense
                    
                    
                        VBG
                        Verb, gerund/present participle
                    
                    
                        VBN
                        Verb, past participle
                    
                    
                        VBP
                        Verb, non-3rd ps. sing.
                    
                    
                        VBZ
                        Verb, 3rd ps. sing. Present
                    
                    
                        WDT
                        wh-determiner
                    
                    
                        WP 
                        wh-pronoun
                    
                    
                        WPS
                        Possessive wh-pronoun
                    
                    
                        WRB
                        wh-adverb
                    
                    
                        #
                        Pound sign & miscellaneous punctuation
                    
                    
                        $
                        Dollar sign
                    
                    
                        .
                        Sentence-final punctuation
                    
                    
                        ,
                        Comma
                    
                    
                        :
                        Colon, semi-colon
                    
                    
                        (
                        Left bracket character
                    
                    
                        )
                        Right bracket character
                    
                
                The GoTagger software, by Kazuaki Goto, is freely available at the following
                    website: http://web4u.setsunan.ac.jp/Website/TreeOnline.htm
                It is not the most modern part-of-speech software, and its accuracy for
                    computational linguistics is not state-of-the-art; but it is fast, free and
                    consistent, the last being the most important attribute in the context of
                    authorship attribution. We have written a short post-processing program to deal
                    with some of the quirks of GoTagger that caused problems for TOCCATA's
                    tokenization routine, so the codes above are not quite identical with those
                    listed on the website above. (Punctuation was not used in the experiments
                    reported, so the last 7 symbols above were ignored.)
            

                Appendix 7: Initial and final paragraphs of three TROM text blocks identified
                    as more like Lafayette than Paine by rolling stylometry.
                
                    
                        Position
                        Paragraph
                    
                    
                        Block 1 start
                        As Mr. Burke has passed over the whole transaction of the Bastille
                            (and his silence is nothing in his favour), and has entertained his
                            readers with reflections on supposed facts distorted into real
                            falsehoods, I will give, since he has not, some account of the
                            circumstances which preceded that transaction. They will serve to show
                            that less mischief could scarcely have accompanied such an event when
                            considered with the treacherous and hostile aggravations of the enemies
                            of the Revolution. [....]
                    
                    
                        Block 1 end
                        That the Bastille was attacked with an enthusiasm of heroism, such
                            only as the highest animation of liberty could inspire, and carried in
                            the space of a few hours, is an event which the world is fully possessed
                            of. I am not undertaking the detail of the attack, but bringing into
                            view the conspiracy against the nation which provoked it, and which fell
                            with the Bastille. The prison to which the new ministry were dooming the
                            National Assembly, in addition to its being the high altar and castle of
                            despotism, became the proper object to begin with. This enterprise broke
                            up the new ministry, who began now to fly from the ruin they had
                            prepared for others. The troops of Broglio dispersed, and himself fled
                            also.
                    
                    
                        Block 2 start
                        I give to Mr. Burke all his theatrical exaggerations for facts, and I
                            then ask him if they do not establish the certainty of what I here lay
                            down? Admitting them to be true, they show the necessity of the French
                            Revolution, as much as any one thing he could have asserted. These
                            outrages were not the effect of the principles of the Revolution, but of
                            the degraded mind that existed before the Revolution, and which the
                            Revolution is calculated to reform. Place them then to their proper
                            cause, and take the reproach of them to your own side. [....]
                    
                    
                        Block 2 end
                        During the latter part of the time in which this confusion was acting,
                            the King and Queen were in public at the balcony, and neither of them
                            concealed for safety's sake, as Mr. Burke insinuates. Matters being thus
                            appeased, and tranquility restored, a general acclamation broke forth of
                            Le Roi a Paris- Le Roi a Paris- The King to Paris. It was the shout of
                            peace, and immediately accepted on the part of the King. By this measure
                            all future projects of trapanning the King to Metz, and setting up the
                            standard of opposition to the constitution, were prevented, and the
                            suspicions extinguished. The King and his family reached Paris in the
                            evening, and were congratulated on their arrival by M. Bailly, the Mayor
                            of Paris, in the name of the citizens. Mr. Burke, who throughout his
                            book confounds things, persons, and principles, as in his remarks on M.
                            Bailly's address, confounded time also. He censures M. Bailly for
                            calling it "un bon jour," a good day. Mr. Burke should have informed
                            himself that this scene took up the space of two days, the day on which
                            it began with every appearance of danger and mischief, and the day on
                            which it terminated without the mischiefs that threatened; and that it
                            is to this peaceful termination that M. Bailly alludes, and to the
                            arrival of the King at Paris. Not less than three hundred thousand
                            persons arranged themselves in the procession from Versailles to Paris,
                            and not an act of molestation was committed during the whole
                            march.
                    
                    
                        Block 3 start
                        As we are to view this as the first practical step towards the
                            Revolution, it will be proper to enter into some particulars respecting
                            it. The Assembly of the Notables has in some places been mistaken for
                            the States-General, but was wholly a different body, the States-General
                            being always by election. The persons who composed the Assembly of the
                            Notables were all nominated by the king, and consisted of one hundred
                            and forty members. But as M. Calonne could not depend upon a majority of
                            this Assembly in his favour, he very ingeniously arranged them in such a
                            manner as to make forty-four a majority of one hundred and forty; to
                            effect this he disposed of them into seven separate committees, of
                            twenty members each. Every general question was to be decided, not by a
                            majority of persons, but by a majority of committee, and as eleven votes
                            would make a majority in a committee, and four committees a majority of
                            seven, M. Calonne had good reason to conclude that as forty-four would
                            determine any general question he could not be outvoted. But all his
                            plans deceived him, and in the event became his overthrow. [....]
                    
                    
                        Block 3 end
                        Having now traced the progress of the French Revolution through most
                            of its principal stages, from its commencement to the taking of the
                            Bastille, and its establishment by the Declaration of Rights, I will
                            close the subject with the energetic apostrophe of M. de la Fayette-
                            "May this great monument, raised to Liberty, serve as a lesson to the
                            oppressor, and an example to the oppressed!"
                    
                
            
