Title:  Renaissance Remix. 
Volume:  012
Issue:  4
Date:  31 December 2018
Abstract:  
                
                Among the most elaborate and coherent instances of Renaissance self-fashioning
                    and female self-determination through culture was a suite of rooms designed by
                    Isabella d’Este in what is now the Ducal Palace museum of Mantua, Italy: a
                    full-blown personal studiolo (study) and an
                    adjoining smaller chamber she called the grotta
                    (grotto). Isabella’s studiolo is a regular point of reference in the study of
                    Renaissance history and art, yet for centuries it has been accessible only in
                    dispersed pieces and in spaces depopulated of major works and artefacts. Digital
                    technology offers the possibility of creating a remastered
                    studiolo, a virtual space in which both visual and acoustic elements may be
                    enhanced with respect to previous attempts at its representation. At the same
                    time, historical uncertainty about numerous details in the arrangement of the
                    objects in this collection requires a high level of flexibility in the digital
                    remix, allowing for the programming of a customisable virtual environment. In
                    anticipation of the project’s full construction and in order to facilitate
                    discussion with potential users about the Virtual Studiolo’s backward design,
                    the authors have developed a concept-demonstration video within the open-source
                    Blender environment (www.blender.org). Among the concerns we aim to address in this phase
                    of the project is how to combine historical accuracy, emotional power, and
                    creative possibilities for users. This case study presents some of the
                    opportunities, constraints and challenges we confronted during the production of
                    our video as we strove within the Blender open environment for a result that
                    will be historically accurate, emotionally compelling, and creatively flexible.
                
            
Full Body Text: 


                1 Introduction
                
                    IDEA: Isabella d'Este Archive Homepage.
                    
                    
                
                
                    Isabella d’Este: Virtual Studiolo borrows its
                    conceptual framework from four domains: the humanistic field of Renaissance art
                    history; the theory and practice of museum curation; current thinking in
                    cultural heritage reconstruction about sentiment analysis, and the
                    technical-creative disciplines of digital modeling, animation, remixing, and
                    remastering. The project aims to reassemble in a virtual, open-access
                    environment one of Renaissance Italy’s most stunning courtly art collections,
                    the studiolo of Isabella d’Este (1474-1539), marchesa of the city-state of
                    Mantua. The Virtual Studiolo will join a set of already existing, interlocking
                    projects gathered in the multimedia online environment of IDEA: Isabella d’Este
                    Archive (http://isabelladeste.web.unc.edu) (fig.
                        1). As a complex, IDEA provides resources for the study of the Italian
                    Renaissance through the figure of one of its most distinguished and celebrated
                    women, Isabella d’Este. 
            

                2 Isabella d’Este’s studiolo
                Breaking with much more modest practices by noblewomen who owned small galleries
                    of family portraits and religious images, Isabella set out shortly after her
                    marriage (1490) to Marchese Francesco II Gonzaga to design a full-blown personal
                    studiolo (study) and an adjoining smaller room she called the grotta (grotto).
                    These camerini (little rooms) functioned as personal retreats for reading and
                    reflection but also as galleries for the display of Renaissance learning and
                    luxuries and as private performance spaces for Isabella’s music. A purposeful
                    projection of her ideal self, they were created both for her own pleasure and
                    for exhibition to privileged visitors 
                    
                    . Isabella managed her acquisitions largely
                    through voluminous written correspondence with artists and dealers, directing
                    the lavish decoration of these rooms with intarsia panels, gilded ceilings,
                    frescoes, tiles, and enigmatic personal emblems. She also filled them with
                    treasures she collected, including books, cameos, Roman antiquities and
                    Renaissance bronzes. Dominating the studiolo was a series of large paintings
                    that now hang prominently in the Italian galleries of the Louvre: two each by
                    Andrea Mantegna, Lorenzo Costa and Antonio Allegri da Correggio, and one by
                    Pietro Perugino. 
                 As a signature instance of personal branding, Isabella’s
                    studiolo stands on a historic par with Granduke Francesco de’ Medici’s later
                    studiolo in the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence and those of Duke Federico da
                    Montefeltro in Urbino and Gubbio (the latter now transplanted to New York’s
                    Metropolitan Museum of Art). It also holds special significance as a collection
                    that anticipated the achievements of such modern female collectors as Isabella
                    Stewart Gardner in Boston, Etta and Claribel Cone in Baltimore, and Peggy
                    Guggenheim in Venice. Isabella’s camerini were an unparalleled architectural and
                    artistic expression of specifically feminine Renaissance culture. In their
                    sensory and intellectual density, they functioned as a space for contemplative
                    withdrawal but also for display, and as a controlled environment in which the
                    human passions could be summoned and engaged while also remaining safely
                    contained . One of this project’s aims is to allow
                    visitors to experience the sensory power of the studiolo in a virtual
                    environment. 
                 Both for its coherence and for the gender of its creator, Isabella’s studiolo is
                    a regular point of reference in the study of Renaissance history and art, yet
                    for centuries it has been accessible only in dispersed pieces and spaces
                    depopulated of major works and artefacts. As documented in detail by the late
                    Clifford M. Brown, the rooms remain but have sustained significant renovations;
                    many of the studiolo’s paintings and sculptures survive, but they belong to
                    museums around the world . 
                 Given the dispersal of their Renaissance contents, it has been impossible to
                    approximate the experience of these rooms as fully appointed and purposefully
                    designed. Today researchers, students, and visitors are limited to looking at
                    books, slides, and variously published online images; they may also listen to
                    limited examples of recorded music. Visiting Mantua’s Ducal Palace in person, on
                    the other hand, one finds empty rooms whose former glory can only be imagined.
                    For a brief tour of the rooms of Isabella’s second studiolo as it appears today,
                    see the video Ad tempo taci’: Songs for Isabella
                        d’Este (see 6:00 ff.) . 
                 Current digital technology — photogrammetry, 3D modeling, the virtual reassembly
                    of dispersed collections, and augmented reality display — offers the possibility
                    of creating a remastered studiolo, a virtual space in which
                    both visual and acoustic elements will be enhanced with respect to previous
                    attempts at its representation. Yet historical uncertainty about numerous
                    details in Isabella’s arrangement of the objects in her collection compels us to
                    present, and to argue, this project as itself a hypothetical and interactive
                    remix: a media artefact that inevitably alters the original through processes of
                    reconstruction, supplementation, subtraction, and reorientation to create
                    something unquestionably new. 
                 Adding to the complexity of efforts to visualize the historic studiolo is the
                    fact that Isabella had it constructed twice, in two different locations at
                    different times in her life, and the two versions of these spaces are in
                    different states of repair and restoration. If one premise of our endeavour is
                    that the virtual integration of the studiolo’s contents will foster
                    understanding of collecting and display, of the studiolo as an early modern
                    project, and of Renaissance culture broadly conceived in ways that have been
                    unattainable for centuries, another is that a single, definitive, and statically
                        authentic restoration of these historic spaces is not
                    only impossible, but also undesirable. We view the Virtual Studiolo as an
                    opportunity to acknowledge the dynamism of collecting and curating as cultural
                    practices, today as well as in the sixteenth century. 
                 Accordingly, we are aiming to present both our own curation of the studiolo as
                    it has been researched and documented by art historians, and also the
                    opportunity for users to move objects in and out of the spaces, rearranging and
                    adding contents in newly-authored configurations — remixes — that may be saved
                    for personal use or publication. Currently we anticipate the use of Blend4Web
                        (https://www.blend4web.com) as
                    the framework both for navigating our own, proposed arrangement of the historic
                    studiolo and for programming a customisable environment for future users. In
                    anticipation of this phase of the project, the Samuel H. Kress Foundation (www.kressfoundation.org/) funded a
                    concept-demonstration video that allows us to present some of the project’s
                    foreseeable further developments. We would welcome feedback on this material,
                    which users may offer either by contacting us through the IDEA project’s home
                    page: (http://ideaart.web.unc.edu/virtual-studiolo-studiolo-virtuale/), or
                    by filling out our short User Story survey: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1nbhkt7W0nHwVh76EOiQNtH-IfkKlRARPtD7UAoKzPVM/viewform?edit_requested=true
                    . 
            

                3 Directing the concept demo-video
                 The design and development phase of the demonstration video for Isabella d'Este: Virtual Studiolo aims to illustrate
                    concisely and effectively to potential funding agencies the attractions of a
                    complex project such as the Virtual Studiolo, while also raising awareness
                    regarding the range of disciplinary collaborations and knowledge bases required
                    for its realization (http://ideaart.web.unc.edu/virtual-studiolo-studiolo-virtuale/). For
                    this purpose, we chose to produce an emotionally captivating video presenting
                    both the historic space of the studiolo, as a 3D reconstruction resulting from a
                    photogrammetric campaign, and a small selection of objects from the collection
                    once housed in it. The video, for example, opens on a vortex of Isabella’s
                    letters, which alludes to the surviving correspondence that documents the
                    studiolo’s acquisitions and that is viewable in another IDEA project, IDEA Letter/e. It shows two musical instruments
                    represented by intarsia panel carvings in the historic studiolo — a lute and a
                    spinet — which recall the love for music that led Isabella to commission songs
                    that she played on those instruments (and which are the focus of several
                    projects in IDEA Music/a). It shows ceramics that
                    she received as a gift from her daughter (featured in the IDEA Ceramics project located in IDEA
                        Art/e). And it also features a high-resolution rendering of one
                    object from her collection, a precious, jewel-encrusted medallion engraved with
                    her portrait, for which image we benefited from the engaged collaboration of
                    Vienna’s Kunsthistorisches Museum (Figure 2), and
                    lower-resolution renderings of several sculptures belonging to her collection.
                    The studiolo is thus presented as a full-scale Wunderkammer devised by a woman
                    who has been called the 
                        first lady of the
                            Renaissance
                        
                    
                    
                    . 
                
                    Gian Cristoforo Romano’s medal of Isabella d’Este. Image courtesy of the
                        Kunsthistorisches Museum of Vienna. Reconstructed in 3D, it is one of the
                        virtual objects shown in the video.
                    
                    
                
                 Our challenge was to present in just under six minutes the state of the historic
                    studiolo today and, at the same time, to simulate projected phases of
                    implementation that will involve virtual reconstructions, assembly of dispersed
                    objects, online exhibitions, and several other tools that digital technology can
                    offer for preserving and accessing cultural heritage, in particular for
                    educational purposes (Figure 3). We sought, as
                    well, to present the range of research options that a remastered studiolo will
                    offer, and to integrate our protagonist, Isabella d’Este, whose portrait at a
                    certain point peers out from the video as if to claim her role as
                        author of the studiolo, as a driving force behind its
                    decades-long ideation and construction. 
                
                    Seven large paintings by Andrea Mantegna, Lorenzo Costa, Antonio Allegri
                        da Correggio and Pietro Perugino, now hanging prominently in the Italian
                        galleries of the Louvre, materialize once more inside Isabella’s
                        studiolo.
                    
                    
                
                 Conceived as an introduction and invitation to the project, the video is a
                    compact whole that is separated into two parts. The first, more creative,
                    emotional and evocative segment is accompanied by an insistent, contemporary
                    music track by Kai Engel that carries a certain driving force. The second
                    segment includes a sound track of music from Isabella’s time. This sequence is
                    especially important, as it conveys both the participant credits, which range
                    across disciplines and institutions, and technical information about the
                    potential evolution of the project. The video’s conclusion opens out onto new
                    horizons for study and educational itineraries that are now possible thanks to
                    digital media. Our project is therefore consciously a marriage of the current
                    renaissance of art and technology with the historic, Italian Renaissance from
                    which we draw inspiration and knowledge. 
            

                4 Technical issues
                 The creation of the video began with a photographic campaign for the
                    photogrammetric acquisition of the historic studiolo and grotta in Mantua’s
                    Ducal Palace. More than 500 photos were taken inside each of Isabella’s two
                    rooms at a 36-Megapixel resolution. The photogrammetric reconstruction, with
                    PhotoScan (www.agisoft.com/) (Figure 4), produced the following results: 
                        
                            for the studiolo, starting from 574 photos, the software was able to
                                align 574, creating a dense point cloud of 110,945,015 points with
                                11 million vertices and eight 4096*4096 pixel textures;
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            for the grotta, starting from 620 photos, the software was able to
                                align 492, creating a dense point cloud of 122,408,100 points with
                                12 million vertices and four 4096*4096 pixel textures.
                        
                    
                
                    Photogrammetric reconstruction of the studiolo in PhotoScan.
                    
                    
                
                 The 3D models were then imported and optimised in Blender. The mesh was
                    duplicated and divided into macro areas (ceiling, walls, floor) and further
                    subdivided into smaller zones. On the bare walls we applied a
                        planar decimation, while on the rougher or more irregular areas
                    of the mesh — such as those corresponding with the intarsia on the ceiling — we
                    applied a collapse decimation. The output of this process was a
                    mesh with a lower level of detail (100/200.000 vertices) that is suitable for
                    full-room renderings. For close-up shots, instead, segments of the
                    full-resolution mesh were used. 
                 As for the textures, since PhotoScan does not optimize UV unwrap,
                    the mesh had to be manually subdivided through seams, in
                    order to isolate planar areas and perform a new manual unwrap. Two techniques
                    were applied. Blender standard unwrap was used for the more
                    irregular portions, with a relax post-processing passage for better
                    smoothing out of irregularities. The second technique we adopted was a
                        project from view. 
                 In some areas, such as those with the intarsia wooden panels or the richly
                    coffered ceiling, we obtained a higher level of resolution by scaling the
                        UV island; for an immediate visual feedback we applied a 4K
                    resolution UV grid texture (Figure 5). The mesh
                    material was configured in order to use a new empty texture for the colour. In
                    this instance, the colour information obtained with bake was
                    transferred from a high poly mesh to an optimized one. 
                
                    UV grid texture applied to the studiolo 3D model within Blender.
                    
                    
                
                 Several other techniques were also key for the video: fluid simulation, for ink
                    and sealing wax drops (Figure 6); a series of
                    particle simulations, for the vortex of letters; Blender animation nodes for the
                    spreading of the floor tiles; and 3D photo matching, for Isabella’s portrait. 
                 For a credible representation of the ink and sealing wax drops, the Blender
                    fluid simulator was programmed with the real physical density of the two
                    substances. Moreover, for sealing the wax, Blender modifiers and shapekeys were
                    used, as explained in the tutorial we have shared on the VisitLab blog (http://visitlab.cineca.it/?p=1771
                    ). 
                
                    Final simulation effect of sealed wax on one of Isabella d’Este
                        letters.
                    
                    
                
                
                    As for the vortex of Isabella’s letters, three main particle systems and two
                        auxiliary ones were created, the latter for adding random dynamics. The main
                        particle systems created the three movements of the shot: the ascending
                        movement of the letters, the vortex and its explosion (Figure 7). A further particle system, with
                        keyed particles, was added to these three for managing the transitions among
                        them. Images of five of Isabella’s actual letters were used instead of point
                        particles.
                
                
                    Final interpolation between the particle systems, from the vortex to the
                        explosion of the letters.
                    
                    
                
                 For the animation of the floor tiles, a significant contribution came from the
                    online community, thanks to the add-on Animation nodes (https://github.com/JacquesLucke/animation_nodes) and Archimator, a
                    pre-set of configurable nodes for the creation of groups of objects: (http://blenderartists.org/forum/showthread.php?350296-Addon-Animation-Nodes&p=3013604&viewfull=1#post3013604)
                        (Figure 8). 
                        The reconstructed tiled floor of the studiolo.
                        
                        
                     The Titian portrait of Isabella d’Este was recreated with 3D photo
                    matching using the tool Make Human (www.makehuman.org/). 
                 Our desire to create a short video that would convey the many possible
                    applications of Virtual and Augmented Reality technologies that the Virtual
                    Studiolo project could engage, including gaming and 3DWeb and that would, at the
                    same time, entice viewers and involve them in a kaleidoscope of these
                    possibilities, led us to an extensive use of visual effects created in Blender:
                    animation, paint-brush based scenes, morphing, plays of light and shadow and, as
                    noted above, the physical simulation of fluids and the use of node compositing
                        (Figure 10). 
                 All that we have achieved during the creation of this concept demonstration
                    video will constitute a solid basis for future developments of the Virtual
                    Studiolo project, but it also demonstrates more generally the use of
                    environments, objects and animations that is possible with current visualization
                    and interaction technologies, some of which are briefly suggested in the visuals
                    accompanying the closing titles of the video. 
                
                    A still from the closing titles, showing a possible Augmented Reality
                        application to be developed in the future phases of Isabella d’Este: Virtual Studiolo
                    
                    
                
            

                5 The Virtual Studiolo: a new kind of cultural object
                 Immersive Virtual Reality (VR) technology offers unprecedented tools for
                    meaningful encounters with historic sites and virtual restoration of structures
                    that have been damaged, altered, or destroyed over time 
                    
                    . Photogrammetric surveys of surviving architectural
                    spaces and objects, digital animation, 3D modeling, virtual acoustics, mapping,
                    and digitized documentation enrich these new forms of access to historically
                    remote artefacts. Yet persisting in these new technologies are enduring
                    questions regarding all historical representation. Whose perspective is
                    reflected in the finished product? How open is it to interpretation and
                    revision? What active roles can users play in the VR experience? How can these
                    products move beyond mere illustration or single-narrative recreational
                    experiences to inspire new knowledge? Isabella d’Este:
                        Virtual Studiolo aims to build a multi-sensory, document-integrated,
                    interactive environment that confronts these issues. It will highlight scholarly
                    understanding of this celebrated studiolo (including uncertainties, which
                    abound), while also inviting user experimentation, interrogation, and customized
                    storytelling to offer a dynamic contemporary experience of the Renaissance
                    culture that the studiolo exemplifies . 
                 Museums and cultural sites aim to provide meaningful learning experiences  that, as an outcome, very often produce a sort of
                    paternalistic form of 
                        educative leisure
                        
                     that appeals to a narrow audience. In order to broaden the audience and
                    achieve better results, the communicative approach is gradually shifting toward
                    a different perspective. Understanding that learning and feeling are entangled,
                    that emotions play a role in attention and memory, recent research has
                    increasingly stressed the importance of emotive experiences in learning . We consider emotionally evocative applications to be
                    crucial for the future developments of Isabella d’Este:
                        Virtual Studiolo as well. Our video itself relies upon a visually
                    compelling first segment before giving way to a second segment that presents
                    more direct illustrations of devices, technologies, and products, suggesting our
                    aspiration to mobilize these to communicate elements of Isabella’s
                    Weltanschauung (a new inflection of what art historian Michael Baxandall termed
                        the period eye) , by running plausible simulations of the studiolo
                    and grotta environments. Additionally, it shows that 3D virtual environments may
                    be connected to digital archives of letters, music and objects from Isabella’s
                    life and, vice versa, by means of bidirectional paths and interactive,
                    personalised setups. 
                
                    One of Isabella’s dinner plates undergoing a digital process of colouring
                        after showing a hint at the original technique used by ceramicists for
                        transferring complex drawings onto ceramics.
                    
                    
                
                 Numerical simulations, which are an established practice in the sciences, allow
                    us to re-create plausible scenarios that increase our knowledge of natural
                    phenomena by means of mathematical and physical models under different initial
                    conditions and constraints. Similarly, taking as a point of departure IDEA’s
                    digital archive of Isabella’s letters, we illuminate our documentary sources for
                    understanding her early modern world through immersion in a 3D reconstruction of
                    her studiolo, aiming for a scholarly and creative experience that lies in an
                    overlapping dimension between historical research, game and dream. In this
                    project focused on Isabella d’Este’s studiolo, finally, we confirm lessons
                    learned at VisitLab from our previous experiences with the concept of Talking
                    Monuments, where databases and surviving artifacts are merged in a virtual
                    environment , as well as insights stemming from
                    Cineca’s numerical simulations of the eruptions of Vesuvius . 
                 We have already tested several types of navigation and user participation
                    employing a variety of technologies, most immediately within the Blend4Web
                    framework. Appropriate adjustments to models and textures for a real-time
                    performance, combined with JavaScript-HTML5-CSS3 programming, will allow users
                    to move around inside the Virtual Studiolo, to interact with objects and
                    writings, to read historical information and metadata, and even to customize the
                    explored environments without needing to install any particular application. Any
                    browser supporting WebGL, even on handheld devices, through a Web address and in
                    a fully transparent way, will provide the user with all the resources necessary
                    to run our application (Figure 9). 
                 Emotionally compelling Virtual Reality experiences have the potential to appeal
                    to a wide and diverse audience and to achieve long-lasting learning impacts.
                    Firsthand testimonials, oral histories and memories are typical means for
                    achieving these effects, in Virtual Museums as well as in traditional exhibits.
                    Where such authentic responses are unavailable, scripted storytelling may
                    provide information that engages visitors, as for example in the Etruscanning
                    project , where narration is carried out by two
                    fictional versions of the people buried in the Etruscan so-called
                    Regolini-Galassi tomb. Interactivity is a further means for engaging visitors’
                    undivided attention; adding immersivity to the experience promises to achieve
                    even higher levels of involvement, with interactions that are attainable either
                    in real-life settings or in virtual ones, or in both at the same time . As Perry et al. observe, 
                        no coherent framework of practice
                            (neither a conceptual model, nor practical guidelines) yet exists for
                            designing and evaluating emotive experiences for the cultural heritage
                            sector at large
                        
                    . The Virtual Studiolo will accordingly aim for a range of possible
                    outputs designed to elicit positive user feedback. We will privilege narration,
                    interactivity, immersivity , and aesthetic/emotive
                    involvement for all visitors to the Virtual Studiolo, while also offering
                    powerful new tools for teaching and research on the Italian Renaissance. 
                
                    Detail from end titles showing a possible immersive virtual reality
                        application to be developed in future phases of the Isabella d’Este Virtual
                        Studiolo project.
                    
                    
                
                 Integration of the studiolo’s surviving features (tiles, doorways, ceiling
                    decoration) with its former contents (paintings, instruments, sculptures, books,
                    clocks) will support research on Renaissance design and collecting.
                        Moveable contents will acknowledge scholarly debate
                    about their original arrangement and allow users to test hypotheses about
                    display and curation. At the same time, we also anticipate that users may
                    experience the Virtual Studiolo’s space and objects as a playable medium, exploring through a
                    game-like environment the choices, intentions, and tacit judgments that may have
                    informed Isabella’s decisions . Interfaces
                    with other IDEA projects will encourage deeper exploration of the relations
                    between the collection, the collector, and her historic cultural milieu. 
                 For a more immersive experience, both the studiolo and the grotta will be
                    available in HMD applications, with specific exports of the scene designed for
                    navigation with headsets (Figure 11). We also
                    anticipate the creation of special projections inside physical immersive spaces,
                    such as CAVEs, coupled with user tracking to enable a natural-feeling
                    interaction with the objects contained in the Virtual Studiolo. 
                 Finally, Isabella d’Este Virtual Studiolo is conceived as a multi-location,
                    cross-media opportunity that aims both at the general public and at a specific
                    audience of researchers. Our reflections on this spatial multiplicity and its
                    potential realizations include not simply the two levels of real and virtual
                    space, but also multiple potential real interfaces within the current Ducal
                    Palace in Mantua, with its empty, historic studiolo, and any other reproductions
                    of the studiolo that might merge real and virtual layers. In the case of the
                    real studiolo, for example, the museum’s director has considered the possibility
                    of installing physical copies of the paintings and other artefacts pertaining
                    historically to these rooms. Spatial augmented reality could, however, provide
                    another solution , where projections of virtualized
                    objects would be superimposed over the real space and could be accompanied by
                    animations and other elements capable of increasing people's involvement. In
                    such a realization, the virtual information layer could be integrated almost
                    seamlessly inside the real world, reducing the estrangement factor for non
                    3D-experts . Outside the Ducal Palace of Mantua, it is
                    also possible to set up a simulated studiolo made of real bare walls, in plywood
                    for example, and 3D printed or reconstructed objects, such as furniture or 3D
                    printed copies of works of art, to be used as simulacra of the objects
                    visualized inside the virtual world. Here, visitors would experience a situation
                    of hyper reality, with a seamless intermixture of physical and virtual worlds
                        . Since the construction of projects such as the
                    Museum of Pure Form , where a complex haptic system
                    was elaborated for giving users full and realistic interactions with sculptures
                    inside a virtual environment, the realism of virtual reality experiences has
                    improved exponentially. At present, environments such as The Void (https://www.thevoid.com/), a hyper reality environment for gaming
                    defined by the company as VR you can feel, represent a possible frontier
                    for Digital Cultural Heritage as well. Such a level of immersivity and
                        realism may suit both scholarly and general audiences.
                    360 degrees of free movement combined with environmental audio would simulate a
                    lifelike experience that opens new perspectives for researchers on topics that
                    will be no longer isolated but rather clearly interconnected with other
                    dimensions of research on Isabella’s life and milieu. A still further step may
                    be that of setting up a collaborative virtual reality environment 
                     to create a working space that is compatible with a
                    hyper reality experience. 
                 Sentiment analysis techniques , may enable forms of Big
                    Data analysis to enhance even further our knowledge of the intimate social space
                    of the studiolo. The capacity to extract participant sentiment automatically is
                    important in today’s world of commercial marketing, while measuring public
                    sentiment has become a primary tool for political analysis . Big data produced through the sophisticated algorithms
                    of social media like Twitter and Facebook are the digital outcomes of these
                    efforts . In the case of Isabella’s cultural patrimony,
                    her voluminous collections (of letters, music, and works of art) may represent
                    future digital corpora for sentiment analysis and opinion mining tools, and a
                    challenge for the development of new Artificial Intelligence networks. Might new
                    neural networks, developed and trained by interdisciplinary scholarly teams,
                    inquire into Isabella’s digital, multimedia heritage in search of new
                    perspectives on the Big Data concentrated in this minute, historic space? 
            

                6 Conclusions
                 Our challenge in the study of Isabella d’Este’s famous multimedia studiolo is to
                    learn from a variety of data sources that are relatively sparse, in order to
                    realize a multimodal dataset that can be experienced in a specific spatial
                    context: the Virtual Studiolo. Multiple data sources within the project will
                    complement each other, and their careful fusion will increase knowledge about
                    Isabella d’Este, her practices as a collector, and the values of her time. As
                    the Virtual Studiolo develops, we will focus on immersive technology through
                    CAVE and museum-situated applications to add to this project the critical
                    dimensions of scale and spatial proprioception. In both the desktop and the 3D
                    immersive applications that will be our initial products, we attend to the
                    textures and the aesthetics of this space, not only as principles of beauty but
                    also in the shaping of a sensorium where Renaissance visitors affirmed their own
                    values, desires, and emotions. We would welcome feedback from readers on the
                    video or the project as a whole. 
            

                Acknowledgements
                Following submission of our proposal (with video) in 2018, the Virtual Studiolo
                    project was awarded a National Endowment for the Humanities Digital Advancement
                    Grant, Level II, for 2019-2020. This generous support will enable construction
                    of phases one and two of five proposed, foundational phases of the environment.
                 The authors wish to thank: Peter Assmann (Palazzo Ducale di Mantova); Anne
                    MacNeil, Molly Bourne, Stephen Campbell, Daniela Ferrari, Lisa Regan (IDEA
                    project); Luca Govoni, Micaela Spigarolo (Cineca); Francesca
                    del Torre, Stefan Zeisler, Christian Mendez (Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien);
                    Dominique Thiebaut (Musée du Louvre); and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New
                    York. 
                 The realization of the concept-demonstration video was supported by the Samuel
                    H. Kress Foundation, the University of California, Santa Cruz, and the
                    Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien. 
            
