Title:  Modelling Medieval Hands: Practical OCR for
                    Caroline Minuscule
Volume:  013
Issue:  1
Date:  26 April 2019
Abstract:  
                
                Over the past few decades, the ever-expanding media of the digital world,
                    including digital humanities endeavors, have become more reliant on the results
                    of Optical Character Recognition (OCR) software. Yet, unfortunately,
                    medievalists have not had as much success with using OCR software on handwritten
                    manuscripts as scholars using printed books as their sources. While some
                    projects to ameliorate this situation have emerged in recent years, using
                    software to create machine-readable results from medieval manuscripts is still
                    in its infancy. This article presents the results of a series of successful
                    experiments with open-source neural network OCR software on medieval
                    manuscripts. Results over the course of these experiments yielded character and
                    word accuracy rates over 90%, reaching 94% and 97% accuracy in some instances.
                    Such results are not only viable for creating machine-readable texts but also
                    pose new avenues for bringing together manuscript studies and digital humanities
                    in ways previously unrealized. A closer examination of the experiments indicates
                    regular patterns among the OCR results that could potentially allow for use
                    cases beyond pure text recognition, such as for paleographic classifications of
                    script types.
            
Full Body Text: 
Modelling Medieval Hands: Practical OCR for Caroline Minuscule

                Introduction
                In an age replete with digital media, much of the content we access is the result
                    of Optical Character Recognition (OCR), the rendering of handwritten, typed, or
                    printed text into machine-readable form. On a more specific scale, OCR has
                    increasingly become part of scholarly inquiry in the humanities. For example, it
                    is fundamental to Google Books, the Internet Archive, and HathiTrust, corpus
                    creation for large-scale text analysis, and various aspects of digital
                    humanities. As a number of recent studies and projects have demonstrated, the
                    results of OCR offer a wide range of possibilities for accessing and analyzing
                    texts in new ways. There are many more than can be cited here, but see
                        esp. results from the Stanford Literary Lab; ;
                            ; ; and .
                OCR has shifted the range and scope of humanistic study in ways that were not
                    possible before the advent of computers. As stated by a team of scholars led by
                    Mark Algee-Hewitt at the Stanford Literary Lab, 
                        Of the novelties produced by
                            digitization in the study of literature, the size of the archive is
                            probably the most dramatic: ...now we can analyze thousands of [texts],
                            tens of thousands, tomorrow hundreds of thousands
                        
                     (cf. ). Beyond literary study specifically,
                    new possibilities due to the mass digitization of archives have emerged across
                    the humanities. Historians of books, texts, and visual arts (to name just a few
                    areas) now have ready access to many more materials from archives than previous
                    generations. Among the new pursuits of humanities scholars, computer-aided
                    studies often no longer focus only on a handful of texts but encompass
                    large-scale corpora — that is, collections of hundreds or thousands of
                        texts. See previous references, esp. the overview and examples in . Much of this is made possible by
                    OCR.
                Yet most studies and applications of OCR to date concern printed books (see,
                    e.g., ; ; and ). The majority of text-mining projects in the
                    humanities focus on eighteenth- and nineteenth-century printed texts.  For
                        projects using OCR on early modern printed texts, see, e.g., ; and . One way to
                    expand the potential for humanistic studies even further is to apply OCR tools
                    to extract data from medieval manuscripts, but this area of research has
                    received much less attention. Some recent endeavors to render
                        machine-readable data from medieval materials (manuscripts and incunables)
                        stand out, although not all of these use OCR software: e.g., ; ; ; ; ; ; ; the Rescribe project ; ; ; and the
                        recently launched HIMANIS project , built on
                        proprietary software by Teklia, not open-source tools that could be more
                        widely applied. Indeed, the current situation with using OCR on
                    medieval manuscripts is not much different from 1978, when John J. Nitti claimed
                    that 
                        no OCR (Optical Character
                            Recognition) device capable of reading and decoding thirteenth-century
                            Gothic script was forthcoming
                        
                    . Now, as then, there has been little progress on using OCR to decipher
                    Gothic or any other medieval script, regardless of type, date, or origin. 
                This article presents the results of a series of experiments with open-source
                    neural network OCR software on a total of 88 medieval manuscripts ranging from
                    the ninth through thirteenth centuries. Data for our experiments may be
                        found at https://github.com/rescribe/. Our scope in these
                    experiments focused mainly on manuscripts written in Caroline minuscule, as well
                    as a handful of test cases toward the end of our date range written in what may
                    be called Late Caroline and Early Gothic scripts (termed transitional when taken
                        together). On terminology and other issues, see our Appendix: A Note
                        on Manuscript Dates, Origins, and Scripts. In the following, we
                    discuss the possibilities and challenges of using OCR on medieval manuscripts,
                    neural network technology and its use in OCR software, the process and results
                    of our experiments, and how these results offer a baseline for future research.
                    Our results show potential for contributing to not only text recognition as such
                    but also other areas of bibliography like paleographical analysis. In all of
                    this, we want to emphasize the use of open-source software and sharing of data
                    for decentralized, large-scale OCR with manuscripts in order to open up new
                    collaborative avenues for innovation in the digital humanities and medieval
                    studies.
            

                Medieval Manuscripts and OCR
                The field of medieval studies, of course, relies on the transcription and editing
                    of texts for analysis. Work with OCR on medieval manuscripts is potentially
                    useful considering how many medieval texts remain untranscribed or unedited. In
                    many cases, this is because of the unwieldiness of editorial projects dealing
                    with hundreds of witnesses. In other cases, texts remain obscure because they
                    are overlooked or ignored in the shadow of more canonical works. While
                    digitization has expanded the size of the archive for humanities scholarship in
                    substantial ways, medieval studies still has work to do before this archive may
                    be used for examinations of understudied texts or large-scale analysis.
                In this respect, we see the potential to harness open-source OCR software for
                    medieval studies in a number of ways. Using OCR could help contribute to areas
                    such as: the speed, efficiency, and accuracy of text transcription and editing;
                    cross-manuscript comparisons of texts in multiple respects; paleographical
                    analysis; studies of textual transmission; as well as corpus creation,
                    searchability, and subsequent macroanalysis. For example, with the output of OCR
                    from medieval manuscripts, we could compare versions of texts for editorial
                    purposes with collation tools like JuxtaCommons, or for intertextual parallels
                    within larger corpora with tools like Tesserae. With other methodologies in
                    mind, using OCR for massive corpus creation would allow for text-mining with
                    tools like Lexos or other statistical analysis software like R (as in ). Using OCR with medieval manuscripts also opens up
                    new avenues of research related to scribal practices such as scripts and their
                    variant spellings, irregular spacing, abbreviations, and errors — encompassing
                    local and general considerations through diachronic and synchronic lenses.
                Certainly there are difficulties to working with OCR software on medieval
                    manuscripts that do not apply to printed books. Medieval scribes did not work
                    with Unicode, nor even with modern typefaces. A few reasons why OCR has not been
                    widely applied to medieval manuscripts, even though it is evidently a good idea,
                    include irregular features of handwriting, abbreviations, and scribal
                    idiosyncrasies; variations in spellings; non-standard page layouts; and
                    deteriorated pages — among other issues that might appear. All of these factors
                    make traditional OCR based on print technology difficult. Recently assessing the
                    field of OCR for corpus creation in medieval studies, Michael Widner writes, 
                        Medieval manuscripts are
                            practically impervious to contemporary OCR
                        
                     (cf. ). However, with the availability of
                    open-source Artificial Neural Network (ANN) technology, as well as an increasing
                    amount of digitized sources available via open access, OCR for medieval
                    manuscripts is actually becoming a greater possibility.
                We believe that there is a significant point to using OCR software — rather than
                    other tools for handwritten text recognition (HTR) — because of the relative
                    regularity of medieval hands and scripts overall, which may be analogous in some
                    ways to print typefaces in a general way. On distinctions between OCR and
                        HTR, and critique of the former, see ; and, e.g., , with
                        documentation about both OCR and HTR at the project wiki, https://transkribus.eu/wiki/index.php/Main_Page. Recent
                    work has questioned the efficacy of OCR and turned to HTR as a preliminary way
                    to analyze script types even before moving on to the process of recognition
                    (e.g. by ). The differences between OCR (a
                    long-established technology) and HTR (in an early phase of development) are
                    subtle but substantial. The biggest difference lies with layout analysis and
                    segmentation for processing: this stage is usually built into the OCR engine,
                    while it is a separate stage in HTR. OCR tends to be known for a focus on
                    processing individual letter-forms or characters as isolated parts of the
                    whole text or text lines and is more widely used on printed texts. HTR typically
                    processes whole words or lines, and is upheld as the optimal technology for
                    handwritten texts.
                Yet OCR and HTR technologies and processes have recently converged to some
                    degree. Major OCR engines are also used on handwritten texts in various ways.
                    Indeed, there is now some amount of overlap between OCR and HTR in practice
                    because of developments in machine learning; for example, engines like OCRopus
                    allow for new methods and analysis and segmentation (see below, on the OCRopus
                    engine). New modes of using OCR software with ANN technology shift beyond
                    specific focus on characters. ANN technology has reached a point that makes this
                    possible for several reasons, more than the previous type of technology. While
                    both OCR and ANN technologies have been around for much longer than often
                    acknowledged, we now have more computing power than ever before. The time seems
                    right to use that technology for the challenges that medieval manuscripts pose
                    to OCR.
                At the outset, it is important to recognize that our goal is not to eliminate
                    human analytical work with computers. But using open-source OCR tools for
                    manuscripts has the potential to limit the time of editing and to increase the
                    efficiency of dealing with large numbers of witnesses. As is obvious from other
                    uses of OCR for text-mining, post-processing brings the need for cleaning up
                        dirty OCR through means of
                    what David Mimno has called 
                        data carpentry
                        
                    . For print books, post-processing means, at the least, eliminating
                    extraneous data such as chapter numbers, hyphens, page numbers, page headers and
                    footers, and apparatus, as well as unwanted noise produced
                    in the OCR process (see ; and ). Manuscripts may include many of the
                    same elements, as well as their own idiosyncrasies like glosses and marginalia.
                    Surely the human is integral to this whole process.
            

                Artificial Neural Networks for OCR
                Artificial neural network (ANN) technology, also known as deep learning,
                    machine learning, or just AI has been around for a surprisingly
                    long time. On ANN technology and its connection to OCR as discussed in
                        this section, see esp. ; ; and .
                    While recognized as a powerful method which could address a large range of
                    problems in computing, its uptake was limited for years, in large part due to
                    the need for very large training sets and general speed issues. However, its use
                    has exploded in recent years as storage and computer processing is much cheaper,
                    and in some sectors massive labelled training sets can be assembled
                    automatically using the labor of unknowing web users (see, e.g., ; and ). ANNs are useful in a
                    large variety of applications and are particularly good at dealing with
                    fuzziness and uncertainty in data, identifying patterns in a noisy world.
                The basic idea behind ANNs is that they use algorithms to create a function that
                    can perform some action, such as labelling different breeds of dogs, given a
                    large training set, by repeatedly refining and testing different versions of a
                    model. As this training process continues, the network
                    becomes more and more accurate, until a point at which it plateaus and can no
                    longer improve without more input data or changes in the initial configuration
                    of the ANN. The model generated at each step is composed of many simple
                        yes/no gates, automatically created by the training algorithms, which
                    are given different weights through different iterations of the training process
                    until an optimal configuration is found. These gates can be compared to
                    biological neurons in the brain, which is where the name neural network
                    comes from.
                There are many types of ANNs, and each is appropriate for different uses. Deep
                    neural networks (DNNs) use many hidden layers, which result in significantly
                    more complex, but generally more accurate, recognition. Recurrent neural
                    networks (RNNs) are a type of DNN in which different layers can refer back to
                    each other, which has the effect of enabling some contextual memory —
                    which is to say that later parts of recognition can make reference to earlier
                    parts, and vice-versa. Finally, a type of RNN that has found much favor in OCR
                    and many other applications is called Long Short Term Memory (LSTM). This is a
                    clever configuration of a RNN such that contextual memory can endure for a long
                    time when it is useful without skewing recognition results in other cases, which
                    could happen with earlier RNN variants. The combination of a long contextual
                    memory and a neural network makes LSTM very well suited to tasks like OCR and
                    speech recognition, where the context (of earlier and later characteristics like
                    pixels, sounds, characters, words, and beyond) is very helpful in inferring the
                    correct result.
                These ideas can be difficult to conceptualize in the abstract, so it helps to
                    take a look at how they work in the case of OCR. The following description and
                    accompanying images should help to make the process clearer. A training set will
                    typically consist of many images, each containing a line of text, with
                    accompanying labels that the ANN should somehow learn to
                    associate with the parts of each image, until it can do this correctly even for
                    unseen images. This can be done in different ways, so here we discuss how the
                    open-source OCRopus engine works using a LSTM neural network.
                First, the page image used for training the neural networks is split up into the
                    lines that make up the text (see Figure 1). Each
                    line image is matched with a text transcription as a label — the UTF-8 formatted
                    text corresponding to the text in the image, as transcribed by a human in order
                    to train the computer how to recognize the text. All matching pairs of image and
                    text lines taken together make up the so-called ground
                        truth which is used to train the OCR model. This stage of the
                    process creates image-text pairs, between the segmented line image and the
                    ground truth transcription (labels), for the purpose of training the engine.
                
                                     
                    
                    
                
                In the next step, the actual training process, each ground truth image line is
                    split into vertical lines 1 pixel wide and fed into the LSTM network in order
                    (see Figure 2). In this case the
                        memory of the LSTM network refers to the vertical lines
                    before and after a point being considered. The LSTM training engine will go
                    through the lines one-by-one, creating a model of how each line relates to those
                    around it, with the lines further away generally having less weight than those
                    closest (but still able to influence things, thanks to the
                        long memory aspect of LSTM). The exact configuration
                    and weighting of different nodes of the LSTM network is altered many times
                    during this process, each time comparing the result of OCR with this test
                    network on the ground truth image lines. After a few tens of thousands of
                    iterations, this process gradually finds the configuration which produces the
                    best results for the whole corpus of ground truth.
                
                    
                    
                    
                
                By contrast, traditional OCR methods are based on rules defined by the designers
                    of the system, defining algorithms for how best to split characters and match
                    those characters to characters that have been previously seen. While intuitively
                    we might expect human experts to do a better job at designing methods to do OCR
                    than an RNN, recursive neural network systems consistently perform far better in
                    practice. This is a well-recognized feature of recursive neural network systems
                        . Again, perhaps surprisingly, neural networks
                    are in particular very good at handling the fuzziness of real world inputs.
                    Needless to say, this works in our favor for OCR in general, and for OCR of
                    historical documents in particular.
                While many medieval manuscripts are relatively regular in style and script, there
                    is inevitably more variation in script than with printed documents. When coupled
                    with the large number of variant spellings, irregular spacing, abbreviations,
                    and errors used in the period, traditional OCR engines are not able to provide a
                    good enough accuracy to be particularly useful. The power of OCR based on LSTM
                    technology changes the situation, due to the significantly higher accuracy level
                    in general, the ability to take as much context as is helpful into account, and
                    the ability to better tolerate variation and other sorts of
                        noise that crop up in centuries-old handwritten
                    documents (see ).
                Of the RNN software currently available, our choice fell on OCRopus, an
                    open-source program designed to train neural networks for optical character
                    recognition. With respect to our purpose, OCRopus has some specific advantages
                    vis-a-vis other open-source programs. First, it is distributed under the Apache
                    License and freely usable by anyone under the outlined conditions. Second,
                    OCRopus provides an easily modifiable set of commands that allows users to adapt
                    the single steps of OCR (such as binarization, segmentation, training, and
                    recognition) to their specific purposes. OCRopus is not a turn-key system, or
                    software ready for use as is. Rather, this type of software requires the users
                    to train their own models, the key input to the process; hence a degree of
                    technical know-how is required. Even so, it offers the advantage that if any of
                    the code has to be modified, or third-party programs used for discrete steps,
                    this can be done in a simple, localized fashion without repercussions for the
                    overall process. In our specific case, we chose to process the
                        binarization with an alternative open-source program, ScanTailor, in order
                        to maintain a higher resolution than OCRopus would produce. We also amended
                        the numbering procedure for the segmented lines from hexadecimal to decimal
                        as we realized that the initial hexadecimal order would confuse the order of
                        lines in the raw text output.
                Unlike alternative OCR programs like Tesseract or Oculus, OCRopus’s neural
                    networks are trained in a language-agnostic fashion — that is, exclusively
                    focused on characters rather than words (see, e.g., ;
                    and ). While OCRopus offers sets trained for specific
                    languages like English, there is no corrective process interpreting strings of
                    characters with the help of a set dictionary as a language-focused OCR program
                    might. Although this sort of function can be of great use when adapting OCR for
                    modern languages with a fixed orthography, this freedom from orthographic rules
                    proves convenient when working with medieval manuscripts in Latin replete with
                    variant spellings, irregular spacing, abbreviations, and errors. Indeed, for our
                    purposes, this gives OCRopus an advantage over other OCR software and makes it a
                    viable choice even in comparison with HTR technology.
                Additionally, the documentation provided for OCRopus by both the original
                    developers and users opens up the process significantly for further
                    applications. One example is previous experimentation in using OCRopus with
                    incunables by Uwe Springmann and Anke Lüdeling .
                    Although incunables are printed, and of a greater regularity than expected from
                    manuscripts, instructions and experiment results that Springmann and Lüdeling
                    laid out provided an initial baseline for us to conduct experiments with.
                        Our main sources for installation and training process, apart from OCRopus’s
                        own documentation on Github, was Dan Vanderkam’s very useful contribution
                        about installing OCRopus on Apple iOS  and
                        Springmann’s detailed description of a training process for incunables .
                The open-source OCRopus engine uses a reasonably standard LSTM architecture. As
                    mentioned above, it splits a page image into lines before passing the result to
                    the LSTM engine, for either training or recognition. This is in contrast to most
                    HTR systems, which cannot rely on lines being straight and mostly
                    non-overlapping, and therefore have to rely on a more complex architecture.
                    However, for printed texts and more palatable manuscript scripts like Caroline
                    minuscule this is fortunately unnecessary, which means we can use a simpler
                    architecture which is faster, smaller, and more accurate . The initial line-splitting is done with the tool
                        ocropus-gpageseg, This tool, as are the others mentioned here,
                        is built into OCRopus. which analyses a page image and outputs a
                    series of lines in PNG format. One can then either perform recognition on these
                    lines using an existing model, with the ocropus-rpred tool, or create a
                    series of ground truth files that correspond to the lines (named, e.g.,
                        imgname.gt.txt) and train a new neural network model with the
                        ocropus-rtrain tool.
            

                Process and Results
                
                    1. Objective and theoretical approach
                    The basic objective of our experiments with OCR software based on neural
                        network technology was to develop a workable, ideally time-saving, but
                        sufficiently accurate solution for recognizing text in medieval manuscripts
                        using open-source software.
                    At the start of our research, there were no known efforts publicly documented
                        that would demonstrate the success of applying OCR to medieval manuscripts.
                        Our initial experiments were therefore designed to demonstrate whether
                        neural networks can be trained on medieval manuscripts in the first place,
                        using ground truth created from target manuscripts. Results over the course
                        of our experiments yielded character and word accuracy rates over 90%,
                        reaching 94% and 97% accuracy in some instances. With the benefit of
                        hindsight, these findings concur with the excellent results achieved with
                        digitized manuscripts from the Royal Chancellory in Paris by the HIMANIS
                        project, launched in 2017, albeit not with open-source software . We might also compare these results to those of
                        the Durham Priory Library OCR Project conducted using OCRopus .
                    The viability of developing an open-source OCR solution based on neural
                        network technology for medieval manuscripts can be considered proven in
                        point. Even more, a model trained on the ground truth from a specific,
                        single manuscript can yield high-accuracy results with that particular
                        manuscript. We see this in the case of our experiment with Arras,
                        Bibliothèque municipale 764, for which we achieved a shocking 97.06%
                        accuracy rate for OCR based on ground truth transcription from this single
                        manuscript. With a view to the primary objective of large-scale,
                        collaborative work on manuscripts, the involvement of open-source software
                        would be a desirable, expedient, and time-saving approach — ideally by
                        developing a turn-key model. Rather than focusing on whether manuscript OCR
                        is possible, our experiments tried to ascertain some best practices.
                    The hypothesis to be tested in our experiments, therefore, was that size and
                        diversity of the training pool would be directly proportional to the quality
                        of the resulting model when tested on seen and unseen
                        manuscripts within the realm of Caroline minuscule scripts. Seen in
                        the context of this article refers to test manuscripts included in the
                        training pool, albeit different pages; unseen refers to manuscripts
                        not included in the training pool. While the results of seen manuscripts
                        would be relevant in the research, developing a strategy for building a
                        turn-key model for unseen manuscripts of a certain denomination is our
                        ultimate goal. Among the specific types of application for neural networks,
                        the strategic selection of training material seems to matter where there is
                        no unlimited amount of data available, also depending on the type of
                        material involved. That is, although the training pool can presumably never
                        be big enough, the question remains about what kind of diversity is actually
                        beneficial.
                    In the context of medieval manuscripts, the accuracy of the results is rarely
                        satisfactory when a model trained on one specific manuscript is applied to
                        an unseen test manuscript. This concurs with the result of Springmann and
                        Lüdeling’s experiments with incunables . In a
                        further step, however, Springmann and Lüdeling’s experiments sought to
                        combine the ground truth from different incunables to observe the outcome.
                        The experiment was designed with a diachronic corpus of texts spanning
                        several centuries and the range of training and testing manuscripts was
                        significantly broad. The mixed models developed yielded reliably worse
                        results than the pure models where the OCR training pool contained ground
                        truth from the target incunable only. This problem can be expected to only
                        exacerbate in the case of medieval manuscripts where it is not only the
                        different font, so to speak (the script), but also the
                        idiosyncratic execution of the scribe (the hand) that sets one manuscript
                        apart from another. Since single-manuscript models do not perform well for
                        other manuscripts, however, the mixing of ground truth from different
                        manuscripts would be the only way to develop a turn-key model for unseen
                        manuscripts. The question is whether the trade-off between a decreased
                        accuracy for seen manuscripts and time saved by using a turn-key model would
                        be made worthwhile by sufficiently good results for unseen manuscripts.
                    Conceptually, it is useful to liken the situation of manuscript OCR to that
                        of speech recognition technology. Handwritten texts are deliberately similar
                        within script categories, but without a definite blueprint they all refer
                        to; conversely, there is no such thing as the perfectly pronounced natural
                        speech, only variations of it (male-female voice, old-young, accent-native).
                        Within the pool of the spoken sound, there are boundaries defined by
                        languages: within each, specific sounds (phonemes) will consistently map to
                        specific letter combinations (graphemes). Across a range of languages,
                        however, with different relationships of phonemes and graphemes, this
                        consistent mapping would get confused. Accordingly, training pools for
                        speech recognition algorithms tend to be limited to data in one language
                        only.
                    Comparing the case of medieval manuscripts, not phonemes but characters
                        (abbreviations included) map directly to letters or letter combinations from
                        the Latin alphabet — at least to the extent that the relationship is
                        consistent within each manuscript. Although medieval manuscripts can be
                        written in a variety of languages, the linguistic boundary seems less
                        relevant than the typographic one: across a range of hands, some characters
                        of different scripts resembling each other correspond with different letters
                        of the Latin alphabet. The Visigoth a, for example,
                        looks more similar to a Caroline u than our expectation
                        of an a. Defining the boundary of the training pool
                        should therefore exclude instances where two characters from separate
                        medieval hands resemble each other, but map to different letters (whereas
                        mapping one Latin letter to two different-looking characters would not
                        necessarily pose a problem).
                    Following that analogy, we limited the training pool mainly to one script
                        type. Given its spread in Western Europe, across a range of geographies and
                        time periods, Caroline minuscule naturally suggested itself as a more easily
                        read and widespread script. Eventually, we did include manuscripts that
                        pushed beyond initial models based on Caroline minuscule. In our second
                        phase of testing, we also incorporated manuscripts containing scripts with
                        features exhibiting later developments. Such manuscripts contain
                            transitional Late Caroline and Early Gothic scripts (see the
                        Appendix). These manuscripts helped to expand our experiments somewhat to
                        begin seeing further results about the diversity of our training pool.
                    The implicit goal was to develop a model that could deliver a character
                        accuracy of at least 90% on unseen manuscripts. As per our experience,
                        certain technical parameters are crucial to achieve good output: good
                        quality, high-resolution images; a minimum line height, even if that
                        significantly slows down OCRopus’s processing in the segmentation and
                        recognition steps; and eliminating skewed results from large illustrations,
                        difficult layouts, and discolorations. The quality of both testing and
                        training manuscripts can skew the interpretation: for example, a testing
                        manuscript of extremely high quality might compare all too favorably and
                        skew expectations with regard to the average outcome. Within our overall
                        framework, the goal was to establish tendencies rather than definite
                        results.
                    For the current project, the expansion of medieval abbreviations has been
                        treated as a post-processing problem and bracketed out from the
                        experimentation objectives. With a view to future research, however, we
                        believe there to be scope for LSTM models to be trained to correctly expand
                        ambiguous abbreviations.
                    The overall experiment proceeded in two steps: testing models from training
                        pools as small as 2-5 manuscripts, and pools of 50 manuscripts upwards.
                
                
                    2. Size and diversity in small models
                    In the first round of experiments, we combined single pages of a small number
                        of manuscripts written in Caroline minuscule in a training pool and tested
                        them on different pages from these seen manuscripts. In the process, models
                        were built from 2-5 different manuscripts. This step very much resembled the
                        experiments with mixed models done by Springmann and Lüdeling on incunables
                        and our results concurred with theirs . At
                        the time, our assumption was that diversity within a training pool would be
                        unequivocally beneficial in all cases. When tested on target manuscripts,
                        however, these small, mixed models performed uniformly worse on seen
                        manuscripts than pure models — that is, these results directly contradicted
                        our assumption that a greater variety in a training pool would always lead
                        to greater accuracy of the results.
                    Looking at the results more closely for both seen and unseen manuscripts
                        brings more nuanced tendencies to the fore. Foremost, we encountered a
                        phenomenon we termed relative preponderance in the context: the
                        proportionally higher or lower representation of a manuscript or subgroup of
                        manuscripts in the training pool and the subsequent effect on the accuracy
                        of the respective test manuscript or subgroup. For example, when testing on
                        seen manuscripts, i.e. manuscripts represented in the training pool,
                        accuracy decreased with diversity of the training pool (Figure 3). In other words, the lesser the
                        relative preponderance of the seen manuscript in the training pool, the
                        lower the accuracy of the outcome.
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    An exception to this rule was a model composed of 100 lines of Arras,
                        Bibliothèque municipale 764 (c.800-1100, France and England), and around 100
                        lines of Wolfenbüttel, Herzog August Bibliothek, Weissenburg 48 (c.840-860,
                        Weissenburg?). With an error rate of 2.33% when tested on unseen pages of
                        Arras 764 the model outperformed the model built from 300 lines of Arras 764
                        combined with 100 lines of Weissenburg 48 (3.97% error rate) and the
                        original model on only 300 lines from Arras 764 on the same test pages
                        (2.53% error rate). The error rates in this case were surprisingly good for
                        Arras 764 and, with further experiments, proven exceptional rather than a
                        rule. A further elaboration on the experiment combined the original ground
                        truth of Arras 764 with pages of ground truth from other manuscripts. The
                        result shows that the model created from a combination of Arras 764 and
                        Weissenburg 48 was some kind of an outlier: in the majority of cases, the
                        model formed from two different manuscripts did not outperform the original
                        model trained exclusively on ground truth from the target manuscript.
                    A careful conclusion would have it that a variety of two or more manuscripts
                        does not yield a better foundation for an OCR model for either target
                        manuscript as a rule, but that specific combinations of manuscripts
                            can yield exceptional results. In some cases, the reasons
                        behind such results or the criteria for the respective manuscripts to be
                        combined are not entirely clear. On the whole, mixing additional manuscripts
                        into the training pool of a seen manuscript adversely affects the accuracy
                        of the outcome.
                    When testing these models on unseen manuscripts, the trend was mostly the
                        reverse: the more different manuscripts were included in the model, the
                        better the results were for the unseen test manuscripts (Figure 4). As the graphed data shows, there is
                        not a linear relationship between size and diversity of the training pool
                        and the accuracy of the outcome. With so small a training and testing pool,
                        the idiosyncrasies of each manuscript may also play a role. For the majority
                        of the test cases, the results for unseen manuscripts were better for bigger
                        training pools.
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    The general trend confirms that models tested on seen manuscripts yield worse
                        results the more different manuscripts are added to the training pool. This
                        finding goes against the grain of the assumption that a greater quantity and
                        diversity of manuscripts within the training pool would make for a better
                        model. Our explanation is that at such a low number of manuscripts combined,
                        the accuracy in the results is chiefly determined by the relative
                        preponderance of a seen manuscript in the training pool. In other words, the
                        more its presence is diluted through the addition of more manuscripts, the
                        lesser the accuracy in the end result.
                    In the case of unseen manuscripts, the proportionality between quality of the
                        model and diversity and size of the training pool holds. In this case, the
                        relationship showed that the more different manuscripts were included in the
                        training pool, the better were the results. Conceptually, our interpretation
                        of this behavior is that while the relative preponderance of a seen
                        manuscript is largely responsible for the accuracy for models of small size,
                        the larger the diversity — and therefore complexity — in the training
                        process, the better a model can deal with the unfamiliar hand of an unseen
                        manuscript. Although the accuracy achieved with models of small size was not
                        satisfactory, the findings suggest that the results would only improve with
                        an increase in training material.
                
                
                    3. Size, diversity, and accuracy for bigger models
                    With the ultimate objective of our experiments in mind — building a turn-key
                        OCR model applicable to as large a range of unseen manuscripts as possible —
                        the number of ground truth lines in the training pool were dramatically
                        increased. The transcribed pages of 50 randomly chosen manuscripts of the
                        time period between the ninth and eleventh century and written in Caroline
                        minuscule or a transitional script were combined in one training pool and
                        tested on seen manuscripts included in the training pool and unseen
                        manuscripts not included in the training pool.
                    The results show that the relationship discovered between size of the
                        training pool and the accuracy for the seen manuscript peaked (Figure 5). At some point, the relative
                        preponderance of the target manuscript included in the training pool ceased
                        to matter. Instead, the increase in size of the training pool was directly
                        proportional to the accuracy achieved with the resulting model, almost
                        uniformly.
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    The relationship between the size of the training pool and accuracy of the
                        outcome continued to hold for unseen manuscripts (Figure 6). Yet looking at the improvement of the error rate, the
                        experiments show that, in a small training pool, the addition of one or two
                        manuscripts makes a veritable difference, while in the case of larger pools
                        the difference made by each addition becomes marginal. In other words, while
                        the improvement of model accuracy is proportional to the quantity of
                        manuscripts included, this is not a linear development but a flattening
                        curve.
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    Originally, the training and testing pool had been limited to Caroline
                        minuscule. However, other than with languages, the definition of Caroline
                        minuscule is not set in stone: there are many manuscripts that show
                        transitional stages manifest in different character forms, a growing number
                        of abbreviations, and changing layouts. In a way, the boundaries between
                            pure and transitional scripts
                        are also not absolute but very much subject to human discretion — a
                        circumstance that curiously comes to the fore when testing computational
                        approaches to the area of manuscript studies (cf. ).
                    In a similar vein, a degree of variety was represented in our training set,
                        with some of the manuscripts containing Late Caroline and Early Gothic
                        scripts. A direct comparison of the training sets compiled from Caroline
                        minuscule and strictly excluding transitional forms, versus the same
                        training set including some transitional forms, brought to the fore the
                        result that the presence of transitional forms in the training pool
                        uniformly improved the output, rather than making it worse. Whether this
                        improvement was simply due to the increase of size or diversity of the
                        training pool could not be established for sure at this stage.
                    Conversely, the diversity of the training pool had a greater influence on the
                        results with unseen manuscripts outside the immediate boundary of Caroline
                        minuscule, in this case with transitional scripts. In other words, the
                        relative preponderance of outlier manuscripts in the
                        big training pool showed the same effect as the relative preponderance of
                        the seen manuscripts in a small training pool. When
                        tested on an unseen Early Gothic manuscript, the results for a lower number
                        of manuscripts in the pool showed better results than with further, strictly
                        Caroline minuscule manuscripts added. Similar to the idea of relative
                        preponderance of the seen manuscript in the training pool, the proportional
                        representation of outlier scripts in the training pool
                        affects the results with unseen Late Caroline and Early Gothic test
                        manuscripts.
                    This hypothesis was confirmed in further experiments (Figure 7). To the training pool of fifty predominantly Caroline
                        minuscule manuscripts we added ten Late Caroline and Early Gothic
                        manuscripts for one model, ten Caroline manuscripts for another, and one
                        model combining all three groups. The results showed that for the
                        predominant manuscript group in the pool (with Caroline minuscule script)
                        increase in size and diversity of the model almost uniformly improved the
                        results, more than the increase of size with a view to uniformity. In this
                        set of experiments, our best results achieved an accuracy rate of
                        94.22%.
                    
                        
                        
                        
                    
                    Differently said, in most cases, the addition of ten Late Caroline and Early
                        Gothic manuscripts to the training pool (altogether combining a greater
                        number of lines) made for better results than adding ten Caroline minuscule
                        manuscripts. The difference of accuracy was very small in comparison but
                        almost uniform across the Caroline minuscule test manuscripts. In all cases,
                        the final, large model combining the original pool of fifty manuscripts, ten
                        Late Caroline and Early Gothic, and ten Caroline minuscule performed best on
                        all Caroline minuscule test manuscripts.
                    Conversely, the Late Caroline and Early Gothic test manuscripts uniformly
                        performed best with the model combining the pool of fifty manuscripts with
                        the ten additional Late Caroline and Early Gothic manuscripts, second best
                        with the big combined model, and worst with the Caroline minuscule addition.
                        Our conclusion is that the relative preponderance of Late Caroline and Early
                        Gothic manuscripts in the training pool significantly influenced the outcome
                        for outlier manuscripts, rather than the sheer increase
                        in size of the training pool.
                    The resemblance in behavior with the example of seen manuscripts tested with
                        small models suggests that there might be a similar peak whereby the
                        relative preponderance of the outlier manuscripts in the training pool might
                        cease to influence the outcome. Testing this hypothesis is not within the
                        scope of this experiment but suggests an avenue for future research.
                    Lastly, it is notable that tests with outlier scripts
                        other than Early Gothic — such as earlier manuscripts, for example — yielded
                        neither remotely satisfactory results nor identifiable accuracy patterns
                        across the test range of models. We found this to be the issue with two
                            limit case examples from manuscripts written in Insular minuscule
                        around the year 800. One example was a page from St. Gall, Stiftsbibliothek
                        761, a collection of medical texts, where none of our models achieved an
                        error rate below 36%. See description and digital facsimile at e-codices, https://www.e-codices.unifr.ch/en/list/one/csg/0761 At
                        this point in our research we have too little data to issue anything other
                        than a hypothetical interpretation. Our conjecture is, however, that
                        although overall stylistic distinctions between related scripts like
                        Caroline minuscule and Insular (Caroline) minuscule are not considered
                        immense according to paleographical accounts, even these smaller differences
                        seem to have a big impact on the results with ANN OCR. The fact that these
                        test cases failed to yield any substantial or regular OCR results suggests
                        that the scope of the results of this experiment does not expand beyond the
                        types of scripts used in the training data. These limit cases, then,
                        demonstrate how a focus on script types is justified for further research;
                        there is much more to be discovered in future experiments with this type of
                        computer processing.
                    Given the regularity of behavior in the results with the Caroline and Early
                        Gothic manuscripts, our experiments hint at how OCR technology based on
                        neural networks might be used for further analytical purposes, with the
                        potential to expand the same strategies beyond these script types. This
                        became more apparent as we experimented with training and testing models
                        made up of seen and unseen manuscripts, with a diversity of Caroline
                        minuscule, Late Caroline, and Early Gothic scripts. Beyond pure text
                        recognition (the main aim of using OCR software), results also indicate
                        patterns that could help to better understand paleography and categories of
                        scripts. While our investigations so far have mainly focused on manuscripts
                        with Caroline minuscule script, the outliers we incorporated define another
                        set of results with broader implications than text recognition as such.
                    One particular example of wider applicability may be seen with results from
                        incorporating manuscripts written in scripts from the eleventh, twelfth, and
                        thirteenth centuries. After all, script types during this period are often
                        described as transitional, and paleographical distinctions between
                        developments are difficult to classify (see ; and ). The experiments with
                        different types of training and testing models based on more or less script
                        diversity and greater or lesser relative preponderance of manuscripts groups
                        showed up regular patterns in different contexts that could be employed for
                        analytical purposes. Using these patterns for paleographical analysis is a
                        tantalizing prospect. We hope to pursue these possibilities in the future,
                        as we build more training and testing models to bear out results from
                        further diversity in our experiments.
                
            

                Conclusions
                Bibliography remains a fundamental basis of medieval studies, from traditional
                    paleography to digital humanities databases. For example, research on scripts by
                    paleographers like E. A. Lowe, Bernhard Bischoff, and R. A. B. Mynors formed the
                    groundwork of the Codices Latini Antiquiores
                        (CLA), which in turn gave rise to more recent
                    endeavors in the digital age  (cf. ). Without the CLA, we
                    would not have examinations like Eltjo Buringh’s attempts to statistically
                    quantify and come to terms with the implications of the production and loss of
                    medieval manuscripts across the centuries .
                    Similarly, without numerous bibliographical studies that came before, we would
                    not have projects like The Production and Use of English
                        Manuscripts 1060 to 1220 by Orietta Da Rold, Takako Kato, Mary Swan,
                    and Elaine Treharne, which provides valuable evidence about manuscripts, their
                    contexts, and the history of books in early England . 
                Using OCR software on medieval manuscripts both rests on and extends the work of
                    bibliographers with new possibilities brought about by digital tools. In all of
                    this, it is important to acknowledge the human elements of digital humanities.
                    These aspects include the starting point of research questions asked from a
                    fundamentally humanistic perspective as well as the labor involved in data
                    curation and carpentry, manuscript transcription and processing, and
                    interpreting results to consider the payoff and possibilities that they provide
                    for future pursuit. After all, digital humanities approaches are only possible
                    through the combination of computers with the types of critical, analytical
                    research questions that drive the humanities. OCR extends the investigation of
                    books while also connecting bibliography with other fields for greater
                    possibilities of innovative pursuits. It is our hope that using OCR with
                    medieval manuscripts offers a new range of questions built on bibliography but
                    with fresh implications for future research using computers.
                Using OCR with medieval manuscripts also helps to confirm and feed back into
                    traditional bibliographical analysis in fields like paleography. One result of
                    using digital software on medieval manuscripts is the confirmation that scripts
                    as paleographers have described and identified them do appear and function
                    distinctly (cf. ). The process of using OCRopus
                    for our experiments has reinforced that certain groups of manuscripts with
                    different script types (for example, Caroline minuscule, Late Caroline, and
                    Early Gothic scripts) do differ from each other within general categories, not
                    only in traditional paleographical assessments but also in the ways that the
                    software handles them. OCRopus works differently in processing manuscripts
                    exhibiting earlier Caroline minuscule features than it does with manuscripts
                    exhibiting later Late Caroline and Early Gothic features, demonstrating that the
                    software process is not the same in every case. In other words, how OCR software
                    handles manuscripts differently within and across certain paleographical
                    categories (even if they are relatively fluid) further justifies previous
                    knowledge about such categories and their uses in medieval scribal practice.
                It is clear that using OCR software with medieval manuscripts proves to be
                    useful, but currently this is an area of bibliographical scholarship not
                    well-served. Open-source software based on ANN technology can change this. Our
                    experiments show that, given certain strategies, good OCR results can be
                    achieved, even with a source pool of none-too-shocking size. We have initially
                    experimented using mainly manuscripts written in Caroline minuscule, but our
                    results from expanding to include others written in Late Caroline and Early
                    Gothic indicate that these strategies could be feasibly replicated across a
                    larger corpus of manuscripts and shared alike with other processes. Some of the
                    most exciting results from our experiments were in the best accuracy rates
                    achieved with our corpus of manuscripts: 97.06% accuracy rate for results on the
                    seen manuscript Arras 764 based on ground truth from only Arras 764; and 94.13%
                    accuracy rate for results on unseen manuscripts based on ground truth from all
                    training manuscripts. Our hope is that future work can build on these results to
                    make OCR processing more efficient, more accurate, and more applicable to a
                    wider range of medieval manuscripts.
                The aim of future projects and collaboration using OCR with medieval manuscripts
                    should be to share not only results but also data for the whole process so that
                    others are able to build upon research for future improvements. While these are
                    already fundamental aspects of many endeavors in digital humanities, the case of
                    OCR for medieval sources underscores the necessity of open sharing. After all,
                    our experiments and results are only one starting point, and our hope is that
                    future research will improve the possibilities presented here. Furthermore,
                    while we have used OCRopus for the experiments presented in this article,
                    collaborative, open sharing allows for use with other OCR engines and different
                    techniques. None of our results would be possible without open-source software,
                    collaboration, open access to digitized manuscripts as facilitated by libraries,
                    and, in some cases, the previous work of those experimenting with OCR. Like
                    other ANN software, OCRopus does not come with training built in, so users need
                    to train it. To build on OCR results, researchers need large training sets that
                    have already been created and tested, so that they do not need to start from
                    scratch every time. The future of this type of work necessarily calls for a
                    collaborative approach to sharing data and results. We believe that this is
                    where open-source software is more useful than proprietary software, which does
                    not lend itself to building upon for collaborative work.
                This sort of collaboration will require an amount of digital infrastructure and
                    commitment to distribute training sets. Because training data for all of the
                    popular ANN OCR software today is simply made up of pairings between source
                    images (segmented lines) and ground truth text (transcriptions), they are easy
                    to share. Sharing data in open access repositories is the most sensible
                    approach, so that (for example) collaborators can access and use the data,
                    identify and correct errors in training sets, and upload new batches of training
                    data for different types of source analyses. In some ways, possibilities for
                    this kind of sharing already exist in repositories that enable collaboration —
                    like Github, Gitlab, and Zenodo. See, e.g., the Github repository by ; and the Zenodo repository by . This has also been our goal with
                    sharing our own results in a Github repository. Our process using open-source
                    OCR software with neural network technology should allow many people to
                    participate collaboratively in decentralized fashion and on a much larger scale
                    over time. Our intention with this process is to bring together different
                    scholars, tools, and methodologies to build a robust, collaborative approach to
                    OCR for medieval manuscripts.
            

                Appendix: A Note on Manuscript Dates, Origins, and Scripts
                For data about manuscript dates, origins, and scripts in our data sets, we have
                    generally followed standard bibliographic descriptions in catalogues and online
                    repositories. All of the data gleaned from paleographical analyses and
                    descriptions are necessarily fluid (and often subjective). With this in mind,
                    paleographical data should be understood as somewhat fuzzy: 
                        meaning is under constant
                            negotiation
                        
                    . For example, all date ranges given are approximate, and any specific
                    date given should be understood as in or about that year. Details that
                    justify date ranges may be found in catalogues and other secondary literature
                    about specific manuscripts. Our system for dating aligns with other
                    bibliographic metadata standards, especially the Principles
                        of Description in The Production and Use of
                        English Manuscripts 1060 to 1220 by Orietta Da Rold, Takako Kato,
                    Mary Swan, and Elaine Treharne . Dates for
                    manuscripts in our data set are necessarily approximate.
                The same need to account for fuzzy data is also true of script types, since the
                    history and development of medieval handwriting is full of ambiguity.
                    Classifications of scripts in our data are based on paleographical standards in
                    bibliographic descriptions, but these are not always straightforward.
                    Distinctions between script types, their characteristic features, and
                    terminology are contested and rather difficult to pin down between about 1075
                    and 1225 (see details in ; and ). Nonetheless, certain distinctive features do
                    emerge during this period, and older forms drop out of use. Despite being slow
                    and gradual, a transition does occur. For this reason, we take the view that
                    Caroline minuscule was transitional in this period, and we use this term
                    (following Kwakkel) throughout.
                More specifically, we use two terms for scripts during this transitional period
                    (both in this article and in our data sets): those exhibiting a balance of
                    earlier features from Caroline minuscule, often before about 1200, are
                    identified as Late Caroline; those exhibiting a balance of later features more
                    like Gothic, often after about 1200, are identified as Early Gothic.
                    Justification for these decisions is found in behavioral differences for how OCR
                    software handles different types of scripts. These differences are most
                    prominently seen in the way that adding different types of manuscripts (in
                    Caroline minuscule, Late Caroline, and Early Gothic, as well as seen and unseen)
                    affect the accuracy rates of OCR results (see our discussion in the section on
                        Process and Results). While more detailed
                    discussion of the implications of our results for paleographical analysis is
                    beyond the scope of the present article, we hope to pursue these issues further
                    in the future.
            
