Title:  FairCite
Volume:  007
Issue:  2
Date:  12 October 2013
Abstract:  
                
                Within the digital humanities, there are many approaches to citation. Every
                    discipline handles citation and authorship differently, and within the digital
                    humanities there are wide divergences of practice in the ways that credit is
                    assigned and made visible. However, there is also broad agreement that citation
                    practices need scrutiny and perhaps rethinking. The issue arises with particular
                    force when we consider how to cite digital humanities projects and tools.
                    Standard citation practices do not provide good precedents for making visible
                    the contributions of project personnel in these highly collaborative efforts.
                    There has been significant informal discussion and debate in recent years
                    concerning appropriate ways to credit this work, but no consensus has been
                    reached. FairCite (http://faircite.wordpress.com) was founded to promote this discussion
                    and encourage it towards practical, public outcomes.
            
Full Body Text: 
FairCite: Practical Steps towards a Fairer Culture of Credit in Academia
Citation is not just about information management, ensuring a reader can find a
                particular item at a future date. If that were the case our footnotes and references
                would consist solely of the numerical International Standard Book Numbers (ISBNs)
                attached to every book, or the Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) and Uniform
                Resource Locators (URLs) of the online world. Within the ecology of scholarship,
                citations also provide a verifiable way to track the contributions of our colleagues
                and competitors through authorship in the broadest sense. In this role, citation
                provides a record of achievement and, in the emerging world of linked data, a view
                of the interconnected intellectual landscape of scholarship. However, the
                traditional list of authors is not an exclusive inventory of all of those people who
                had a hand in the creation of research outputs. No academic field currently takes a
                radically inclusive approach to authorship that would include everyone who had any
                involvement whatsoever in a project. And arguably, such an approach could prove
                theoretically as well as practically untenable. Once we begin exploring the
                relations of dependency thoroughly, we encounter a potentially limitless set of
                roles that may have influenced the final form of a work, such as peer reviewers,
                seminar colleagues, conference respondents, copyeditors, and many others. And once
                we extend our understanding of “authorship” in the digital humanities to include
                project and tool development, the set of relevant participants in the creative
                ecology grows even further. In designing citation systems that do justice to the
                record of achievement, we must ask how the threshold of citable intellectual effort
                and responsibility is constructed and justified.
For the digital humanities, we do not imagine that there can be a single answer to
                this question. Every discipline handles citation and authorship differently, and
                within the digital humanities there are wide divergences of practice in the ways
                that credit is assigned and made visible. However, there is also broad agreement
                that citation practices need scrutiny and perhaps rethinking. The issue arises with
                particular force when we consider how to cite digital humanities projects and tools,
                since for many alt-ac professionals, projects are a crucial professional currency
                just as publications are for academic faculty. However, standard citation practices
                do not provide good precedents for making visible the contributions of project
                personnel in these highly collaborative efforts. There has been significant informal
                discussion and debate in recent years concerning appropriate ways to credit this
                work, but no consensus has been reached.
FairCite (http://faircite.wordpress.com) was founded to promote this discussion and
                encourage it towards practical, public outcomes. Initiated by Adam Crymble in 2011,
                FairCite acknowledges that scholarship is increasingly interdisciplinary and team
                based, and traditional models of authorship need to be redefined in light of our
                changing work environment. Without this redefinition, the concept of authorship
                itself will gradually cease to be a meaningful representation of contribution to a
                project. FairCite also provides a reminder that the career development of alt-ac
                scholars may depend on the strength of their C.V.s and portfolios. These members of
                our project teams can ill afford to have their contributions concealed by
                traditional academic practices that exclusively highlight the role of the senior
                scholar, or by a “no names” policy in which no one is explicitly treated as an
                    author.For more on this see .
                Because academic disciplines tend to be insular, it is easy for a scholar accustomed
                to solo-authored contributions to get the impression that shared authorship is the
                exception rather than the norm. However, other models of credit are used throughout
                academia to acknowledge the various contributions of collaborators with few or no
                detrimental effects. This article highlights some of the models currently in use,
                and provides practical guidance for both principal investigators and alt-ac team
                members looking to engage in a productive dialogue with colleagues to ensure that
                the needs of all parties are considered and a fairer culture of credit can begin to
                emerge. 
FairCite does not intend to define at what level that contribution becomes “enough”
                to warrant authorship. FairCite neither presumes nor suggests that all members
                involved in a collaborative project should be considered full authors of the
                outputs. Neither is it about padding the C.V.s of those most in need of career
                advancement. Rather, it is about being informed about the needs of all members of a
                project team and engaging in an open and honest conversation with them to ensure
                that credit is shared in a way that represents the contributions of those involved.
                This paper was written with the example of a team of individuals involved in
                creating a web-based digital humanities project in mind, but it is hoped that the
                messages will be general enough to apply to a range of academic situations,
                including those resulting in a jointly-authored journal article or a monograph.

                Existing Models
                The humanities have few models for collaborative work. The single-authored paper
                    or monograph is still expected to be the humanities scholar’s predominant
                    output. However, there are some precedents and useful guidelines in a number of
                    related fields including digital humanities and academic sciences. The Wikipedia
                    article on “Academic Authorship” also offers an excellent overview of different
                    disciplinary philosophies towards sharing credit .
                
                    Digital Humanities
                    In the majority of cases it is left up to the reader to determine how to cite
                        an academic website or digital project. Sometimes websites will provide
                        advice for how best to cite the work; the Old Bailey
                            Online is a good such example, which offers suggested citations
                        that can be used in a range of contexts depending on whether or not one
                        seeks to cite the project itself, a document stored in the database, or even
                        a search result. While this is incredibly useful it is by no means an
                        industry standard to include such advice. If this information is available,
                        it is typically found on the “About” or “Project Team” pages. At best it
                        will provide a suggested citation, and will outline the names and
                        contributions of all members of the team. This style of credit is not unlike
                        what one would expect at the end of a film in which the cast and crew are
                        listed along with their job titles or characters.
                    In the autumn of 2011, when the first discussions about FairCite began, they
                        were centred on the Old Bailey Online. At the
                        time the project’s policy was to include no one’s name in the project
                        citation: 
                            Old Bailey Proceedings Online. Version 6.0,
                            March 2011. http://www.oldbaileyonline.org/ The principal
                        investigators had come to this policy as a way to avoid concentrating the
                        credit for such a large project (one that included over 40 collaborators)
                        into the hands of a few. This was done with good intentions, but meant the
                        names of technical team members and project managers were rarely if ever
                        given prominence. After a series of discussions between Tim Hitchcock, one
                        of the project’s principal investigators, and Adam CrymbleFor more on
                            these discussions see , , , ., the Old Bailey
                            Online team decided to change its suggested citation to: 
                            Tim Hitchcock, Robert
                                Shoemaker, Clive Emsley, Sharon Howard and Jamie McLaughlin, et al.,
                                    The Old Bailey Proceedings Online,
                                    1674-1913 (www.oldbaileyonline.org, version 7.0, 24
                                March 2012). 
                            
                         The resultant citation was determined by the members of the project
                        team, rather than being imposed from outside. There was no precedent for
                        this type of output with a suggested citation that takes authorship into
                        account, so there was no right or wrong answer. What is most important is
                        that the team engaged with the needs of its team members and came up with a
                        customised solution that they believed fairly represented the intellectual
                        contributions of everyone involved. In this case the five names represent
                        the three academic principal investigators, the project manager, and the
                        lead technical developer. Thirty-five other team members are represented by
                        the “et al” at the end of the list of names, and are acknowledged more
                        formally on the project credits page. The
                        solution that the Old Bailey Online team came
                        to meshes well with the 
                            Collaborator’s Bill of Rights
                        
                        , which states that All collaborators should feel empowered to
                            express their contributions honestly and comprehensively. The
                        Bill was the product of the Off the Tracks
                        workshop held at the University of Maryland, an event that sought to promote
                        the professionalization of the digital humanities.
                    Thus far, models of credit in the digital humanities have tended to follow
                        the disciplinary standards of the department into which people are hired.
                        There are as yet few digital humanities departments; most colleagues work in
                        either digital humanities “centers”, cultural heritage organizations, or
                        traditional academic departments such as history or literature. However,
                        when disciplinary standards in the hiring department differ widely from
                        those used by digital humanists, tensions can mount. Zotero, the citation
                        management software developed at the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History &
                        New Media at George Mason University, lists contributors on an About page.
                        The project does not suggest anything resembling a citation (despite,
                        perhaps ironically, being citation management software). For the project’s director, Sean Takats, the
                        intellectual distance between his contributions to Zotero and the monographs
                        his colleagues were used to evaluating led to conflict during his tenure and
                        promotion evaluation, which Takats shared on his blog. One of the members of
                        the committee questioned whether involvement with Zotero constitutes actual research (as
                            opposed to project management)
                        . Sean’s ire at having such a successful project
                        marginalized by colleagues ill-equipped to pass judgment on something so
                        different from the work they produce themselves is certainly valid. However,
                        it is perhaps because projects like Zotero are so different that it is
                        important for digital humanists to come up with models for sharing credit
                        that elucidate the nature of everyone’s contributions in a way that is easy
                        for outsiders to understand.
                    As Bethany Nowviskie’s noted in Where credit is
                            due, a talk delivered at the NINES Summer Institute in May 2011,
                        the problem of being recognized does not stop at those seeking tenure, but
                        permeates into the much more vulnerable realm of alt-ac scholars in the
                        digital humanities. Nowviskie worries that these scholars are put 
                            into a position where they
                                may choose to de-emphasize their own innovative but collaborative
                                work because they fear it will not fit the preconceived notion of
                                valid or significant scholarly contribution by a sole
                                academic.
                            
                         The way out of this predicament may not be led by individual scholars
                        interested in promoting their own career progression, but in a change in the
                        system that rewards sharing of credit.
                    In the United Kingdom the research of scholars, departments, and whole
                        universities is ranked and subsequent government funding to the institution
                        is based on the results. The ranking occurs once every six years. In 2014
                        the exercise is known as the Research Excellence
                            Framework (REF), and this version of the assessment emphasizes the
                        importance of digital outputs such as databases, digital media, and
                        software, which will be considered a form of scholarly output and will be
                        assessed alongside journal articles and monographs. This means that in the
                        UK at least, scholars will have a vested interest in including their names
                        with project outputs and the “no-names” policy may disappear out of a need
                        for career advancement and departmental ranking.
                
                
                    Academic Science
                    The sciences are known for multi-authored papers and provide the most
                        comprehensive model for author attribution. However, there is no single
                        model and each journal may have their own guidelines. Nevertheless there are
                        several attempts at standardization. The International
                            Committee of Medical Journal Editors  (ICMJE) supports the
                        following standards and expects authors to meet all three conditions:
                    
                        
                            
                                substantial contributions to conception and design,
                                    acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of
                                    data;
                                drafting the article or revising it critically for important
                                    intellectual content; and
                                final approval of the version to be published.
                            
                        
                        
                    
                    Journals under the Royal Society of Chemistry Publishing umbrella provided
                        the following guidelines:
                    
                        There is no universally agreed
                            definition of authorship. As a minimum, authors should take
                            responsibility for a particular section of the study. The award of
                            authorship should balance intellectual contributions to the conception,
                            design, analysis and writing of the study against the collection of data
                            and other routine work. If there is no task that can reasonably be
                            attributed to a particular individual, then that individual should not
                            be credited with authorship. All authors must take public responsibility
                            for the content of their paper. The multidisciplinary nature of much
                            research can make this difficult, but this may be resolved by the
                            disclosure of individual contributions.
                        
                    
                    The Nature family of journals does not
                        explicitly outline criteria for authorship, but requires all papers to
                        detail the contribution each author made in a footnote. This policy is now
                        mandatory for all Nature papers and is meant to
                        eliminate the problem of Honourary Authors – people
                        whose names are included on the paper despite no tangible input from that
                        person. Nature also believes this policy
                        ensures that the right person can be made responsible should problems with
                        the research arise in the future. Examples of author contribution statements
                        from Nature papers look like the following:
                    
                        
                            S.H.C. designed and performed experiments, analysed data and wrote
                                the paper; N.C., M.T. and J.M.G. designed and performed experiments;
                                D.R. and M.B.G. developed analytical tools; and C.I.B. designed
                                experiments, analysed data and wrote the paper.
                            Y.O. and Y.Z. designed the experiments and prepared the
                                manuscript. Y.O. performed the experiments. G.S., M.K.R. and Y.M.
                                generated the chimaera mice from the BayGenomics ES clone. 
                        
                    
                    These and other examples can be found on Maxine Clarke, Author contributions Audit: Nautilus. Nature.com Blogs. 5 November 2007. http://blogs.nature.com/nautilus/2007/11/post_12.html. 
                    Scientific papers commonly include a footnote attached to the author list,
                        which provides details on where each person works and how they can be
                        contacted, as in the example below from Nature.
                        An equivalent to this footnote space could be used in digital humanities
                        projects to outline contributions from each person. The wording could be
                        left up to individual projects, or could be standardized with a limited set
                        of contribution keywords (writer, designer, database, project manager, etc).
                            Nature Editors have contributed a number of
                        editorials discussing the issue of authorship, many of which are relevant to
                        the current discussion; see , , , , , , , , , .
                    
                        Example of authorship attribution in Nature.
                        
                        
                    
                    As not all people who participate in a project meet the criteria for
                        authorship, it is common in science papers to
                            acknowledge more minor contributors in the same way
                        one acknowledges funding bodies. The ICMJE provide guidelines for
                        acknowledgement, which are similar to their guidelines for authorship, and
                        outlines the appropriate model for acknowledging said contributions. For
                        example:
                    
                        The authors would like to thank
                            Ms. Anne-Marie Allen and Mr. Adam Crymble for their assistance with data
                            collection and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council for
                            their financial support.
                        
                    
                
            

                Having a Discussion about Credit with Collaborators
                FairCite is not an attempt to enforce a standardized system of liberal author
                    attribution and citation. Instead, it is about promoting an open and honest
                    conversation between collaborators. This section outlines one way in which
                    project team members might like to initiate and conduct that discussion. This is
                    by no means the only way to do so but may prove useful for getting the ball
                    rolling. 
                
                    Strategies for Initiating the Discussion
                    The biggest hurdle to overcome is to start the conversation in the first
                        place. The sooner this conversation takes place the better. Ideally it
                        should be part of the original project pitch in which the team is being put
                        together and the outputs are discussed. By being open and upfront about the
                        intended project outputs and how credit is shared there is less opportunity
                        for resentment or awkwardness to build up that could threaten the
                        productivity of the group as well as future relations between its members.
                        The person in a position of power is the best placed to instigate this
                        conversation, since more junior members may be hesitant to raise what they
                        may think is a contentious issue. Usually this is the principal investigator
                        or the individual who first suggested the collaboration.
                    However, it may not occur to that person that a conversation is needed, and
                        so all collaborators should feel empowered to raise the issue and seek a
                        discussion. Many people will be relieved to have the question raised and
                        dealt with, even if they themselves were unwilling to raise it. At worst the
                        team discovers at an early stage that they do not want to continue working
                        together and everyone has the chance to cut their losses. At best you avoid
                        an awkward situation and hurt feelings down the road, and everyone’s career
                        benefits from the outputs of the project. If your project is already
                        underway and your team has not yet had this conversation, it is not too
                        late; but the sooner it occurs, the better. If your group has regular
                        meetings consider raising it at the next opportunity. Alternatively you
                        could circulate this article as an icebreaker and suggest you would like to
                        engage in a dialogue.
                
                
                    What are the Right Questions to Ask?
                    Once you have initiated the discussion you need to know what to talk about.
                        The exact questions you will need to answer as a group depend on the nature
                        of your project and the roles of those individuals who are involved. The
                        following may prove useful as a guideline for resolving common issues.
                    
                        Does Authorship Matter to All Team Members?
                        You may find that some team members are not concerned with authorship,
                            and may not wish to be included as authors. There are a number of
                            reasons for this; perhaps they are commercial partners who are unable to
                            accept such credit, or they may have personal reasons for not wanting to
                            spread their name widely. Not everyone operates in the same reward
                            economy. Some members of the team may feel they are rewarded amply for
                            their efforts in software development or web design and may be happy
                            forgoing more formal recognition. On the other hand, some people will be
                            keen to show evidence of their outputs and their career development may
                            benefit enormously from wider exposure. Asking team members if
                            authorship is important to them is a good starting point for any
                            discussion.
                    
                    
                        Authorship Order: Does it Matter?
                        Keep in mind that not everyone will have the same ideas about authorship
                            and that their concerns may be grounded in past experiences or real
                            issues within their own field, such as promotion and tenure. The issue
                            of authorship order is a good example of disciplinary discrepancy. In
                            different fields the order of authors has different cultural
                            connotations. Historians would tend to think the earlier one’s name
                            appears in a list of authors the larger the contribution that person
                            made. This idea of “first author” also pervades in fields such as
                            engineering; however, engineers also reserve the “last author” as the
                            most senior place, where the principal investigator’s name appears. This
                            is based on a model in which the principal investigator crafts the idea
                            for the project and finds the funding to carry it out, but generally a
                            student or postdoc does the actual research or coding and writing. Other
                            fields use an alphabetical model for listing authors names, which avoids
                            the matter of hierarchy altogether. This may be a good solution for some
                            groups, but one should keep in mind that a reader unaccustomed to
                            alphabetical listings may try to interpret the level of contribution
                            each member made based on name-order, regardless of the author’s
                            intentions.
                        As each discipline has different ideas on authorship order it is always
                            helpful to ask your colleagues what if any conventions are used in their
                            field. Try to look at the situation from everyone’s perspective
                            individually. Find areas where there are conflicting ideas and those in
                            which your ideas are the same. By working together you may be able to
                            compromise on a solution that leaves everyone with a fair attribution
                            for the work they put into the project. If the issue seems unworkable
                            because of different disciplinary standards, consider using a footnote
                            to outline the contributions of each member so that they are able to
                            highlight their role for future employers. By putting this information
                            in print, those evaluating job or grant applications have a means of
                            independently verifying what appears on an applicant’s C.V.
                    
                    
                        What Level of Contribution is Enough?
                        Everyone likes to feel like their contribution was valued, and this is an
                            area in which hurt feelings may creep in if the issue is not handled
                            delicately. Maintain positive and open language and try to keep the
                            discussion as relaxed as possible. It is a good idea to come into the
                            discussion with some examples of how similar projects have attributed
                            authorship in the past. The ICMJE criteria listed above can be a good
                            starting point for making this decision.
                        Do not feel pressure to come up with a definitive answer immediately. You
                            can hold another meeting at a later date once everyone has had a chance
                            to digest the discussion. But once you have agreed on a way forward, it
                            is always a good idea to write it down. This puts everyone on the same
                            page and can be used in the future to resolve any conflicts that arise
                            over the course of the project. Keep in mind that nothing ever goes
                            exactly as planned and your group may have to revise the agreement
                            slightly if certain members fail to fulfill their promises, or if new
                            members of the team join once the project is underway.
                    
                
            

                Conclusion
                We all need to get credit for our work, whether we’re academics, students,
                    project managers, or database developers. However, forms of credit vary and
                    different projects may address the challenge of appropriate forms of citation in
                    very different ways. FairCite does not seek to impose a new or standard form of
                    citation. Instead, FairCite seeks to assist in initiating and framing the
                    conversations between collaborators that can lead to a shared, explicit
                    understanding of how credit is being assigned and publicized within a given
                    project. FairCite also suggests that projects provide clear instructions to
                    authors on how to cite the project in publications, rather than leaving it to
                    individual discretion. As an appendix to this article, we offer a template with
                    sample language for a public FairCite declaration reflecting your project's
                    citation preferences. 
                Over time, we hope this initiative may lead in three complementary directions.
                    First, as projects conduct internal conversations and develop expanded forms of
                    citation, we would like to gather these at the ACH's FairCite page (http://ach.org/faircite/) and use
                    them as models for other projects to study and build upon. We encourage projects
                    to send their models to faircite@digitalhumanities.org. Public discussion may
                    yield insight into which models prove most transparent, equitable, and scalable.
                    Second, we hope to see some convergence in practice concerning the location and
                    discoverability of projects’ FairCite declarations, to make it easier for
                    authors to locate the preferred form of citation. Finally, with more equitable
                    and discoverable forms of citation available, we hope to see authors citing
                    digital projects in their published work and providing visible credit to a wider
                    range of project contributors.
            

                Acknowledgements
                The authors would like to thank Bethany Nowviskie, Stéfan Sinclair, Melissa
                    Terras, and Ray Siemens for pushing this endeavour forwards. Thanks as well to
                    Tim Hitchcock for stimulating the idea in the first place. And finally, thanks
                    to the many people who helped shape FairCite by both offering their ideas and
                    expressing their concerns. 
            

                Appendix: FairCite Declaration of Authorship
                We propose the language below as a model or starting point for FairCite
                    declarations:
                
                    The participants named below declare that we have had an open and honest
                        discussion with all significant contributors about our respective roles in
                        [project name] 
                    Though our individual contributions took many forms, we agree that these
                        contributions all constitute an authorship role in the project.
                    We ask that formal citations of this project use the following citation, to
                        which we have collectively agreed and which we believe fairly represents the
                        time, energy, and expertise of our project team members.
                    [Text of citation]
                    [Names of project participants]
                
            
