Title:  The Sentences Commentary Text Archive: Laying the Foundation
                    for the Analysis, Use, and Reuse of a Tradition
Volume:  010
Issue:  1
Date:  12 February 2016
Abstract:  
                
                In this paper, I offer an overview of an idea for a metadata archive, called the
                        Sentences Commentary Text Archive, that
                    attempts to collect and make accessible metadata about the five century-long
                    medieval tradition of commenting on the Sentences
                    of Peter Lombard. If scaled for production, this kind of archive would enhance
                    collaboration among editors, promote previously impossible analyses of large
                    sections of the Sentences commentary tradition, and generally become the
                    backbone of future applications making use of this data.
            
Full Body Text: 

                I. What is a Sentences Commentary?
                Peter Lombard wrote the medieval book, known as the Sentences, during the course of his teaching career at Paris in the
                    middle of the twelfth century. In this work, Lombard intended to bring together
                    diverse theological opinions (sententia) and to harmonize them into
                    a single concordant system. The book soon became the standard theological
                    textbook in European theology faculties. By the thirteenth century, writing a
                    commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard was a
                    required exercise for anyone hoping to become a Master in the faculty of
                        theology.For Peter Lombard's text and structure see, in Latin,  and, in English, .
                        For a discussion of Lombard's Sentences and its
                        legacy see .
                Given that Lombard's Sentences covers a broad
                    spectrum of philosophical and theological issues, it is an extremely valuable
                    source for tracking the development of ideas. Today, we know of approximately
                    1,000 extant commentaries. Unfortunately, only a small number of these
                    commentaries are available in printed editions, and an even smaller number are
                    available in critical editions. Most remain available only in difficult to read
                    Latin manuscripts stored away in difficult to access libraries.
                While the current scholarly practice primarily aims to make these texts available
                    in printed editions, this workflow suffers from a couple of problems. Today, a
                    static print edition of these commentaries remains the gold standard. This is
                    not always without good reason. The unchangeable nature of the text helps create
                    stable citation practices that online resources often have a hard time
                    replicating. Likewise, the print edition is easier to document for purposes of
                    tenure and promotion. In the present proposal, I am not interested in disputing
                    these realities, but rather in thinking about a workflow towards print that can
                    enable other possibilities at the same time. One such possibility lies in making
                    working drafts and on-going editions of texts — editions that often take decades
                    to complete — sufficiently discoverable so as to promote collaboration. It is,
                    however, hard for potentially interested scholars to collaborate if they are
                    unaware of texts or editions in need of collaborators. Another important
                    possibility is the future large-scale analysis of the tradition as a whole. The
                    divergence of editorial practices, file formats, and the generally isolated
                    practice of print production makes large-scale analysis of the entire corpus
                    difficult. Often very little is known about the digital format of the
                    post-publication file. But these post-publication files, if archived and
                    catalogued in an accessible way, could become the bases of a new understanding
                    of this five-century long tradition and its various developments across time and
                    region.
            

                The Function of a Metadata Archive
                In this short paper, I offer an overview of a metadata archive (still in
                    development) that, if scaled for production, could support the kind of
                    collaboration mentioned above, promote previously impossible analyses of large
                    sections of the Sentences commentary tradition, and
                    generally become the backbone of future applications making use of this
                    data.
                By archive I mean a large collection of resources produced
                    by an identifiable tradition and organized (with intentional metadata) according
                    to the organic relationships that constitute said tradition. While Kate Theimer
                    has noted the propensity of digital humanists to play fast and loose with the
                    meaning of an archive, she mentions one important criterion
                    of an archive that fits my present use of the word. In attempting to describe
                    the difference between an archive and a collection she writes: 
                        What defines the work of
                            archivist, and so an archive in the mind of an
                            archivist, is what materials are selected and how they are managed.
                            Archivists select and preserve archives as defined
                            in the primary definition, which is to say
                                aggregates of materials with an organic relationship, rather
                            than items that may be similar in some manner, but otherwise unrelated
                            (emphasis mine).For a further discussion of collection naming, see
                                    
                        
                    
                The suggestion that an archive is a collection of materials with an organic
                        relationship is what I have in mind here. This metadata archive
                    attempts to aggregate a collection of intimately related resources that build on
                    and reference each other over time. The goal of the metadata is to organize
                    these resources in such a way that organic relationships can be tracked and made
                    discoverable by future users.
                Accordingly, this metadata is the beating heart of the archive and the basis on
                    which a user or application can search and sort resources. As such, it also true
                    to say that this conception of archive does depart from the perhaps more
                    traditional notion of an archive as a collection of material objects and is
                    instead primarily interested in a purposeful collection of digital surrogates
                    .
                The need for such a metadata archive was first impressed on me as I worked (and
                    continue to work) on an edition, encoded according to the standards of the Text
                    Encoding Initiative (TEI), of a very late-fourteenth century Sentences commentary written by a Parisian thinker
                    named Peter Plaoul. What I now call the LombardPress web publication framework http://lombardpress.org originally
                    started as a way to progressively display the ongoing transcription of Plaoul's
                    commentary in a user-friendly way. (See http://petrusplaoul.org.) The goal was, and still is, to allow users
                    access to early transcriptions and to allow them to comment and collaborate,
                    should they become interested in the text: an approach that has much in common
                    with what is elsewhere called interactive dynamic editing
                    . The edition began in March 2011 and has
                    now made available over 300,000 Latin words present in four diplomatic
                    transcriptions, totaling over 1,200,000 words.
                As the edition developed, I noticed two things. First, this semantically encoded
                    text is rich in interesting metadata (e.g. citations, references, structure,
                    length, word-frequency, etc.) that, in order to be useable, simply needed to be
                    harvested and presented. Second, as I began to detach the LombardPress framework from the text of the Plaoul edition in order
                    to support the presentation of other editions (see for example http://adamwodeham.org), I noticed
                    that there was a lot of repeated and re-useable information. The prospect of a
                    central archive would not only allow different applications to reuse redundant
                    information, but would also allows users and applications to recognize
                    interesting connections across the entire tradition: connections like the reuse
                    of a particular quotation by multiple authors or spikes in the use of key words
                    across time.
            

                III. Technical Specifics: The Current Sentences
                        Commentary Text Archive Prototype and Workflow
                A primary goal of the Sentences Commentary Text
                        Archive is to be a coordinating service that both humans and machine
                    applications can use. While the archive could itself include the capacity to
                    store the actual source text of an edition, this is not its central function.
                    Rather, as individual sections of a text begin to be edited, it is recommended
                    that they be stored in a development repository (e.g. http://github.com or http://bitbucket.org). Subsequently,
                    strategically selected versions should be deposited into an institutional
                    repository. The proposed metadata archive would then become a central
                    clearinghouse of information about these texts that can, first and foremost,
                    point users, developers, and publishers to the location of the encoded text, as
                    well as to any plaintext or HTML manifestations. With these pointers in place,
                    substantial amounts of metadata can be added to facilitate the discovery of
                    various texts.
                Figures 1 illustrates, in a highly abstract way, how this metadata archive could
                    serve as a kind of switchboard between institutional and development
                    repositories of texts and application uses of those texts. 
                
                    Illustration of metadata archive as switchboard between repositories and
                        multiple applications
                    
                
                In this section, I want to provide some fairly specific technical details about
                    the current prototype of the archive that I have built. The point of such a
                    report is not necessarily to declare the best possible practice or even describe
                    what the final form of the Sentences Commentary Text
                        Archive should look like. Rather, the primary point is to identify
                    one possible (and tested) route by which the idea might be implemented. Second,
                    it is to simply demonstrate that the technical challenges are the smallest
                    obstacles to implementation. Technically speaking such an archive is not
                    overwhelmingly difficult to construct. The larger obstacle is finding
                    institutional support and generating the collective will of the field to
                    contribute its semantically encoded transcriptions (both in draft and final
                    form) for metadata harvesting. 
                In the current prototype (an early incarnation of which can be found at http://scta.info), the archive metadata
                    extraction begins with an XML document, called a "projectdata.xml" file that
                    includes a list of items. Each item in this document
                    represents a discrete section within a given Sentences commentary. Generally, it is assumed that an
                        item is a natural place for discrete file divisions to be made and
                    thus each item would correspond to a TEI file replete with its own
                    metadata-rich teiHeader. This kind of list of items is usually
                    called a Question List when published in academic journals.
                    See for example  or . Since these lists are the starting point of the
                    archive, one future goal is to solicit new question lists
                    encoded according to an established schema wherein the editors of each list —
                    both the compiler of the original list and the encoder of the data — are clearly
                    credited for their work. Our current working database includes eight such lists
                    including over 1,300 indexed items. There are, however, approximately
                    1,000 possible lists and therefore tens of thousands of question items
                    to be indexed. Depending on the structure of the commentary in question, these
                        items can be nested inside grouped sections, typically distinctions
                    or books: a relationship that will be recorded in the extracted metadata. It is
                    also possible that information about individual diplomatic transcriptions,
                    including the folio numbers where this item of text can be found, might
                    be nested within a given item. This foundational document will also include
                    pointers to the repository where the raw TEI text of each item and any
                    individual diplomatic transcriptions may be found. As part of the transition
                    from prototype to implementation, an XML schema will need to be constructed to
                    make sure each of these files adheres to a recognizable standard. 
                The standardization of these files is critical for the next step in the process
                    of extracting metadata according to the Resource Description Framework (RDF)
                    data model. See http://www.w3.org/RDF/ and http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-rdf-schema-20140225/ for a helpful
                        overview of the RDF data model. An XSLT script,
                        rdfextraction.xsl, is applied to a given projectdata.xml
                        file.This process follows a general trend in humanities computing. A
                        report from the Orlando Project (OP) writes: Research projects and content providers in
                            the humanities such as libraries and museums are increasingly
                            incorporating semantic web technologies. As part of this process, many
                            ontologies initially developed for other contexts are being translated
                            into semantic-web-ready forms to enable the leveraging of existing
                            metadata in a semantic web context. XML schemas in particular are
                            targeted for such translation, and production of RDF based on existing
                            XML markup is increasing, with the W3C offering a conversion tool meant
                            to facilitate such translations
                        .  The result is a large
                    set of RDF triples in an XML format that can easily be imported into a server
                    that can be queried using the SPARQL and RDF Query Language (SPARQL). The power
                    of the rdfextraction.xsl is that it not only processes the information in
                    the projectdata.xml file, but that it follows the pointers in the file to
                    the raw TEI text, when available, and begins extracting data for each of the XML
                    encoded transcriptions. 
                From the extracted information, this archive can, first and foremost, promote
                    collaboration by simply listing for interested researchers whether or not a
                    transcription of the particular part of text (i.e. an item) is
                        available,
                    in progress, or not yet started. If a user knows the exact section
                    of a text they are interested, they could look up the text in the database and
                    see the status of the text. This simple step would simultaneously help scholars
                    avoid redundant work and encourage collaboration. 
                This kind of information, however, is only the tip of the iceberg. When texts are
                    encoded according to the TEI schema — or, in the ideal scenario, according to a
                    customized TEI schema tailored to this specific genre of text — it is possible
                    to begin automatically harvesting all kinds of information about the text
                    itself. For example, when name, title, quote, or
                        ref tags are identified with unique standardized identifiers (such
                    as @key, @ref, or @ana attributes), we can quickly harvest information about the
                    number of mentions of distinct authors, or the use of titles, references,
                    quotations, or other key words and technical terms or phrases. Extraction of
                    metadata from a thoughtfully TEI encoded edition is remarkably simple, fast, and
                    robust. Thousands of relationships can be constructed in seconds. 
                For example, in the case of the Peter Plaoul edition, the
                        rdfextraction.xsl stylesheet can, with astonishing speed, run through
                    over 650 documents and 1,200,000 words and return information about which
                    authors were mentioned, what texts were mentioned, and what quotations were
                    cited.
                Though this is the ideal method of abstraction, it remains the case today that
                    many Sentences commentary editions remain in print
                    form only. Likewise, many editors continue to edit in Microsoft Word format.
                    While the promise of such an archive would be greatly enhanced by a field that
                    understood the power and importance of semantic encoding, there is no use in
                    denying the realities of current practice.Despite this reality, in a
                        recent article, Alois Pichler and Tone Merete Bruvik remind us that encoding
                        and presentation are distinct acts, and that, when blurred, it often happens that the first
                            set of procedures, transcription, is biased by the second,
                            presentation
                        . It is hoped that the Sentences Commentary Text Archive will become another tool that
                        will further encourage the separation between encoding and
                        presentation. This is not, however, an insurmountable obstacle. There
                    are other ways to scrape information from a plain text file, and a full
                    implementation of this archive would need to develop strategies for these common
                        cases.As an alternative to the standard approach to extraction
                        through the use of XSLT and XPath queries, the Orlando Project uses a Python
                        script to target specific regular expressions; see . This approach provides some important
                        pathways for including information in the archive from commentaries that are
                        not encoded in the preferred TEI format. It may also prove a useful strategy
                        for targeting printed texts that can be quickly and reliably
                    OCR'd.
                More essential than exactly how this information is harvested is the schema
                    according to which this metadata is catalogued. My present prototype
                    implementation has a created a provisional RDF schema. This schema is divided
                    into three primary classes: texts, resources (such as names, works, quotations,
                    etc.), and properties (such as hasTranscriptions, quotes, isQuotedBy, mentions,
                    references, etc.). Properties are further divided into three main categories
                    that allow the archive to organize metadata according to three main data
                    streams, publication information (pubInfo), content information (contentInfo),
                    and linking information (linkingInfo). Figure 2 offers a representation of how
                    these content streams can be presented to users.
                
                     HTML presentation of various metadata content streams made available by
                        the archive
                    
                
                Ideally this is a schema that would be developed by a team of editors and
                    constructed in concord with the TEI customization schema. Compatibility between
                    these two schemas makes metadata harvesting extraordinarily efficient.
                This kind of metadata collection allows for robust search and finding
                    possibilities. When in place, users can search for any text where a particular
                    Bible verse is used or any text that discusses a key word such as faith,
                    baptism, etc. Likewise, by navigating the archive they could discover
                    networked connections such as sets of texts that quote the same authors in the
                    same places or use the same key words in the context of the same quotations.
                    Right now the information needed for this kind of search is scattered: scattered
                    throughout printed critical editions and various online editions. The Sentences Commentary Text Archive aims to bring this
                    information into a unified web.
                The current prototype instantiation of the archive stores the extracted RDF
                    triples into a Fuseki triple store, part of the Apache Jena Java
                        frameworkSee https://jena.apache.org. that allows for SPARQL queries to
                    be sent over HTTP.See https://jena.apache.org/documentation/serving_data/index.html.
                    The front-end of this prototype archive is written in Ruby using the Sinatra web
                        framework.See http://www.sinatrarb.com/. Using the RDF.rb
                        library,See http://ruby-rdf.github.io/. the Ruby frontend provides
                    users and developers with an API that can be used to navigate the RDF data, make
                    unique connections, and perform searches within and outside the data set. 
                While these possibilities are tantalizing in themselves, the real power of this
                    archive is not primarily in the user interface, but in the further uses that
                    other applications can make of this information. For this purpose, the RDF.rb
                    library is equipped to handle content negotiation. Thus, when a user requests
                    information, the browser will return nicely formatted HTML tables. However, when
                    a machine requests information in other file formats, specified in HTTP header,
                    (e.g. ttl, nt, json, rdf/xml), the requests are easily handled by the Ruby
                    application. 
            

                IV. An Example Application: The LombardPress
                    Framework
                One good example of an application that can make use of the metadata in this
                    archive is the LombardPress framework. As mentioned
                    above, this application was initially developed to display the Peter Plaoul
                    edition. Thus, initially the framework and the text were welded together rather
                    tightly. The long-term goal for the LombardPress
                    application is to increasingly rely on the archive and to be increasingly
                    independent of the raw text. And as the LombardPress framework begins to display other texts, it can
                    benefit from the shared information in the archive. 
                First, the Sentences Commentary Text Archive aims to
                    include basic information about every author ever cited in any Sentences commentary. At the same time, it is also
                    expected that each web publication will have its own prosopography and name
                    index. Rather than requiring each collection of texts to maintain a separate
                    prosopography, the LombardPress framework can
                    simply run through the current texts it is assigned to display, identify which
                    names are used (assuming the text has been edited according to agreed upon
                    standard and names have been identified with agreed upon name IDs), and then
                    query the Sentences Commentary Text Archive to
                    automatically create a custom prosopography for the existing project. The
                    framework can then use this custom list to generate a custom name index.
                A second example lies in the gathering of text files to be displayed in a single
                        LombardPress website instance. At present, an
                    individual site powered by the LombardPress
                    framework is populated by its own projectdata.xml file which includes a
                    lot of redundant information already contained in the archive, such as the
                    location of the text in institutional and development repositories, the formal
                    title of the text, its status (draft or otherwise), and whether it has any
                    corresponding diplomatic transcriptions, subdivisions, etc. Future development
                    aims to reduce this file to a simple set of dereferenceable URLs that the user
                    wants to display, in the order he or she wants them displayed. With the archive
                    in place, the application can make a call to the archive and, by parsing the
                    response, can access all the other pertinent information it needs. Likewise, if
                    the location of the raw XML file changes (for example, if it is moved to a new
                    repository), no updates will ever need to be made. The application will still
                    know, through the information returned from the archive, exactly where the raw
                    text can be found.
                This kind of dependence would also allow for the prospect of building a LombardPress instance (or another application) that
                    aims not to display an entire commentary, but rather to curate a selection of
                    texts that are united by a common theme or subject matter. For instance, suppose
                    someone wants to present a selection of texts by multiple authors on the topic
                    of baptism. Suppose further that these various texts were edited by
                    several different editors and stored in various different institutional
                    repositories across the globe. Using the archive, it is possible first to search
                    for and select all the texts that discuss baptism. Subsequently, an
                    application can follow the metadata pointers to the location of the raw source
                    text and then (using more associated metadata) display these texts
                    chronologically. 
                Third and finally, the ability to observe connections through the metadata
                    archive could be used to suggest connections and topic threads to readers as
                    they consider one text. Future development on LombardPress aims to create a suggested readings list that
                    identifies quotations or key words used in a paragraph, queries the archive for
                    other Sentences commentaries that also use these
                    quotations or key words, and then offers the reader links to the related
                    texts.
                These kinds of developments — the overall separation of the text from the display
                    system and increasing reliance on a centralized archive — are important strides
                    toward the long-term sustainability of both the text and any particular display
                    system. More than likely, the web application will be a continual work in
                    progress, which is simply the nature of modern web development. Thus, through
                    rigorous separation of the text and the platform in which it is viewed, the text
                    can survive and remain accessible through all the vicissitudes that come with
                    the development of a web application. 
                Likewise, the dependency of an application like LombardPress on a stable archive can also help address some
                    important challenges often targeted at digital publication.See Pichler and
                        Bruvik who note the stability of the print text as one of its traditional
                        strengths over digital texts .
                    The most pressing of these is the reliability and stability of URL citations. An
                    institutional commitment to a metadata archive would provide two benefits in
                    this regard. On the one hand, it would allow for stable URLs. On the other hand,
                    it would give editors and developers the freedom to experiment with producing
                    different manifestations of the text using temporary URLs that may not be
                    intended to last forever, but nonetheless remain valuable experiments in
                    development.
                Figure 3 provides an illustration of a comprehensive workflow from editing to web
                    and print publication that makes use of the proposed archive.

                
                    
                
            

                V. Conclusion: Challenges and Possibility.
                As noted above, the technical requirements, while possessing their own
                    challenges, are not particularly difficult to meet. With a little bit of
                    funding, a small team of developers could easily implement and augment the
                    workflow described above. The biggest challenge is contribution.
                One obvious hurdle is getting people to edit their texts according to the TEI
                    schema or in a format easily convertible to TEI. However, I imagine that even if
                    users are allowed to submit in any format, and different scripts are designed to
                    harvest the metadata from the various formats, people will still be reluctant to
                    allow metadata to be harvested from their ongoing work.
                In response to this concern, let me conclude with a couple of pertinent facts
                    about the above proposal. The first is that, while it is possible for the
                    archive to be a place to actually host the XML files themselves, this is not its
                    primary function, and it is not necessary for the text to be permanently handed
                    over to a third party. In the end, the ideal scenario would be for the raw texts
                    to be deposited into an editor's own institutional repository. In this case,
                    editors and projects managers can retain control over where their files actually
                    live. The second pertinent fact is that individual editors can still control
                    accessibility to these texts by indicating their publication status in the
                        teiHeader. What we are primarily talking about here is metadata
                    abstraction. While the extraction will initially need access to the raw text, it
                    does not need permanent access. Further, metadata tags regarding status of the
                    text and its publication license can alert users to the availability of the text
                    and individual editors can choose whether or not to make the full text
                    accessible to many or to just a few. 
                In sum, two dominant principles continue to guide the present proposal. The first
                    principle is a healthy appreciation for the need to support and foster
                    collaboration. To support this collaboration, we need to create a finding aid
                    that gives people enough access to a text to become interested in it. The second
                    principle is an equally healthy respect for an editor's desire to control the
                    content he or she is working on for both development and publication purposes. I
                    believe the Sentences Commentary Text Archive, as
                    described here, is a feasible way to provide this kind of controlled access and
                    discovery. At the same time, I believe it can be the foundation of a long-term
                    resource that would enable future analysis of the entire Sentences commentary tradition that, at present, still remains out
                    of reach.
            
