Title:  Digital Methods and Classical Studies
Volume:  010
Issue:  2
Date:  7 June 2016
Abstract:  
                This essay introduces the articles in the special issue by locating them within
                    current major lines of approach in digital classics. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                In the 1980s, a classical scholar might have been forgiven for considering
                    digital approaches ancillary. The pioneering projects of the Perseus Digital
                    Library and the Packard Humanities Institute might have seemed to simply provide
                    existing texts in a more accessible form. By now, however, it has become clear
                    that digital methods are transforming how we understand classical antiquity. At
                    the same time that Google Books and the Hathi Trust and related efforts have
                    made the content of millions of books instantly available on the internet to the
                    public and scholars alike, electronic databases and journals like this one have
                    opened new horizons by removing impediments of access. As with the study of the
                    humanities as a whole, so within the field of Classics, new and enhanced tools
                    continue to come online to facilitate existing modes of teaching and research
                    and provide new ones. 
                These efforts are still new enough, however, that the field has not yet fully
                    adapted to make them easily accessible. Classicists could once keep current by
                    reviewing the latest journals and reviews, visiting conference bookstands, and
                    leafing through publisher catalogues. But how would one expect to learn about,
                    say, the LOFTS
                    project for the digitization and analysis of fragmentary ancient texts? Peer
                    review of digital resources exists in some areas of humanities, such as Modnets for
                    American modernist literary and cultural studies, but not as yet in
                        Classics. The most-read journal in classics, the Bryn Mawr Classical Review book reviews, once had a companion
                        review of digital resources, but no longer. There are other good
                    starting points, such as the list of digital
                        projects provided by digitalclassicist.org and the announcements and
                    conversations on the digitalclassicist listserv.
                    Digitalclassicist.org has also helped organize a series of seminars in
                    Berlin, Boston, Göttingen, and London. As elsewhere in the digital humanities,
                    blogs and Twitter feeds serve as other important channels for sharing
                    information. 
                Despite the existence of these fora, there has remained a need to bring digital
                    classicists together to share techniques and results, and to connect them with a
                    broader audience of scholars and educators. The Digital Classics Association
                    (DCA) was created in 2013 in order to advance these aims, primarily in the
                    United States, which, despite the ongoing work of Perseus and others, has
                    nevertheless lagged behind Europe in conversations around digital classics. To
                    help bring these to a wider classics audience, the DCA has organized a series of
                    panels at the largest gathering of classicists in the world, the annual joint
                    meetings of the Archaeological
                        Institute of America and the Society for Classical Studies.
                    As a contribution to the dialogue among those with digital interests and skills,
                    it also staged a standalone conference at the State University of New York at
                    Buffalo in spring 2013, Word, Space,
                            Time: Digital Perspectives on the Classical World, with
                    presentations on a variety of areas within the study of classical antiquity.
                The conference was meant to be maximally inclusive, as indicated by its title:
                        Word stood for texts generally, Space for material culture and
                    place, and Time for historical studies. The ecumenical approach meant
                    foregoing the benefit of drawing together experts in one sub-field prepared to
                    fully critique one another’s work. It was designed rather to take advantage of
                    the inherent interdisciplinarity of digital work and create a forum for
                    conversations across the sub-fields of classics and beyond. The conference
                    provided a snapshot of important work along this spectrum, which, given the
                    emerging and ongoing nature of many digital projects, often meant
                    work-in-progress.
                
                    Digitizing Primary Texts
                    The contributions in this volume, drawn from the 2013 DCA conference,
                        represent some of the major lines of approach current within the areas of
                        digital classics. An account of the origins of digital classics is
                            provided by , of digital humanities, by . The most fundamental effort is to
                        continue the work begun by Perseus and PHI in the 1980s of digitizing
                        materials for reading and analysis. As part of its larger goals, the Open
                            Philology project is working to add substantially to the Perseus
                        corpus of Greek and Latin. Complementary efforts are beginning under the
                        auspices of the Society for Classical Studies, the Medieval Academy of
                        America, and the Renaissance Society of America, for the construction of a
                            Digital Latin Library,
                        which might be considered an expanded and richly augmented descendant of the
                        long-useful Latin
                            Library. Like Latin Library, the Lacus
                                Curtius website is helpful for offering clean, simple texts,
                            though Lacus Curtius has Greek in addition to Latin, as well as English
                            translations for many of its texts. More specialized efforts have
                        made considerable progress digitizing texts from beyond the classical era,
                        including DigilibLT, which hosts many late antique Latin texts, and Camena, which has a Neo-Latin collection. Among parallel efforts
                        to digitize primary materials in the realm of material culture, a notable
                        effort is FASTI, a site that
                        aggregates the records from excavation and conservation of classical
                        archaeological sites.
                    Two of the articles in this volume report on ongoing efforts to expand the
                        fundamental materials available online. They also illustrate how these
                        efforts often follow in the footsteps of Perseus in creating a rich set of
                        tools with which to analyze the materials they have digitized. The first of
                        these efforts is in fact an effort under the umbrella of the Open Philology
                        project, the Leipzig Open Fragmentary Texts Series (LOFTS). In their
                        contribution, Monica Berti, Bridget Almas, and Gregory Crane explain how
                        LOFTS approaches digitizing several sets of classical texts consisting
                        wholly or partly of fragments or quotations.
                    The first challenge lies in the selection of texts to digitize. Classicists
                        have the advantage that the editions of their primary texts, and even some
                        secondary texts, are often old enough to be free of copyright restrictions.
                        Among the digital editions LOFTS is producing is one the Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum (Fragments of Greek Historians, or FHG) of Karl Müller. The volumes of FHG were published from 1841 to 1870, and became
                        the basis of the authoritative print edition of Felix Jacoby, Die Fragmente der
                            griechischen Historiker, whose first volume appeared in 1923, and
                        which has been continued now in online subscription format as Jacoby Online. The choice to digitize Müller’s earlier FHG was partly by necessity, since some if not all
                        of Jacoby is under copyright, and so not available for an open access
                        edition. This sort of situation is faced by many digital classics efforts.
                        Classicists may have full and free use of editions of most texts, just not
                        the most recent editions. As part of the Open Philology project, the leaders
                        of LOFTS have developed a best-practices strategy for confronting this
                        problem, which includes signalling differences from more recent editions.
                        Also, earlier editions, even when superseded in some respects, often have
                        virtues that later editions do not. The FHG,
                        for example, is more concise and manageable than Jacoby’s more comprehensive
                        work.
                    The second challenge is how to take advantage of the digital medium to enrich
                        the texts. Addressing this challenge requires answering three questions.
                        What additional information should be included together with the texts in
                        the form of XML markup, including Linked Open Data identifiers to allow it
                        to be identified and used by other resources? How should the marked-up texts
                        be presented online? And what additional research tools should be joined
                        with the texts?
                    The LOFTS team has approached all of these questions in an exemplary way.
                        They have developed sophisticated methods for representing texts that are
                        missing author and context, and even (parts of) the text itself, as when it
                        is known only through paraphrase and reference. LOFTS also integrates its
                        editions admirably with other resources. The project has used Canonical Text
                            Services standards to identify texts and parts of texts, so that
                        they can be easily linked to and analyzed.
                    The contribution of Caroline T. Schroeder and Amir Zeldes (Raiders of the Lost Corpus) describes an analogous
                        effort at digitization, but one that confronts its own distinct challenges.
                        The goal of their Coptic Scriptorium project is to develop a digital corpus
                        of Coptic texts. Coptic is the form of the ancient Egyptian language that
                        emerged in the Roman period, with a largely Greek alphabet used for grammar
                        and vocabulary evolved from ancient Egyptian. Critical as they are for the
                        understanding of late Egyptian culture, as well as the contemporary cultures
                        of Greece and Rome, many Coptic texts have never been edited and published
                        at all, much less in digital form. The project they describe thus takes as
                        its starting point the creation of a collaborative publication and editing
                        space for presenting these texts.
                    In both of these projects, the creation of digital editions is supplemented
                        by tools with which to study them. LOFTS is the integrating its texts with
                        the emerging Perseids
                        editing platform for textual analysis and annotation. The Coptic Scriptorium
                        includes morphological and syntactical tools for language analysis, as well
                        as with taggers that allow entities within the text to be linked to other
                        online resources, including those dealing with geographical and
                        prosopographical information. The conjoining of texts and tools is
                        characteristic of current efforts in digital classics, again following the
                        example of Perseus.
                
                
                    Digitizing Derived Textual Information
                    Separate efforts have been underway focusing just on tools, apart from the
                        publication of digital texts. One basic task is to derive entities from
                        texts as independent objects of study, and for use in abstract models. One
                        set of such entities are unique signifiers in the ancient world. Pleiades has created unique
                        digital identifiers for all known places in antiquity. These
                        include not just names of towns, cities, and geographical features, but also
                        places that are manmade (Hadrian’s wall), mythical (Atlantis), or contested
                        (the birthplace of Homer). SNAP-DRGN is creating a uniform index with unique identifiers for
                            ancient people. The Perseus Catalog is creating
                        an index of all classical texts, using Canonical Text Services standards for the creation of unique
                        identifiers to refer to texts, textual editions, and specific textual
                        locations. By using Linked Open Data standards, these projects are
                        establishing the infrastructure for highly sophisticated queries. In the
                        future, for example, it should be relatively simple to discover how often
                        Roman knights are mentioned in connection with Mediterranean ports, or what
                        parts of foreign lands different Greek authors typically referred to at the
                        opening of their works. 
                    In his article Extracting Citation Networks from
                            Publications in Classics, Matteo Romanello demonstrates his
                        method for automatically identifying and extracting canonical references to
                        classical works in secondary scholarship. Through his efforts, for instance,
                        one can now gather every reference to Vergil’s Aeneid 3.452 in searchable scholarship, whether the title was
                        given as Aeneid or abbreviated to
                                Aen. or A.. Romanello can then demonstrate, by means of network
                        graphs, the density of reference to certain passages over others. His work
                        will make it possible to precisely identify trends in scholarship, and
                        reveal how scholarly conversations have affected how we see the ancient
                        world. 
                    The contribution of Francesco Mambrini, Treebanking in the world of
                            Thucydides. Linguistic annotation for the Hellespont Project, takes us back to the primary
                        sources themselves. Resources like the Classical Languages Toolkit now provide versions of basic and
                        essential tools for linguistic analysis long available for English, such as
                        tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, stemming, and even scansion. A need
                        yet remains, however, for a resource of great interest to linguists as well
                        as philologists, a set of fully syntactically annotated Greek and Latin
                        sentences. Mambrini’s paper reports on the Hellespont Project, an effort to
                        perform syntactic analysis on the text of Thucydides, as a step toward
                        creating a method for automatic syntactic parsing of ancient Greek
                        generally. Treebanking is the common technical term for full
                        morphological and syntactical analysis, and based on the treebank they
                        created, Mambrini and his collaborators set out to answer compelling
                        questions such as whether there is a general difference between the actions
                        of the Athenians and the Spartans in the period between the Persian and
                        Peloponnesian Wars. This is extremely challenging work, as it means trying
                        to fit precise distinctions to the subtleties of syntax, but the article
                        shows that real progress can be made.
                
                
                    Large-Scale Analysis
                    Just as big data has followed from digitization
                        generally, so in digital humanities has the promulgation of digital
                        resources and first-order tools been followed by attempts at large-scale
                        analysis. This procedure has been given different names, such as, for
                        literary studies, the distant
                            reading Franco Moretti contrasts with traditional 
                            close reading,
                            
                         or the macroanalysis Matthew
                        L. Jockers contrasts with 
                            microanalysis
                            
                        . The promise of large-scale analysis is to gather together in great
                        numbers elements of works that have been digitized and detect larger or
                        otherwise hard-to-discern patterns in the form, contents, and locations of
                        cultural artefacts.
                    In his contribution to this volume, Matthew L. Jockers himself brings this
                        larger perspective on the digital humanities to bear in an interpretation of
                        an aspect of the classical tradition. Here he focuses on the question of
                        what the distribution of geographical place names in a corpus of 3,500
                        19th-century American, British, and Irish novels can tell us. After laying
                        out his methods in ways that can serve as a guide to others pursuing similar
                        approaches, he comes to a variety of telling observations. These include,
                        for example, the fact that the Mediterranean is characterized as a more wild
                        and adventuresome place, described with words coming under the themes of
                            Outlaws and Robbers,
                        Female Heroines,
                        Men with Guns. This contrasts with the characterization of cities and
                        civilizations situated on the Mediterranean such as Egypt, Greece, and
                        Jerusalem, which are associated with more sublime themes like Art and
                            Beauty and the Holy and the Sacred.
                
                
                    Education
                    Pedagogy and outreach have been major goals of work in digital classics from
                        its beginnings. In the 1980s, Perseus and the Vergil Project were
                        founding efforts to establish texts and study materials for students. More
                        recently, the Dickinson Classical
                            Commentaries represent a leap forward in classical language
                        pedagogy that takes full advantage of students’ increased access to the
                        internet through phones and tablets. The site successfully integrates
                        multimedia offerings with traditional pedagogical aids such as customizable
                        vocabulary lists and live readings by the instructor. The series includes
                        authors commonly read in the introductory Latin language curriculum (Caesar,
                        Cicero, and Ovid) as well as those not commonly encountered by
                        undergraduates such as Callimachus and Sulpicius Severus.
                    More generally, making basic materials and analytical tools more easily
                        available to all has provided additional benefits for students. In addition,
                        teachers have created or adapted new digital pedagogical materials and
                        techniques for the use of students. Two of the examples presented in this
                        volume include Jeffrey Rydberg-Cox’s Greek pedagogy site and Rebecca
                        Schindler’s initiative on spatial literacy.
                    Jeffrey Rydberg-Cox’s paper reports on his initiative to make self-guided
                        pedagogical materials freely available for students of ancient Greek. He
                        adapted John Williams White’s First Greek Book
                        (1896), a textbook with 80 lessons based upon the language and vocabulary of
                        Xenophon’s Anabasis, for a variety of mobile
                        platforms. Sentence alignment exercises, in which users match individual
                        Greek words with English words and phrases, help students make the
                        transition from drilling exercises into reading authentic Greek. Spaced
                        repetition enables students to practice material over multiple sessions. The
                        initiative has been successful both for Rydberg-Cox’s students at University
                        of Missouri-Kansas City and other students of ancient Greek. The site
                        boasted 7,800 unique users in its first twelve months, a significant number
                        for a less-commonly taught language.
                    Rebecca Schindler’s paper discusses the integration of spatial literacy
                        skills in the classical studies curriculum. Spatial literacy is now valued
                        alongside the more traditional skills of writing, numeracy, and critical
                        thinking. Classical studies has tended to fall behind other disciplines in
                        terms of teaching spatial literacy, as courses in GIS for classicists are
                        relatively rarer. Schindler describes how she and her colleagues have
                        integrated spatial literacy into classical archaeology courses, using
                        examples from the Collaboratory for GIS and Mediterranean Archaeology (CGMA)
                        at DePauw University. 
                
                
                    Conclusions
                    Three years after the original DCA meeting, the future of digital humanities
                        in classical studies continues to look promising. Both philologists and
                        archaeologists will benefit from a series of new, publicly available
                        projects. One volume cannot capture the diversity of projects discussed at
                        the DCA conference, much less the broader field of classical digital
                        humanities. To enlarge the scope further somewhat, however, we conclude with
                        a survey of two projects whose leaders presented at the conference but do
                        not have articles in this volume, to give a sense of other important
                        directions in the field.
                    Network analysis has been a major line of approach among digital humanists.
                        Research in social network analysis considers how associations of
                        individuals and groups map onto geographical space. Representative of such
                        efforts is the work of Maxim Romanov on toponyms used in the early Islamic
                            world. Romanov, M. forthcoming Toward
                                Abstract Models for Islamic History. In The Digital Humanities + Islamic & Middle Eastern
                                Studies (pdf
                                of submission). By gathering locating names such as
                            Al-Baghdadi and al-Basri from the 14th-century History of Islam written by the Damascene
                        historian al-Dhahabī on maps of the geography where Islam was born and grew,
                        Romanov shows how the frequency of mentions of regions changes. From this
                        information, he is able to sketch a kind of social geography of the early
                        Islamic world as one indicator of the shifting cultural and religious
                        importance of different regional centers over the centuries.
                    Traditional philological studies have also been transformed by the new
                        digital tools. Neil W. Bernstein described a method for gauging the internal
                        connectedness, through allusion and intertext, of the works that make up the
                        corpus of classical Latin epic poetry. Bernstein and his collaborators took
                        the individual, often subtle borrowings of language from one epic author to
                        another revealed by the search provided by the Tesserae Project web
                            tool. They conducted a rigorous, large-scale study that compares
                        the overall level of intertextuality among authors writing epic.
                            Published separately in DHQ: Bernstein, N.
                            W., K. Gervais, and W. Lin. 2016. Comparative rates
                                of text reuse in classical Latin hexameter poetry.
                            DHQ 9.3. The result was a relatively
                        objective measure of which authors were most influential in the tradition,
                        and which on the other hand were most interested in alluding to and
                        borrowing from the language of their predecessors and contemporaries. The
                        result is a kind of genealogy of influence that was impossible to conduct
                        before the advent of digital tools. 
                    The diversity of projects introduced at the DCA meeting reflected the
                        interdisciplinarity of classical studies, which has traditionally integrated
                        the study of literary and archaeological sources. So whereas the notion of
                            big tent digital humanities, including not just
                        developers but users and others, has had to be argued for in the broader
                        field of digital humanities , particpants in the
                        2013 DCA conference demonstrated a strong sense of common purpose in
                        developing technologies and adapting them for particular ends. The
                        continuing development of large-scale digital infrastructure in classics
                        described above should provide an improved common basis for such efforts,
                        allowing for increased collaboration around existing tools and data
                        archives, and so easier creation and dissemination of new analytical and
                        pedagogical applications.
                
            
