Title:  Webbots and Machinic Agency
Volume:  006
Issue:  2
Date:  5 October 2012
Abstract:  
            
            Malware and criminal operations performed by botnets on the Internet not only pose a
               new threat, but also point to our increasing reliance upon a new form of machinic
               agency, which I call the webbot assemblage. Whereas news media coverage of its
               operations considers only their human aspects, mostly in relation to crime and
               cyberterrorism, Daniel Suarez's recent novel Daemon
               provides a suggestive glimpse into how, in a webbot assemblage, new forms of human
               and machinic agency are complexly intricated. The significance of this assemblage
               becomes further evident when it is considered in relation to how the Internet is
               increasingly perceived: no longer as a neutral medium but as an ecosystem defined by
               netwar, software arms races, and the possible evolution of low
               forms of artificial life.
         
Full Body Text: 
Webbots and Machinic Agency

            Introduction
            In recent years, sophisticated new forms of cybercrime and cyber warfare have
               displaced spam, pornography, and vandalistic viruses as the most visible threats from
               the Internet's dark underside.On viruses, see . My essay in the same volume  considers computer
                  viruses mainly as experimental and vandalistic. The present essay is more directly
                  concerned with the historical shift to the widespread use of malware
                  in hacking. A general term for malicious software, malware includes
                  viruses, worms, trojan horses, spyware, rootkits and other software designed to
                     exploit vulnerable computer networks. As early as 2003 and
               increasingly from 2004 to the present, the primary use of computer viruses and worms
               has been as malware, which is used to break into and capture networked machines and
               data systems for specifically criminal, money-making purposes, or for politically
               subversive or destructive ends. Sometimes these subversive actions have taken a
               positive political turn, as when they participate in the ongoing efforts to maintain
               free and open access to the exchange of information, or to expose the secret and
               illegal actions of surveillance, whether by state or private data-mining agencies.
               The hacktivists' attacks against companies like PayPal which tried to weaken or end
               financial support for WikiLeaks in the wake of its release of diplomatic cables was
               one spectacular instance. Stuxnet, the worm that penetrated and corrupted the
               computer system controlling the centrifuges of the Iranian nuclear enrichment
               program, provides a comparably dramatic example of cyber warfare.The Stuxnet
                  worm was first detected in the summer of 2010 by Internet security experts around
                  the world, but no one knew precisely what its target and payload were. As it
                  replicated and spread, it seemed to be searching through computer systems for a
                  pre-defined target, which it apparently located in the Fall. Thus far there has
                  been no conclusive determination of its origin, though the consensus opinion of
                  security experts is that it most likely originated in a joint American-Israeli
                  intelligence operation. I discuss some of Stuxnet's technical features further
                  below. For more background information, see Stuxnet:
                     Dissecting the Worm
                  . Stuxnet: Fact vs.
                     Theory
                   summarizes many of the early news reports, and Michael
                  Joseph Gross' article for Vanity Fair provides a useful narrative account . Shortly after reports of Stuxnet appeared in the
               news media, the former anti-terrorist security advisor for Presidents George W. Bush
               and Bill Clinton, Richard A. Clarke, published Cyber War
               (2010), a book detailing the increasing vulnerability of the American government,
               military, and large corporations to cyber attacks launched by State hackers working
               for foreign governments. But in fact, news reports of cyber war have generally been
               less frequent, and mainly of interest to Internet security experts. The vast majority
               of related news media stories for the past six or seven years concern the exploits of
               cybercriminals, and have focused on Distributed Denial of Service attacks, instances
               of extortion, identity theft, and the astronomical sums of money invested in Internet
               security and extracted by mafia-supported hackers. These reports have been so
               visible, in fact, that President Obama felt compelled to give a public speech about
               cyber threats and the costs of cybercrime early in his presidency.The speech
                  (see ) was delivered on May 30, 2009.
            

            While certainly justified — indeed, to ignore Internet security and the dangers of
               malware would be foolish — this media attention is concerned almost exclusively with
                  the human face of a vast technological assemblage whose machinic operations
               mostly remain obscure. Specifically, our greatly increased dependency on the Internet
               necessarily also means our increased dependency upon a variety of bots
               (software robots) and intelligent agent software more generally. Much of what happens
               on the Internet is enabled or carried out by web bots, spiders, screen scrapers, and
               many quasi-autonomous software systems. Although essential to the functioning of our
               current information society, the new forms of machinic agency that bots instantiate
               have received very little critical attention outside the circles of Internet security
               and data mining professionals. Here, I will examine what I call the webbot assemblage
               from multiple, partially overlapping perspectives – first, new malware and Internet
               security, second, a contemporary cyber-thriller in which a webbot assemblage figures
               centrally, and third, the dynamically changing nature of the Internet itself. My aim
               is to sketch a new understanding of the evolving and complex imbrication of human and
               machinic agency that the Internet is bringing about. Indeed, the developing
               technology of the webbot assemblage is inseparable from many of the dynamical changes
               we have witnessed in the Internet itself over the past decade or so, as it has
               acquired the traits of an ecosystem defined by netwar, software arms races, and the
               possible evolution of low, barely intelligent forms of artificial life.
         

            Bots on the Net
            Unlike the computer voices on the telephone with which we frequently interact, most
               bot activity remains invisible. In eerie silence, countless numbers of bots
               tirelessly search for, record, retrieve, sift through, and act upon the
               ever-enlarging masses of data without which our contemporary high-tech world could
               not function. While most of this activity occurs on the Internet, it is instigated by
               and purportedly serves the interests of people at the front-end, in offices
               and at desktops everywhere. Much of financial management, for example, is automated
               by bots, which more and more often determine whether or not we get a loan or
               mortgage. Bots scan x-rays and MRIs, function as players in online games and as
               purchasing agents for brokerage houses. They operate and monitor surveillance cameras
               all over the globe, as unblinking eyes that watch and record many of our activities —
               our movements, spending habits, commercial transactions, and health records — which
               other bots in turn analyze for patterns which are then sold on the market. The
               massive increase in cell phone and e-mail surveillance since 9/11 would not be
               possible without bots. In fact, the Internet itself, which we commonly think of as a
               network of people using machines, is increasingly used for machine-to-machine
               exchange, specifically Electronic Data Interchange (EDI). In sum, Internet bots now
               automate a widening range and number of activities that until recently only humans
               could perform.

            Initially, bots were a basic tool for network maintenance and data management. But
               with the Internet's accelerated use and expansion in the late 1990s, bots were
               developed that could search the Web, download pages or selected bodies of information
               following refined search criteria, and then bundle it neatly in a file for the human
                  user.See  for a detailed discussion of Internet
                  bots in the early 1990s. This type of bot, usually called a web crawler,
               systematically visits web pages, retrieves content, extracts URLs to other relevant
               links, and then in turn visits those links. In addition to data mining, web crawlers
               are often used to find and repair broken links. But they can also be used to retrieve
               user information, including usernames and passwords, as well as security information
               about the user’s machine or system. Consequently, bots have also become a primary
               means for malicious and criminal exploits, the most threatening of which is their
               collective formation in criminal botnets.
            

             In its simplest form, a botnet is an army of compromised computers that takes orders
               from a botherder. In Botnets: The Killer Web App,
               Craig Schiller et al explain further: 
                  The software that creates and manages
                     a botnet makes this threat much more than the previous generation of malicious
                     code. It is not just a virus; it is a virus of viruses. The botnet is modular —
                     one module exploits the vulnerabilities it finds to gain control over its
                     target. It then downloads another module that protects the new bot by stopping
                     antivirus software and firewalls; the third module may begin scanning for other
                     vulnerable systems
                  
               . To start this process, a hacker first tricks the user into installing a root
               kit that gives him (they are still mostly males) complete control over the user’s
               machine. Several vectors are used to install such malware: getting the user to open a
               contaminated email or to download software from a compromised website are the most
               frequent. To penetrate databases storing credit card and personal information of
               large numbers of people, hackers often deploy software tools to probe for open or
               unprotected ports through which the malware is downloaded directly.For further
                  details on how these software tools work, see  and
                     . Together with Schiller et al 2007, these sources
                  provide a clear technical description of the botnet assemblage. With
               malware installed, the hacker or botherder — completely unknown to the user — can use
               the compromised machine or zombie to send waves of spam or pornography, or
               else enslave it in huge botnets that are mobilized in Distributed Denial of Service
               (DDoS) attacks, which overload and crash the target website, rendering it
               inaccessible. Initially such attacks were directed against online gambling sites and
               large corporate web sites, but more recently all sorts of organizations and even
               governments have been targeted. In Fatal System Error
               , Joseph Menn provides many detailed examples of how DDoS
               attacks have been used for criminal extortion by mafia-like organizations in Eastern
               Europe and Russia. As Menn shows, these highly skilled and well-paid criminal hackers
               rely on networks of semi-secret websites that offer malware and services like
               pay-for-use botnets. Such darknets constitute an extensive network of
               underground sites used to develop and market the essential tools of the trade.

             One significant side effect of these DDoS attacks has been to make more visible both
               the power of bots and our greatly increased dependency upon them. The problem of
               countering the threats they pose will be considered later; here let it suffice to
               note that with the constant development of Internet security measures we are
               witnessing an escalation of the malware wars, which are usually represented as
               an evolving software arms race between the good guys and the bad guys, with
               the future of the Internet at stake. These developments — and foremost the greatly
               increased sophistication of the tools that now make up criminal webbot assemblages —
               indicate an important historical shift. This is evident in the large numbers of
               criminal hackers, their complex organization, and often the concerted nature of their
               actions, which sharply contrast with the practices of the preceding epoch, when only
               small numbers of relatively isolated hackers wrote and launched computer viruses for
               vandalistic, anti-social motives or simply to experiment with software in the
                  wild.
            

            This historical shift to large criminal organizations and thus to a well-financed
               criminal hacker class whose motivation is purely monetary or economic is not the
               whole picture, however. Many recent events suggest that the line between the mafia
               hacker and the State-supported hacker is becoming blurred. In his book, Inside Cyber Warfare: Mapping the Cyber Underworld, Jeffrey Carr
               cites a number of relevant incidents. When Russia attacked Chechnya in 2002, for
               example, it used some of the same criminal organizations just mentioned to bring down
               Chechnyan opposition websites. In 2001, when Chinese and American military aircraft
               collided over the China Sea, thousands of Chinese hackers spontaneously launched a
                  counter cyber-offensive against US aggression. As a result, as Carr puts
               it, 
                  non-State hackers [have become] a
                     protected asset
                  
               . Yet, since the evidence suggests that many nation-states besides China and
               Russia not only tolerate but actively support and even provide university or
               technical training for hacker groups, a clear and constant distinction between state
               and non-state hacker can no longer be maintained. Perhaps a more appropriate
               framework could be extrapolated from Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari's concept of
                  nomad war machines, which, they theorize, have always existed apart from
               but can also be appropriated by a State apparatus.See  for their theory of the nomad war machine
                  and the State apparatus. The authors insist upon the exteriority and
                  irreducibility of the war machine vis-a-vis the State apparatus, which can
                     capture but never fully internalize the war machine.
                  Significantly, among the latter's many attributes and associations, secrets and
                  betrayal figure largely. However, in the contemporary context the primarily
                  technical aspect of war machines and the importance of code assume a significance
                  not discussed by Deleuze and Guattari. In many of the instances cited by
               Carr and Clarke, malware and rootkits functioning in webbot assemblages have clearly
               been weaponized for cyber warfare by nation states. 

            The Stuxnet worm provides a highly instructive example. Its apparent purpose was
               simple: to slow down Iran's production of high-grade uranium by destroying the
               functionality of its centrifuge machines. However, Stuxnet represents a striking leap
               forward in complexity and functional design. Based on a rootkit and multi-functional
               set of software modules much like the criminal botnet assemblage described earlier,
               it adds a large array of components to increase its chances of success — for example,
               it exploits several zero-day Windows vulnerabilities (i.e. vulnerabilities
               still largely unknown to software developers and for which no security fix has yet
               been issued by vendors), it increases the number of possible infection paths,
               includes new antivirus evasion techniques and two forged digital signatures, and it
               can be easily updated and possesses a command and control interface.For
                  details, see the extensive (70-page) analysis of Stuxnet's component software and
                  mode of attack and operation made available by Symantec Security Response . Basically, Stuxnet targets with laser-like
               precision a Siemens industrial control system, invisibly rewriting the code and
               altering the variables for the centrifuge engine speeds, which this system regulates.
               This very capacity to target a single mechanized unit within a complex industrial
               control system at a precise physical location — rather than a specific website —
               makes Stuxnet a fearful development in the hacker's armory of tools and software
               weapons. The workings of Stuxnet forcefully demonstrate that webbot assemblages can
               be used not only to gain access to valuable and protected information but also to
               penetrate into and manipulate physical machines and industrial control systems in
               acts of netwar.
         

            An Internet Daemon
            The kind of multi-functionality now evident in webbot software is dramatically
               illustrated in Daniel Suarez's popular cyber-thriller, Daemon (2008).See , as well as the
                  sequel, . Since the novel clearly delineates
               some of the central features of the webbot assemblage and its machinic operations, it
               is worth examining in some detail. Conspicuously concerned with the blurring of the
               human-machinic interface and the becoming autonomous of a highly distributed system,
               it suggestively presents a diagram of how human agency — precisely by means of the
               webbot assemblage — is disassembled into part-functions and re-distributed into what
               amounts to a new, collectively functioning posthuman form. As Suarez later revealed,
               the novel's central idea originated in his work developing software systems. After
               developing an application for changing the weather in computer games, he made it
               available to download on the Internet with an automatic pay system. After several
               years, he noticed that it had deposited a tidy little sum into his bank account. He
               then began to imagine other things that you could do even if you were dead. The basic
               idea for the novel soon followed. Its overarching plot centers on a talented online
               game designer, Matthew Sobol, who contrives to set in motion after his death armies
               of bots directed by a sophisticated AI game engine. Guided by the Daemon, as
               this new form of machinic agency comes to be called, the bots carry out increasingly
               complicated scenarios. First, they recruit several human agents, including a
               journalist who helps to disguise the Daemon's murderous and destructive actions by
               shifting the blame onto an investigating police officer whose supposed theft of
               Sobol's money is publically exposed. Almost invisibly, armies of bots then
               remorselessly begin to dismantle our current society and reconstruct it as a fully
               distributed, automated system.

            An unlikely event triggers the novel's initial action: two of the leading programmers
               at Cyberstorm Entertainment, a highly successful producer of Internet games, die of
               what first appear to be high-tech accidents. One has his throat slit by a wire that
               rises up across the path where he normally rides his motorcycle; the other is
               electrocuted when he tries to enter the company’s data center and possibly shut down
               the servers. However, the ensuing police investigation reveals that these deaths are
               very sophisticated, automated executions. Proceeding slowly and methodically in the
               face of the skepticism and technical ignorance of the higher ups in the police
               department and FBI, the local homicide investigator and a computer consultant who is
               initially a suspect piece together evidence of an unprecedented new type of plot in
               progress. It turns out that Matthew Sobol, the wealthy and inventive game designer
               who had founded and controlled Cyberstorm, had recently died of brain cancer. For
               reasons never fully disclosed, Sobol had programmed bots to scour Internet news
               sources for the announcement of his own death, and then, in response to this
               announcement, to set in motion a vast complex of orchestrated events, including the
               destruction of the FBI agents who attempt to search his California mansion. The novel
               renders this attempted search-turned-siege as a vivid action sequence. The house is
               defended by a bot-controlled, weaponized Hummer programmed to hone in on the heat
               signatures of the FBI agents; inside, it is booby-trapped with high tech weapons like
               subsonic broadcasts that leave the attacking SWAT team writhing in nausea. Later in
               the novel a whole fleet of autonomous vehicles will be built according to online
               specifications and will constitute a mechanized army ready for attack.

            Much of the novel's action is made possible by Sobol's modification and deployment of
               the software he had developed for his hugely popular Massive Multiplayer Online Role
               Playing Games, Over the Rhine and The Gate. To implement his manipulative game scenarios, Sobol had
               invented a powerful AI game engine (called Ego), which
               he has adapted so that it can coordinate the activities of a huge "darknet" of bots
               and other robotic agents, and which eventually includes human agents. To enlist the
               services of the latter, particularly his devoted gamers, Sobol has also modified the
               game map and special graphical user interface developed for the online games. In
               another vivid action sequence, a criminal hacker named Brian Gragg, who is also a
               highly skilled player of Over the Rhine, engages in
               combat with German troops led by the fearful Nazi Lieutenant Boerner, a game
               character who acquires a quasi-autonomous life of his own as a recruiting
                  avatar. After one of their combat encounters, Boerner leaves Gragg an
               encrypted clue that will unlock this special interface, after which Gragg is led to
               take intelligence and skill tests and then recruited by the now dead Sobol, who
               appears to Gragg in a video made before his death.

            Gragg is only one of many among the criminals, the disaffiliated, and the out of work
               who are similarly induced to join Sobol’s secret network. Membership gives them
               access to this special graphical interface from Over the
                  Rhine, expanded to include an integrated Global Positioning System to map
               and coordinate both human and bot resources. As the hacker Jon Ross explains to the
               FBI investigators, 
                  In essence Sobol is using the GPS system
                     to convert the earth into one big game map. We're all in his game now
                  
               . Ross and the FBI then discover that the new interface projects a virtual
               overlay onto the agent's environmental space (this requires a wearable computer and
               special contact lenses) in which call-outs identify human agents to one
               another and the resources that are locally available. Beginning with the actions of
               bots and progressing to multiple, hybrid forms of agency operating at several levels,
               Sobol's online games become an autonomous network whose agents begin to penetrate
               into and transform social, economic, and political reality.

            In effect, Sobol's online game world functions as a transformational matrix for
               bringing about a fully distributed and automated society, initially engineered by
               webbots and other robotic agents that collectively constitute a remorseless machine —
               the Daemon of the title. In computer technology, a daemon refers to a
               small computer program or routine that runs invisibly in the background, usually
               performing house-keeping tasks such as logging various activities and responding to
               low-level internal events. Analogously, the reader of the novel doesn't directly
               perceive the actions of the webbots, only humans carrying out their instructions —
               for example, at a small firm where engineers are converting newly purchased SUVs into
               autonomous vehicles according to specifications received online from an outsourcing
               company. Over the course of the novel this Internet daemon extends its reach into an
               increasing number of production and distribution networks, and thus into the economy
               at large, slowly and systematically dismantling and rebuilding the world according to
               a ruthless logic of efficiency and highly distributed, low-level intelligence. By the
               novel's conclusion, the Daemon has infiltrated and taken over the databases of many
               large corporate and financial institutions, and successfully frustrated the
               government's efforts to defeat it.
         

            Bots as Narrow AI and Artificial Life
            Whereas the idea for Daemon stems from the author's
               technical interest in the efficacy of bots, its realization reflects a worry about
               the possible consequences of their increasing capacity and our developing dependence
               upon them. In interviews Suarez has insisted that his novel is not a sci-fi scenario,
               since the necessary technology already exists. Yet, clearly no Luddite, Suarez is
               hardly interested in denying the conveniences bots provide, or the labor and tedium
               they enable us to avoid. His concern, rather, is with the layering and the extent of
               automation that bots are making possible, and as a consequence the tendency to reduce
               the number of people making the important decisions that both directly and indirectly
               affect human lives. In other words, he is worried by the possibility that bots are
               becoming a form of autonomous agency inimical to the public good.

            In a web-cast lecture entitled Bot-Mediated Reality,
               See  for the complete lecture. Suarez
               focuses on our current society's collective pursuit of hyper-efficiency, arguing that
               bots are the perfect tool for its achievement. Cheap to make and operate, bots are
               relentlessly efficient, for unlike the humans they replace, they have very few needs.
               As evidence of their ascendance, Suarez points to the exponential increase over the
               past few years in the number of bots, the amount of malware, the size of hard-drive
               space on our computers, and thus the growing size of an ecological niche for software
               agents. While bots could certainly become a vector for human despotism, the greater
               danger, he thinks, would be the collective human loss of control over society: since
               bots could enable society to function as a vast inhuman machine on auto-pilot, its
               operations would no longer be susceptible to human steering. Human beings, as
               large-brained animals with complex motivations not reducible to efficiency, would
               then have created an environment in which they no longer enjoy an adaptive advantage,
               in a sudden reversal of human history. Thus Suarez summarily suggests that this
               desire for hyper-efficiency has led to and may be locking us into a Darwinian
               struggle with low or narrow AI, specifically with the kind of low-level intelligent
               software instantiated in bots.Interestingly, the low-level AI of the Google
                  search engine has recently begun to generate a comparable anxiety, though not (to
                  my knowledge) on Suarez's part. For a specific example, see . From the outset, Google founders Larry
                  Page and Sergey Brin were always forthright not only about the AI origins of their
                  original search engine but also about their vision of the perfect search engine as
                  constituting full AI. Artificial
                     Intelligence would be the ultimate version of Google Page said in 2000;
                  and in 2003: 
                     The ultimate search engine is
                        something as smart as people —or smarter
                     
                  . What seems to have blunted or displaced public worry about this explicit
                  development of AI is the Google search engine's widespread (and even necessary)
                  usefulness, as well as Google's heretofore generally beneficent image.
            

            To be sure, Suarez is not the first or only one to wonder if bots might constitute a
               new form of machinic life.For a discussion of the concept of machinic life, see
                     . One of the first books to consider bots,
               Andrew Leonard's Bots: The Origin of a New Species
               (1998), explicitly raises this possibility.While the population of bots —
                  chatbots, computer game bots, and of course the bots I consider here — has vastly
                  increased since the publication of Leonard's book, unfortunately there has been no
                  update or comprehensive book devoted to this vital topic. Leonard, however,
               does not pursue what may be the most intriguing corollary to this possibility: that
               bots are a new form of digital parasite, like the sacculina parasite
               that slowly converts the sand crab into its own zombie reproductive machine. As a
               silicon species whose number has grown over two thousand per cent in the past few
               years and now enjoys a rapidly expanding ecological niche, bots could become — or may
               be becoming — the agency of a double transformation, providing both a mechanism that
               could enable our society to operate on auto-pilot, as a hyper-efficient machine no
               longer under human control, and, as a form of low-life intelligence, the
               medium and environment in which network agency could evolve to greater complexity.
               This double transformation, moreover, points to a specifically machinic aspect
               of the webbot assemblage. In effect, it evolves through the doubling back on itself
               or retroaction of a cybernetic loop: humans build and deploy bots in an extension of
               human agency, but — from a reversed perspective — the bots also reproduce and evolve
               by means of the human desire to build more and better bots. When a certain threshold
               is achieved — that of an autonomous technology — this language is no longer
               metaphorical, but simply indicates how an assemblage of human and nonhuman agencies
               has become self-sustaining and self-perpetuating.In Erewhon (1872), Samuel Butler provides the first description of how
                  machines reproduce by means of human agency. Langdon Winner's book Autonomous Technology (1977) extends Jacques Ellul's
                  argument (in The Technological Society) that
                     technique has become autonomous and operates beyond the control of human
                  agency. These different strands come together in George B. Dyson's Darwin Among
                  the Machines: The Evolution of Global Intelligence, where he writes: 
                     Everything that human beings are doing
                        to make it easier to operate computer networks is at the same time, but for
                        different reasons, making it easier for computer networks to operate human
                        beings
                     
                  . The overarching determinist argument evident here — that human beings make
                  technology that eventually produces human beings who desire only and exactly more
                  of this same technology — depends however on a single, tightly closed cybernetic
                  loop. Thus it is far too simple an account of the relationship between humans and
                  the technologies they construct. In actuality, this relationship is constituted
                  from a multiplicity of such interactive loops (or coupled dynamical systems), with
                  any number of contingencies and indeterminacies. To speak of causal determination
                  in the human brain alone, for example, is made exceedingly difficult by the fact
                  that many (possibly most) neural areas are linked by both feedback and feedforward
                  neural pathways. No doubt there are many circuits of continuous
                     reciprocal causation (Andy Clark's felicitous phrase) between humans
                  and their technologies, but many of the loops are open, inevitably expand the
                  possibility space, and hence spiral out into indeterminate futures.
            

            
               Daemon is explicitly concerned with the first aspect of
               this double transformation, but not with the further evolution of bot technology. It
               can thus be read as a cautionary tale, comparable to Michael Crichton's
               techno-thrillers like Jurassic Park and Prey, where hubristic humans deploy a new technology that
               quickly escapes their control. At the same time, and this is the source of its deeper
               interest, Daemon offers a fundamentally different kind
               of narrative, one driven by a peculiar transformation and displacement of human
               agency: having (posthumously) set the webbot assemblage in motion with the
               announcement of his own death, Sobol survives or lives on as a form of
               artificial or machinic intelligence through the operations that the webbots
               collectively perform. As a consequence, Sobol's relationship to his daemon
                  spirit appears as complexly ambiguous. At once a posthumous and
                  posthuman figure, the Daemon is not the cause but the result of the bots'
               collective and emergent actions. At the level of Sobol's programmed bots, there is no
                  human face or purpose — only an operational logic extending along vectors
               of a vast communicational network, in effect defining a virtual plane of immanence
               actualized in a multitude of highly distributed parallel actions. Working
                  only at this level, this autonomous and remorseless form of agency is
               intensely corrosive of large hierarchical organizations like contemporary
               corporations and the US government, which require repeated attributions of meaning
               and purpose at every level precisely because they operate through (while also
               transcending) individual human connections. Having no inherent purpose beyond their
               own local functionality, the bots collectively produce an emergent, global effect —
               the dismantling of current corporate society — simply by working in concert at the
               lowest level of machinic efficiency.

            Thus, while the Daemon is denominated as such by Sobol and assigned this role
               as immanent and material cause by Sebeck and the other characters, this totalizing
               effect should be understood as a metaphor, as the novel's symbolic staging of the way
               humans make sense of a complex transformation, in this instance of how Sobol's
               bodily human intelligence has been extended into and replaced by the concerted
               actions of thousands of little intelligences at work, as if they were swarms of
               robotic homunculi. In other words, the Daemon provides a convenient fiction by which
               a unified and transcendent agency can be attributed to the low-life actions of
               a highly distributed intelligence that is re-making all complex, hierarchical
               organizations and structures in its own flat image. This diffraction or
               gearing down of human agency into lower machinic levels is represented as initially
               violent and destructive, in keeping both with the violence of Sobol's first-person
               shooter games and the literary genre of techno-thriller fiction. However, it is
               ultimately not all bad news for humans, who are quite capable of living productively
               in flat, web-like networks instead of large scale, corporate hierarchies. Indeed,
               such flat networks may well be the necessary bedrock of a more sustainable human
               future, as Daemon's sequel, Freedom (2010), suggests.For example, in Freedom a number of scenes are devoted to the efforts on the part of
                  several small, networked human communities to provide an alternative to corporate
                  monoculture and specifically to agribusiness in the Midwest.
            
         

            Netwar and New Agency
            We can now consider from a wider perspective what Suarez has extrapolated from our
               contemporary hi-tech world that requires this embedding of the webbot assemblage and
               its particular form of agency in his fictional narrative. We shall see first that it
               is not at the level of agent software and the swarms of bots running on
               the Internet that the novel's primary fictionalization occurs. Rather, it is more
               globally, at their targeting of the structure and mode of operation of corporate
               capitalism and its servant (or handmaiden) the nation-state. In Daemon all the robotic attacks are directed either at corporations that
                  reside in the US or at the US government — indeed, sometimes these two
               entities are blurred. In 1886, the US Supreme Court declared that corporations were
                  persons entitled under the Fourteenth Amendment to the same protections as
               living citizens. But as Peter Barns in Capitalism 3.0
               points out, following many others before him: 
                  ... the modern corporation isn't a real
                     person. Instead, it's an automaton designed to maximize profit for
                     stockholders. It externalizes as many costs as it possibly can, not because it
                     wants to, but because it has to. It never sleeps or slows down. And it never
                     reaches a level of profitability at which it decides, This is enough. Let's
                        stop here
                  
               . Barns' specific terms should make it clear that Sobol's Daemon is meant to
               mirror the automaton that is current corporate capitalism; or rather, it is the
               latter's inverse or demon image, since profit is not its motive. The Daemon's
               purpose, rather, is only to perpetuate itself as a fully distributed agency with no
               central authority and thus as an inversion of the corporate structure.At the
                  very end of the novel, Sobol explains to Sebeck (in a video Sobol made before his
                  own death) that the Daemon 
                     is a remorseless system for building
                        a distributed civilization. A civilization that perpetually regenerates. One
                        with no central authority
                     
                  .  It can achieve this, however, only by converting the webbot
               assemblage into a war machine. In other words, it can enact and fully become a
               completely distributed agency only through all-out netwar against the highly
               centralized and hierarchical agencies of the corporate state.

            In the 1990s, two researchers for the Rand Corporation, John Arquilla and David
               Ronfeldt, defined netwar as 
                  an emerging mode of conflict (and
                     crime) at societal levels, short of traditional military warfare, in which the
                     protagonists use network forms of organization and related doctrines,
                     strategies, and technologies attuned to the information age
                  
               . Arquilla and Ronfeldt emphasize two particularly relevant aspects of netwar.
               First, Hierarchies have a difficult time
                  fighting networks, and thus 
                  It takes networks to fight
                     networks
                  
               . Those who practice netwar — the authors mention criminals, terrorists, or peaceful social activists
               as specific adversaries —
               therefore operate as completely dispersed nodes or multi-channel cells, in
               either case as part of de-centralized or highly distributed networks without central
               command and control structures; instead, they are headless or
                  hydra-headed and allow for local initiative and autonomy. Second, a
               frequently deployed tactic for attack in netwar is the use of swarms or a massively
               large number of agents that can simply overwhelm the enemy. Whereas the terrorist
               organization Al-Quaeda serves as an obvious example of the first feature, the massive
               swarms of bots deployed in actual Distributed Denial of Service attacks clearly
               exemplifies the second.

            Both of these features are fundamental to the netwar carried out by Suarez's Daemon. It should be noted, however, that the Daemon itself
               doesn't fit precisely into any of Arquilla and Ronfeldt's categories of adversary,
               but partakes ambiguously of all three. The authors' comments on what they call the
                  darkside and the ambivalent dynamics of netwar are revealing in this
               respect. They see the type of conflict they call netwar in relation to a specific,
               historically repeating pattern: 
                  a subtle, dialectical interplay
                     between the bright and dark sides in the rise of a new form of
                     organization
                  
               . Summarily, whenever new forms of organization emerge, so do bad guys
               on its cutting edge, who are often eager and very quick 
                  to take advantage of new ways to
                     maneuver, exploit and dominate
                  
               . The good guys, in contrast, 
                  may be so deeply embedded in and
                     constrained by a society's established forms of organization that many have
                     difficulty becoming the early innovators and adopters of a new form
                  
               . Involving both a new form of organization and new technologies, "the network
               form" brings new risks and dangers; specifically, the authors note, threats to
               freedom and privacy. Furthermore, as an ambivalent mode of
                  conflict with a dual nature, netwar can be expected to 
                  cascade across the spectrum of
                     conflict and crime
                  
                as the information revolution spreads globally and its technology grows more
               sophisticated. However, the radical increase in connectivity — which actually blurs
               the distinctions between the local, the transnational, and the global — also means
               that insiders and outsiders are no longer so easily separated or even
               identified. And far from being a transitional phenomenon, it will likely be a 
                  permanent aspect of the new
                     era
                  
               .

            The problem evident here, however, is that Arquilla and Ronfeldt assume that specific
               types of human subject (good guys and bad guys) already exist and are
               simply called forth by the emergence of new forms of organization, that the
                  bad subjects then appropriate these new forms for their own antagonistic
               ends. As a consequence, the authors remain bound by a static and essentialist
               conception of human agency. I suggest, to the contrary, that the advent of a new form
               of organization and a new technology — and it is not evident that either of these
               ever occurs separately — alters the very nature of human agency and thus our
               understanding of the human subject. Specifically, as new technology both elicits and
               creates new possibilities of agency, a corresponding zone of subjective
               indetermination is also created. In the new age of digital connectivity — point and
               click, cut and paste, rapid information searches and scanning — in which writing and
               using code, adapting to completely mobile communications and collectively
               participating in online gaming and social media are all new forms of action,
               the technology transforms what it connects. Specifically, the putatively human
               subject is first and foremost (re)defined operationally as a dense node of complex
               and adaptive functionalities in multiple networks, and thus a site of uncertain
               affects, stoppages, and transductions. These operate as neither simple mechanical
               transmissions of force nor as exchanges of meaning, but as both at once, as
               entanglements and comminglings in which agency is not only multi-mediated and
               multi-modal but viral and memetic. In a technological network society the human is
               never fully separated from the nonhuman and the machinic — there are only degrees
                  of separation.
            

            In effect, human agency diffracts into multiple, interacting sub-agencies — many of
               which are nonhuman — only to be (but not always) re-assembled in entirely new
               configurations and aggregates. In the primary example developed here, a particular
               set of human and machinic agencies working together defines the webbot assemblage.
               What I called at the outset the human face of this assemblage can now be
               understood (like Sobol's Daemon) as a passing but
               inevitable attempt to maintain the appearance of a human unity and continuity, by
               projecting the full dimensionality of human action onto a scene where it has actually
               been diffracted into multiple mechanisms and emergent effects. With this in mind we
               can return to our point of departure, in order to consider the threat of cybercrime
               and to understand why it is not in any simple sense just another type of netwar.
         

            Malware Wars
            In the past few years professional Internet security analysts have become
               increasingly alarmed by the sophistication and mounting costs of criminal activities
               on the Internet. A 2007 issue of the journal Computer
                  Economics reported that costs were averaging around 15 billion dollars a
               year, but added that these are only reported costs, with many companies and
               institutions (especially banks) not releasing information because it could hurt their
               reputation for being well protected.In  President
                  Obama estimates the global costs to have risen to one trillion dollars a
                  year. In a recent series of workshops on the Malware Wars at the
               Santa Fe institute, representatives from the FBI, academic computer scientists, and
               security specialists from companies like Google and Symantec quickly arrived at full
               agreement on several fact-based issues: first, that the accelerated development of
               malware was driven by huge profits, and financed mostly by criminals residing outside
               the US, particularly in Russia, Eastern Europe, and China, where there are few if any
               laws or regulations; and second, that these criminals are highly organized and
               constantly innovating, sharing, or selling new malware to one another and often
               working together, especially on large Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
                  attacks.See . The quotations that
                  follow are taken from this article. Moreover, many of the workshop
               attendees were openly pessimistic – not only because the good guys are way
               behind, always playing defense or catch-up against ingenious new software and tricks,
               but because of the very nature of the problem. As one put it: One software bug or weakness equals millions of compromised
                  hosts. Another was equally blunt: The rate of evolution is so much higher. Malware has such a
                  high evolvability, it may evolve to the point that the Internet is no longer
                  useable. In sum, not only was there full agreement that evolvability and
               system robustness are the key issues, but few of the attendees had any problem
               accepting the assumption that [software]
                  programs behave enough like organisms that some lessons from nature might be
                  applicable to the Internet and malware.
            

            The upshot of this perspective is that we are not only witnessing but, to varying
               degrees, participating in an escalating evolutionary arms race between attacking and
               defending software systems. The hope, explicitly stated at the Santa Fe workshop, is
               that the good guys will prevail by keeping the operational costs of defending
               systems within reasonable limits, and thus at least stabilize the situation until a
               more robust and less vulnerable Internet can be evolved. But of course, arms races
               are inherently unstable and thus unpredictable.

            Two recent developments provide direct evidence. First, as reported in ComputerWorld
               Security, a new feature called Kill Zeus has been added
               to the software toolkit Spy Eye currently used by
               Russian botnets.See , accessed 10 February
                  2010. (Zeus is a more widely deployed, rival toolkit also used by Russian
               botnets.) While both Spynet and Zeus are designed to set up botnets that specialize
               in stealing online banking credentials, the new Kill
                  Zeus feature allows Spy Eye to displace its rival by deleting it from
               zombie machines and then assuming the latter's functions. For some time now botnets
               have been very sophisticated, deploying modular, multi-functional, and increasingly
               adaptive software. Once installed on a machine, this software can download other
               components, search for other machines to capture, or be directed to attack specific
               targets in massive DDoS attacks. The new Kill Zeus
               feature (which no doubt has been duplicated in other rival toolkits) brings about a
               new level of complexity, by allowing these systems (or certain of their component
               modules) to turn each other on and off. In keeping with the analogy with biological
               systems, this can be likened to the actions of genetic regulatory networks, in which
               genes switch each other on and off, producing complex adaptive systems that evolve or
               don't, depending on whether new features (i.e. sub-agencies) enhance the capacities
               of the larger systems within which they operate. Whereas software operating on the
               Internet has often been compared to neural circuits in the brain performing specific
               computational tasks, this new genetic component in the webbot assemblage
               clearly produces additional variations and thereby increases its evolutionary
               potential.

            As already noted, these systems are constantly subjected to new evolutionary
               pressures. We see further evidence in another development reported in ars technica.See ,
                  accessed 14 February 2010. The article points out that botnets are
               increasingly being used for ideological and politically motivated attacks,
               citing recent DDoS attacks against Australian government websites by anti-Scientology
               groups incited by the government's plan to block access to pornography on the
               Internet. But it also reveals that new tactics are being deployed in botnets to avoid
               detection and thus circumvent defense measures. Heretofore most successful DDoS
               attacks owe their success to sheer numbers, often involving fifty or sixty thousand
               zombie machines. Of course, the sheer size of these botnets makes their attacks
               highly visible. The article notes a new tendency to reduce this visibility — to
               attack in many irregularly-timed pulses (throttling, rather than employing a
               few massive waves), at a much wider bandwidth of IP addresses, and, perhaps more
               significantly, to employ camouflage by encrypting the operational scripts in
               innocent-looking data. These new tactics, thus far, have proven to be extremely
               difficult to defend against. We can therefore expect a new tendency to assemble
               smaller, smarter, and less visible botnets, which will in turn demand new and perhaps
               different kinds of defense and counterstrike measures. The more recent revelations
               about Stuxnet, and in particular its precise targeting capacity and officially
               unassignable origins, only aggravate the situation, enabling the murky world of cyber
               warfare to transition rapidly into a potentially global and highly destructive
               battlefield.
         

            Conclusion
            While the escalation of the malware wars has been represented as a
               technological arms race between the good guys and the bad guys, with the
               future of the Internet at stake, the actual discourse necessary for understanding the
               complex dynamic of interactions at work has been that of biological ecosystems and
               the survival and evolution of complex adaptive systems. This conceptual disconnect is
               surely evidence that the concepts of netwar, cybercrime, and even cyber warfare
               remain too dependent upon conventional and unquestioned notions of human agency, in
               which the capacity for intentionality, self-awareness, and control remain uppermost.
               But meanwhile, on another scene — should we call it a form of technological
                  unconscious? — new and different forms of agency are at work. Unfortunately,
               conventional notions of human agency neither provide a reason for considering the
               complex dynamics of the webbot assemblage or even the Internet itself as a
               conglomerate assemblage, nor do they instigate any interest in recognizing the
               rapidly developing forms of artificial life and intelligence we are busy surrounding
               ourselves with and indeed building ourselves into. Unless we analyze the software
               assemblages in which these processes are instantiated, we shall fail to perceive and
               understand the diffraction of human agency into the mundane, barely intelligent bots
               and botnets that operate on and are changing the very nature of the Internet.
         
