Title:  In One's Own Hand: Seeing Manuscripts in a Digital Age
Volume:  006
Issue:  2
Date:  12 October 2012
Abstract:  
            
            As museums increasingly place archival materials on display, a body of scholarship
               has emerged to provide practical advice for staff about exhibiting handwritten
               documents. However, there has as yet been little scholarship that problematizes the
               exhibition of manuscripts and the responses they elicit from their audiences. This
               essay, then, investigates the cultural perception of handwriting as an inherently
               unique and authentic embodiment of its writer, the assumption of which lies behind
               its display. Through a series of close readings of responses to the sight of the
               autograph, I examine the ways in which handwriting’s association with the human body
               has been historically shaped and interpreted; its current function as a locus for
               concerns about the loss or degradation of corporeal identity in an increasingly
               technologized world; and how multimedia museum exhibitions of handwritten documents —
               as digitally manipulable surrogates of original artifacts — expose, complicate, and
               break down the oppositions in this cultural discourse. Ultimately, I argue, digital
               interactives are part of a new exhibitionary paradigm, which not only offers new ways
               of considering an artifact’s essential meaning, but also refines and redefines our
               understanding of human effort, intentionality, and embodiment in a digital age.
         
Full Body Text: 
In One's Own Hand: Seeing Manuscripts in the Digital Age

            I. 
            On attending a recent exhibit on Emily Dickinson at the New York Botanical Garden
               library in 2010 that included a display of her autograph letters and poems, Holland
               Cotter of the New York Times wrote, To see Dickinson’s verse written in her inimitably rangy
                  hand is always a moving experience
               . When the Harry Ransom Center mounted an exhibition on
               Edgar Allan Poe in 2009, journalist Wayne Alan Brenner declared that one of the
               highlights of the show was a letter in
                  which the author pretty much wrenches out his wounded, gin-soaked heart and smears
                  it across the paper via his always meticulous handwriting
               . And for Jennifer King, reviewing the Ransom Center’s
               Poe exhibition for a high school newspaper, the most astonishing pieces were the handwritten letters and manuscripts. Simple
                  as they seem, intact yellow-tinted sheets of paper full of words and exquisite
                  cursive, these pages reveal the absolute innermost mind of Poe in his own
                  hand
               .
            As these comments from a range of audiences demonstrate, the display of handwritten
               documents often elicits immediate and emotional responses from viewers, who imagine
               the creators of these documents to be uniquely — or to use Cotter’s term,
                  inimitably — embodied and revealed in their scripts. As more
               libraries incorporate exhibitions within a broadening understanding of collection
               development and access, and as museums and other cultural institutions increasingly
               recognize the value of displaying library and archival materials, a growing body of
               scholarship has emerged to guide staff through the process of exhibiting manuscripts.
               Most of this literature provides practical advice on such matters as how to ensure
               the preservation and security of documents while they are on display, what kinds of
               display cases to use, how to write engaging text labels, and how to publicize the
               exhibition and use it as a marketing tool for the institution.Though this
                  bibliography is substantial, a representative sample includes ; ; ;
                     ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and .
            
            While this practical advice is extremely helpful, there has been little scholarship
               that problematizes the practice of exhibiting manuscripts and the responses they
               elicit from audiences.For a notable exception, see . This essay will investigate the cultural perception of handwriting as
               an inherently unique and authentic embodiment of its writer, the tacit assumption of
               which lies behind its display. Through a series of close readings of responses to the
               sight of the autograph, I will examine the ways in which handwriting’s association
               with the human body has been historically shaped and interpreted, and how it now
               functions as a locus for concerns about the loss or degradation of corporeal identity
               in an increasingly technologized world. Finally, I will suggest how multimedia museum
               exhibitions of handwritten documents, as digitally manipulable surrogates of the
               original artifacts, expose, complicate, and break down the oppositions in this
               cultural discourse. Ultimately, I argue, digital interactives are part of a new
               exhibitionary paradigm that not only offers new ways of considering an artifact’s
               essential meaning, but also refines and redefines our understanding of human effort,
               intentionality, and embodiment in a digital age.
            Scholars who have theorized the aura of the autograph focus on its embodiment of
               individual identity in contrast to the chilly impersonality of print.There is
                  some ambiguity in the term autograph: though it can refer specifically to a
                  person’s signature, it can also mean any writing in one’s own hand. Throughout
                  this paper, I use the term in the sense of this latter, broader definition.
               Martin Heidegger argued that in typed writing, every person looks the same
               .Quoted in . Printed texts, according to Walter Ong, look machine-made, as they are…This is an insistent world of
                  cold, non-human, facts
               . Handwriting, on the other hand, is considered to
               be individually distinctive. As Sonja Neef and José van Dijck declared, There is no such thing as two people
                  writing identically…handwriting is a unique and authentic signature that
                  claims to guarantee the presence of an individual writer during a historically
                  unique moment of writing. This subjectivity is physically inscribed in the
                  movement and the pressure of the pen led across the paper, leaving there an
                  unexchangeable, personal trace. The autograph embodies its writer, so
               uniquely identifying and identified with him that the reproduction of authentic
               handwriting risks being considered a forgery .For other scholarship on the legality of signatures, see  and .
            
            For these theorists, then, the original autograph is its equally original
               author, seemingly inseparable from the idiosyncratic and singular self embodied by
               his or her handwriting. This sense of embodiment approaches and even becomes
               indistinguishable from the literal. Throughout this essay, I will use the term
                  embodiment to mean the ways in which manuscripts, not unlike relics,
               are assumed to make tangible to the viewer the physical presence of its creator.
               Autograph collectors in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, many of
               whose collections would eventually find their way into special collections libraries,
               imagined the handwritten document functioning as just such a conduit to the physical
               materiality of its original writer. Thomas Madigan, one of the most successful
               autographs and manuscripts dealers in the United States in the early twentieth
               century, believed of autographs that the
                  hearts of men that once moved in gorgeous orbits beat in them still
               . The collector George Birkbeck Hill declared
               that so strongly does the mere handwriting
                  sometimes bring before me those who have long moldered in the dust that there are
                  some signatures, like those of Philip II, Tomás de Torquemada, and Charles
               IX, which I could not bear to keep in my
                  collection, such horror would they excite
               . And for George Barr McCutcheon, The manuscript of a novel in the
                  handwriting of the author — especially if he be long dead and therefore famous —
                  possesses an appeal unsurpassed by anything else. Here is the novel, the poem or
                  the essay just as it was transferred from the brain by way of the hand to the
                  paper on which it was written. No printers had done this job. For months and years
                  the man himself has toiled over these sheets, his own fingers have held the pen,
                  his own eyes have followed the course of the ink as it ran in readable streams
                  across the page, his innermost thoughts have been rendered visible by the magic
                  scribble that turns them into words for all the world to see if it will. The man
                  puts himself upon those sheets as surely as he draws the breath of life. Other men
                  transform his words into type and others bind them up, but he alone has a brain, a
                  heart and a soul into the thing we afterward call a book. 
                  All three preceding quotations originally quoted in .
               
            
            For these collectors, the value of script lies not only in its expression of the
               writer’s innermost thoughts...rendered
                  visible, but also, and perhaps even more strikingly, in what they imagine
               as its ability to connect its reader directly to the writer’s bodily organs: hearts,
               eyes, brains, and especially hands, which represent the most frequently repeated
               synecdochic shorthand for the connection between the body of the writer and the body
               of his writing.
            At the same time, however, the existence of and anxiety over the possibility of
               forgery — the unauthorized assumption of another person’s identity through his or her
               writing — call attention to the potential instability and illegitimacy of
               handwriting, and handwriting’s history is accordingly bound up with the history of
               competing technological means of authentication. As early as ninth-century England,
               documents were authenticated through the author’s handwriting as well as his seal.
               Yet handwriting and seals were understood in the Middle Ages to have different, and
               sometimes competing, cultural valences. A medieval seal typically contained an
               inscription bearing the owner’s name, which enabled him to sign his name identically
               with each imprint .Also see . The seal, then, was a technology of automatic
               reproduction, as Albertine Gaur has pointed out: Not only by intent but also in practice a seal does exactly
                  the same as the printing press: it reliably copies and multiplies information by
                  mechanical means
               .Also quoted in . But in a dispute in 1218, for example, over the
               authenticity of a bond made by William de Spineto between his son, Sewal, and Samuel,
               son of Aaron of Colchester, Sewal denied that the seal on the chirograph was his
               father’s; Samuel, however, insisted that the chirograph was genuine, appealing to the
               testimony of those who know the handwriting
                  of the clerk who was chirographer when it was made
               .Quoted in . As Michael Clanchy has observed, Samuel’s argument hinges
               on the suppositions that handwriting could be attributed to individual scribes and
               that their scripts were more reliable than seals as indicators of authenticity.
               Samuel argued, moreover, that a knight might have more than one seal; seals, too,
               could be forged, or used by people other than their owners. A seal, in other words,
               depersonalized the signing process, since it automatically printed out its owner’s
               name and, in the case of one of the earliest known English seals, the great seal of
               King Edward the Confessor, made the sign of the cross on the owner’s behalf and even
               in his absence .
            This latter automation of the cross is a striking appropriation of the written sign
               of authentication, since prior to King Edward’s introduction of the great seal in the
               late eleventh century, Anglo-Saxon charters seem to have been authenticated primarily
               by just such handwritten crosses, whereby each cross was accompanied by a witness’s
               name written by a priestly scribe as a record of his oath made in the presence of the
               crucified Christ . According to Brigitte
               Bedos-Rezak, the signatory may also have made the ceremonial sign of the cross across
               his body as he marked the cross on the page .Also see . The written
               cross, then, was a physical representation of embodied gestures and of interactions
               not only between people but also with God. By contrast, there seems to have been some
               anxiety over whether seals alone, as marks of secular legality, could adequately
               signify divine approval .Also see . Accordingly, the medieval signer of a charter
                  for Chester abbey notes the presence of both the seal and the signs of the cross
                  that follow each signatory’s name: I, Earl Hugh, and my barons have confirmed all
                     these things in the presence of Archbishop Anselm [of Canterbury] not only by
                     my seal but also by the seal of Almighty God, that is the sign of the holy
                     cross, so that each of us makes a sign of the cross with his own hand as
                     evidence for posterity (Ego comes Hugo et mei barones confirmavimus ista
                     omnia coram Anselmo archiepiscopo, non solum sigillo meo sed etiam sigillo dei
                     omnipotentis, id est signo sancte crucis + , ita quod singuli nostrum propria
                     manu in testimonium posteris signum in filii eius
                  ). For the English translation, see . Earl Hugh opposes his own
                  mechanically-produced seal to the sign of the cross he makes with his own
                     hand, which he describes as the seal of Almighty God, that is the sign of the holy cross. The
                  handwritten cross, then, functions as a conduit for God’s will; moreover, it
                  indicates the presence not only of its human creator but also of the divine
                  Creator, for it both commemorates and reproduces Christ’s crucifixion, the
                  culmination of God’s embodied presence on earth. Although seals continued
               to be used on all formal documents, the practice of authentication by writing one’s
               own name in one’s own hand, known as the sign manual, spread rapidly in England in
               the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries, and, eventually, to America. Over
               the second half of the nineteenth century, the testimonies of handwriting experts
               claiming to be able to recognize identities through handwriting began to be
               increasingly accepted in American courts of law , and continue to do so in court cases today.The testimony of handwriting
                  experts is not unproblematic. In the 2007-2009 trial over the legitimacy of a
                  codicil in Brooke Astor’s will, for example, both defendant and prosecution used
                  competing testimonies of handwriting witnesses . At the
                  same time, the development of new forms of digital handwriting authentication
                  technologies offers critics opportunities to pose new questions about the ability
                  of handwriting to stand in uniquely for its creator. Currently among the foremost
                  of these technologies is dynamic signature verification, a behavioral biometric modality that analyzes dynamic
                     characteristics of an individual’s signature, such as shape of signature, speed
                     of signing, pen pressure when signing, and pen-in-air movements, for
                     recognition
                  . For a discussion of potential problems
                  with dynamic signature verification, see . For a
                  discussion of and problems with biometric security measures more generally, see
                     .
            
            These technologies of authentication, each with very different cultural resonances,
               continue to complement, contest, and appropriate each other as modes of identity
               production and authentication. I do not mean to suggest that one mode is actually
               more automatic or impersonal than another, or even that automation necessarily
               implies impersonality. Rather, I wish to highlight the different cultural emphases
               assigned to these technologies that render them conceptually opposed to each other.
               In the Middle Ages, handwriting was understood as embodied, a tangible sign of human
               and divine presence and intention as expressed through the bodily movement of the
               hand. By contrast, seals lacked such validation of the human creator’s and divine
               Creator’s physical presence, although, as marks of secular, legal authenticity, they
               continued to be used throughout the Middle Ages, often in tandem with handwritten
                  signs.For more on handwritten crosses as signifying divine authority, and
                  for another perspective on seals’ relationship to individual identity, see . The association of embodied
               identity with handwriting, especially as defined against other technologies that were
               imagined in opposition to handwriting as disembodying, intensified steadily in
               subsequent centuries, under the pressure of such catalysts as the invention and
               increasing dominance of printing technologies; the development of the Romantic
               idealization of the singular and idiosyncratic self in the nineteenth century, which
               contemporary graphologists, autograph collectors, and writers imagined as expressed
               unconsciously through one’s handwriting; and the reaction in the twentieth century,
               exemplified by the Arts and Crafts movement, against the perceived degradation of
               human potential by the growing ubiquity of the machine.For a history of
                  typographic development that leads away from handwritten models, see . For an excellent study of the history of handwriting, to
                  which this overview is greatly indebted, see .
               It is against this historical background of appropriation and reinterpretation that I
               will turn to the ways in which conceptions of handwriting are now being shaped in an
               increasingly digital environment.
         

            II.
            On November 5, 1994, in a two-page handwritten letter faxed to news organizations and
               addressed to the American public, former President Ronald Reagan wrote, My fellow Americans, I have recently been
                  told that I am one of the millions of Americans who will be afflicted with
                  Alzheimer’s disease
               .Reagan’s letter has also been reproduced in
                  facsimile in .  The uneven margins,
               unsteady ductus, and hand-blackened errors prompted presidential biographer Edmund
               Morris to write in The New Yorker that: I, too, cried at that letter, with its crabbed
                  script and enormous margin (so evocative of the blizzard whitening his mind)...
                  Script’s primary power is to convey the cursive flow of human thought, from brain
                  to hand to pen to ink to eye — every waver, every loop, every character trembling
                  with expression. Type has no comparable warmth; matrix dots and laser sprays and
                  pixels of L.C.D. interpose their various screens between writer and reader. If Mr.
                  Reagan’s letter (which, by the way, he composed entirely himself) had been
                  keyboarded to the world, instead of handwritten and issued in facsimile, its
                  poignancy would have been reduced by half. 
               
            
            Both Reagan, in choosing to handwrite the letter, and Morris, in affirming that
               choice, seem to resist what Jay Bolter and David Grusin have theorized as
               remediation, the logic by which new media refashions prior media through the
               imbricated strategies of immediacy, a style of representation that seeks to erase the
               traces of its presence in order to convince the viewer of his unmediated relationship
               to the medium’s contents, and hypermediacy, which seeks to keep the medium at the
               forefront of the viewer’s perception . Yet
               Reagan’s handwritten letter does not simply represent an anti-modern rejection of new
               media; rather, it calls forth and obscures a range of immediate and hypermediate
               interfaces, a strategy that, I argue, demonstrates a skillful manipulation of how
               human physicality is perceived in an increasingly technologized milieu.
            Reagan’s decision to write his letter by hand must be read in terms of handwriting’s
               lengthy history as a representative of, and even a conduit for, embodied identity.
               His awareness of the aura of handwritten documents is evident in Morris’s description
               of the way in which President Reagan went
                  so far as to address and seal his personal mail, and...he was known to lick his
                  own stamps. I treasure several letters from him written on thick ivory
                  gold-embossed stock, each with its matching envelope meticulously inscribed, down
                  to the last digit of my Zip Code
               . Many others have testified to Reagan’s
               extraordinary propensity for letter writing. It is estimated, for example, that he
               may have composed upwards of 10,000 letters over the course of his life, thousands of
               which were handwritten . In the first year of
               his presidency, Reagan dictated 265 letters but discontinued the practice in February
               1982, because he preferred writing them himself .
            In particular, Reagan’s recognition of handwriting’s implication of social intimacy
               is one of several ways in which he draws on the immediacy of the handwritten format.
               Reagan thus begins his 1994 letter with a salutation to his fellow Americans;
               he continues to inscribe this familiarity throughout, seeking to downplay social,
               political, and economic differences between himself and his readers. When he writes
               of the onerous burden of caring for an Alzheimer’s patient that I am confident that with your help [Nancy Reagan] will face
                  it with faith and courage, he encourages his readers’ fictive inclusion in
               his wife’s intimate circle, and concludes the letter with a brief but warm
               acknowledgement of their social closeness: Thank you, my friends
               .
            Yet the letter was not delivered to any individual, but rather sent by fax machine to
               news organizations around the country that reported on its contents the following day
                  . The resulting letter that journalists saw was thus
               not the original ink and paper with which Reagan traced his script, but one of many
               copies, transformed into an analog or digital signal, compressed, and reassembled in
               the course of its transmission via phone line and fax machine. This act of processing
               and transforming a human artifact through a machine is an apt metaphor for the
               biotechnologies that enhance and transform the human body, including, not
               incidentally, that of a body with Alzheimer’s.
            Modern discourse on technologically enhanced quality of life is frequently inflected
               with an anxiety that, as Martin Halliwell and Andy Mousley have pointed out, often
                  reflects on the ways in which biotechnology may augment organic life to such an
                  extent that...the label human may no longer be applicable. As the Human
                  Genome Project promises to unlock the secrets of our genetic makeup, the Visible
                  Human Project attempts to translate the human body into digital codes, and
                  neurological scientists move closer to explaining how consciousness arises from
                  physical matter, so these fields of research threaten to destroy the myth that
                  each human being has a core of unique individuality that can neither be explained
                  nor replicated...Biotechnology…has the capacity to transform the parameters of the
                  human body into a potentially unrecognizable form. 
                  In addition to Halliwell and Mousley, many others have articulated various
                     facets of what has been called a theory of the posthuman, though the term is
                     controversial and holds different meanings for different scholars. See
                     especially ; ; and . For an overview of the discourse on posthumanism,
                     see .
                Similarly, Timothy Lenoir has described the notion that digital information
               is a disembodied pattern that exists independently of any specific material medium as
                  one of the dominant metaphors of our
                  time
               .
            Morris’s characterization of matrix dots and L.C.D. pixels as lacking in warmth, in
               contrast to his valorization of script, whose every waver, every loop, every character trembl[es] with
                  expression, is a response to this perception of the human body as an
               increasingly expendable medium as it becomes progressively more dependent on
               technology for its own sustenance. For Morris, handwriting without the aid of digital
               machinery retains a human quality that machine-produced writing has lost. Reagan’s
               choice to handwrite his letter, then, underscores its purpose as a revelation
               specifically about his physical health, drawing on the close association of
               handwriting with the inner workings of the human body in contrast to other media.
               Indeed, the letter avoids many other signs of mechanical modernity, erasing, for
               example, the fax machine’s role as one of the letter’s communicative media and
               encouraging the fiction that the original letter has been delivered directly to
                  the American people. Similarly, it elides the biotechnologies at work in
               preserving Reagan’s health. The letter’s strategies of erasure, driven by this sense
               of human alienation in an age of digital information and biotechnology, serve to
               fashion itself and Reagan’s body as interchangeable entities by obscuring the
               technologies that would assist in extending human agency or health. In the past, Reagan writes, Nancy suffered from breast cancer and I had
                  cancer surgeries. We found through our open disclosures we were able to raise
                  public awareness. We were happy that as a result many more people underwent
                  testing. They were treated in early stages and able to return to normal, healthy
                  lives
               . Specific medical procedures are omitted from
               this account, though they underlie the general references to surgeries, tests, and
               treatment. Equally elided is the entire system of what numerous scholars, following
               Michel Foucault, have called technologies of health
               .Also see ; ; and . For Foucault’s writings on the politics of health and bio-power,
                  see ; and . These include but are not confined to the crisscrossing
               agendas and purviews of doctors, hospitals, pharmaceuticals companies, health
               insurers, and medical researchers, as well as legislative oversight of these
               entities, all of which play pivotal roles in the discovery and treatment of
               Alzheimer’s but which the letter discreetly hides from view.
            Instead, what the letter foregrounds is the Reagans’ decision to write it at all.
                  Upon learning this news,
               Reagan explained, Nancy and I had to
                  decide whether as private citizens we would keep this a private matter or whether
                  we would make this news known in a public way
               . Their ultimate decision to publicize private
               illness is portrayed as the agent that helps to heal the afflicted, first in the case
               of cancer and now in the case of Alzheimer’s: in this narrative, it is not primarily
               as a result of medical research, treatment, or health care, but rather because of the
               Reagans’ open disclosures, including the public display of the letter itself,
               that many people were able to return to
                  normal, healthy lives. According to Nancy Reagan, People didn’t realize that Alzheimer’s was a disease like
                  any other...They were embarrassed or self-conscious, and the letter released them
                  to admit that somebody in their family had Alzheimer’s. It’s a beautiful
                  letter
               . The handwritten letter, standing in for
               medical care, is thus figured as a restorative technology that, by broadcasting its
               creator’s bodily health and identity, will help to recover them for his readers and
               even, perhaps, for himself. 
            This concept of restorative handwriting has historical precedence. As the polemical
               rhetoric about technology’s capacity for dehumanization gained momentum in the first
               decades of the twentieth century, graphologists’ advice columns proliferated,
               promising to discover identities within their readers’ handwriting that had been lost
               to or obscured from them. Show me your
                  handwriting and I will tell you who you are, graphologist Nadya Olyanova
               encouraged her readers , while Louise Rice wrote
               that in her readers’ own familiar writing
                  you may see the mirror which will reveal yourself to yourself
               .Both preceding quotations originally quoted
                  in . Tamara Thornton has
               situated this desire for identity within the increasingly corporate, impersonal, and
               automated environment of the modern American workplace . But for those suffering from Alzheimer’s, a disease of
               forgetting, the potential for remembering and recovering oneself through one’s
               handwriting acquires an added poignancy. Reagan’s handwriting was so compelling
               because it promised not only to reveal his inner self — literally disclosing, in his
               confession of Alzheimer’s, the inner workings of his body and brain — to his readers,
               but also to reveal and restore it, as its readers may have imagined, to himself. 
            Yet it is precisely this publicity – and its obverse, privacy – that turn out to be
               the most slippery aspects of the letter, informing its various levels of immediacy
               and hypermediacy. Handwriting here is hypermediated: that is, the viewer is meant to
               notice and interpret the medium as carrying a message of its own. The viewer,
               however, perceives this hypermediacy as immediacy, in Bolter and Grusin’s sense of
               the word: that is, he feels that he has direct access to the content of the medium.
               But in fact, the viewer substitutes medium for matter; when Reagan’s handwriting is
               perceived as an embodiment of its creator, it does not convey precisely the same
               message as the letter's actual content about Reagan's physical health, but rather
               offers a heightened, more authentic version of it. I use authentic as
               Bolter and Grusin use it here: Hypermedia
                  and transparent media are opposite manifestations of the same desire to get past
                  the limits of representation and achieve the real. They are not striving for the
                  real in any metaphysical sense. Instead, the real is defined in terms of the
                  viewer’s experience; it is that which would evoke an immediate (and therefore
                  authentic) emotional response
               . Indeed, for Morris, the authenticity of
               Reagan’s letter is attested by its ability to move him to tears, effected by the
               perceived immediacy of its handwritten medium. Thus, although Morris extolled
               script’s apparent transparency, whose primary power is to convey the cursive flow of human thought, from brain to hand
                  to pen to ink to eye, the medium of script so overshadows the letter’s
               actual contents that Morris virtually never quoted directly from it. Instead, the
               letter’s message is contained in the visuality of the medium itself. He interpreted
               the crabbed script as evidence of Reagan’s physical degeneration, and the
               unusually wide margins as the blizzard
                  whitening of his mind. The letter, however, not only does not mention
               these details concerning Reagan's physical and mental condition, but in fact
               deliberately eschews them by placing Reagan’s onset of Alzheimer’s at some future
               point: I am one of the millions of
                  Americans who will be afflicted with Alzheimer’s disease, Reagan writes.
                  At the moment, I feel just
                  fine
               .
            Morris was not alone in valorizing what he calls the human immediacy of script and its direct and enduring quality.
               According to Richard Norton Smith, then director of the Reagan Presidential Library
               in Simi Valley, California, Reagan’s letter prompted more than 25,000 letters in
               reply, many handwritten in ink, crayon, and pencil. The letters crossed age groups,
               geographical boundaries, and political affiliations . Reagan
               was famously known as The Great Communicator during his political career, and
               the vast number of letters he wrote while in office, many to those he called the
                  uncommon people, testify to his desire to connect with his constituents.
               But, of course, the American public was limited in its familiarity with Reagan; like
               all public figures, he is knowable only to a certain point, and his desire for
               personal revelation extended only so far. Earlier in life, during his acting career,
               Reagan paid his mother, Nelle, to answer his fan mail; she wrote thousands of letters
               in Reagan’s name not only to movie fans, but also to his longtime friends, signing
               the letters Dutch,
               Ron, or Ronnie
               .On Nelle’s role as Reagan’s letter
                  writer, see ; cited in . In 1995, when contacted for Reed’s article, Reagan’s office in Century City declined to
                  discuss his current medical condition, citing respect for his privacy
               . That Reagan encouraged his mother to write letters
               purporting to be in his own hand demonstrates his recognition of the perceived value
               of the handwritten document, as well his appropriation of that value to protect his
               own time and privacy. Similarly, his own handwritten letter to the American public
               acts as a seemingly immediate but actually hypermediated substitute for his physical
               and emotional proximity.
            Reagan’s unreadable body is perceived as perfectly legible because of its viewers’
               expectations about handwriting’s ability to embody its creator. This emotional
               response to the public display of Reagan’s handwriting, moreover, is echoed in the
               exhibition reviews with which this essay began, describing the sight of Emily
               Dickinson’s handwriting as a moving
                  experience and imagining Poe’s wounded,
                  gin-soaked heart smeared across the page in his always meticulous handwriting. For these reviewers, as for Morris,
               viewing Dickinson and Poe’s letters is akin to seeing physical manifestations of the
               creators, an authentic-because-emotional experience that emerges both from a history
               of handwriting as embodiment and as a reaction against a disembodied digital
               environment, whose emotional intensity threatens to overtake the other meanings
               carried by artifacts that use handwriting as their communicative media. None of the
               exhibition reviewers quoted above, for example, mentioned the textual contents of the
               letters they find so compelling; rather, the letter’s message is in the visual impact
               of the handwriting itself.
            As the embodied nature of handwriting is reinforced by a culture increasingly
               structured by seemingly disembodied digital information, it is also becoming
               increasingly hypermediated, loaded with emotional meaning and significance to the
               point of obscuring its other messages. Handwriting is becoming, in other words, an
               opaque medium, an eventuality compounded by its increasing literal illegibility,
               which is not only a practical result of the obsolescence of penmanship courses and of
               people’s diminishing opportunities and inclinations to read and produce handwriting,
               but also as an ideological reaction against the uniformity of print. As handwriting
               is idiosyncratic where print is regular, so it is literally illegible where print is
               readable: handwritten signatures, for example, have evolved into consciously
               undecipherable scrawls in a digital world in which signatures are virtually the only
               words people still write by hand.
         

            III.
            In 1789, Benjamin Franklin likened the uniformity of print to the effacement of
               people’s faces, which he believed rendered the text less legible because it made
               individual letters less distinctive. Writing to Noah Webster about the new printing
               practice of discarding the long s, a holdover from handwritten models,
               in favor of the short, round s, he declared mournfully that certainly the omitting this prominent letter
                  makes the line appear more even; but renders it less immediately legible; as the
                  paring all Men’s Noses might smooth and level their Faces, but would render their
                  Physiognomies less distinguishable
               .Originally quoted in . Two hundred years later, Morris would
               valorize autographic unreadability, declaring:  Museums are not about to display the floppies of any
                  contemporary Flaubert. Or, if they do, I doubt they will attract the sort of awe
                  accorded some manuscripts of Vladimir Nabokov, which the New York Public Library’s
                  Berg Collection put on display last spring. At least two of these, delineated in
                  colored pencil, were more design than script. One was a diagrammatic analysis of
                  metrical variations in a poem by Vasily Zhukovsky, structured rather like a
                  stained-glass window. Units of scansion were represented by variously colored
                  lozenges, and ruled ligatures ran with and contrary to the rhythms, in triangular
                  and rectangular patterns. 
               
            
            The value of handwriting here lies precisely in its textual illegibility, which
               commutes Nabokov’s notes into wordless geometric patterns. Furthermore, the
                  awe commanded by such patterns gestures towards the way in which
               handwriting’s opacity intensifies when put on display. Writing is, after all, not
               only a textual but also a visual medium, which, according to Neef and van Dijk,
               renders it complex as a system based both
                  on the articulation strategies of alphanumeric text and of visual images. This
                  visual dimension distinguishes standardized mechanical writing from handwriting,
                  which is idiosyncratic and often risks being illegible. This specific materiality
                  qualifies the handwritten text as allographic and autographic at once; its
                  semiotics unfolds in this in-between-media, as text-image or as
                     image-text.
                  
               
            
            As Morris’s response to the sight of Reagan’s letter and Nabokov’s manuscripts
               demonstrates, the very act of exhibition encourages viewers to interpret handwritten
               documents as objects, whose significance is to be discovered by looking at rather
               than reading them. Indeed, viewing a handwritten document, existing as it does as
                  image-text, becomes even more fraught when it is framed for museum and
               library display, where practical challenges contribute further to the manuscript’s
               unreadability: when letters are written on both sides of the page, only one side of
               the original document can be shown; when manuscripts are bound, only a single opening
               of the work can be displayed at a time. Unlike paintings and sculptures, manuscripts
               are always displayed under glass, due to their relative fragility, providing another
               layer of separation between the viewer and the artifact.The decision to forego
                  the placement of paintings behind glass and acrylic is primarily aesthetic: though
                  paintings can be better protected from vandalism and environmental stress this
                  way, they do not display as well. According to Emil Bosshard, the light reflection
                     spoils the aesthetic pleasure of
                     viewing the work of art
                  , while Jill Snyder specifically mentions
                  the unpleasant distancing effect of a glazed surface for viewers of paintings on
                  canvas: While increased protection may
                     be assured by placing a painting behind glass or acrylic, the average artist
                     often rejects this method for cost as well as for aesthetic reasons. Keep in
                     mind that a painting whose surface has been carefully protected by varnish will
                     already possess some defenses against environmental dangers. An exposed canvas
                     also enhances the viewer’s ability to appreciate the qualities of depth and
                     texture associated with a painted surface, and the distancing caused by a
                     glazed surface often bars access to these details
                  . These constraints necessarily make it
               difficult, if not impossible, for a visitor to fully read the documents. Sonja Neef,
               for example, described her visit to the Anne Frank House in Amsterdam, where the
               darkened room, the glare of exposition spotlights on the glass cases, and the crowd
               of fellow visitors prevent her from being able to decipher the handwritten letters on
               display. She considered these letters in terms of Walter Benjamin’s conception of
                  cult value that he assigned to objects whose significance lay in their
               presence rather than their visibility .On
                  cult value, see . For Neef,
               traditional museum displays of static, spotlit artifacts encourage the allocation of
               cult value to documents that cannot be absorbed in their entirety, as their other
               messages are muted or obscured by contextual loss instigated precisely by their
               exhibition.
            In recognition of these challenges of display, cultural institutions are increasingly
               exhibiting not only handwritten documents but also their digital surrogates.Not
                  all cultural institutions, it should be noted, are alike. Jay Levenson has argued
                  that art museums are more reluctant than other kinds of institutions, including
                  history and science museums and libraries, to display reproductions and
                  facsimiles, digital and otherwise, due to an operating principle that has
                  historically privileged the
                     centrality of the [original] work of art
                  . At the New York Botanical Garden,
               for example, visitors not only saw Emily Dickinson’s autograph letters, but could
               also page through a digital facsimile of an herbarium that she had compiled by hand
               as a teenager. Using a touch-screen kiosk, visitors could drag their fingers across
               the bottom of the screen to turn its pages, or zoom in on parts of blooms, seeds, or
               leaves . One item in the Ransom Center’s Poe exhibition was
               a manuscript of Poe’s story, The Domain of Arnheim,
               which Poe had written on pieces of paper that he attached together to form a scroll.
               Because the artifact itself could be opened only to a single section of the story
               within its glass vitrine, visitors were invited to scroll through a digitized version
               of the manuscript at a kiosk near the original artifact. According to Molly
               Schwartzburg, one of the curators of the exhibition, The Domain
                  of Arnheim was digitized specifically to counteract its illegibility, thus
               providing visitors with the opportunity to read and interact with Poe’s handwriting
                  . While the primary goal of these interactive
               exhibits is to make the material accessible and legible to viewers, Nick Prior has
               argued that museums are not just passive
                  loci of external patterns and processes but self-reflective agents of social and
                  cultural change themselves
               .Interactive exhibits have received
                  considerable attention from museum scholars. Some scholars have criticized them as
                  part of a trend towards the consumerization and commercialization of culture,
                  while others have critiqued the way in which they encourage users to substitute
                  preprogrammed links for their own mental associations. See ; ;
                  and . Advocates of new media, on the other
                  hand, celebrate its democratizing
                     potential, its ability to make multiple viewpoints available, to turn visitors
                     into authors, and to engage people in the production of their own
                     stories
                  . For more discussions of interactive
                  media, see ; ; ; ; ; and . Read in this way, these hybrid representations expose, even as they
               attempt to recuperate, the limitations of handwriting as it becomes an increasingly
               hypermediated and opaque mode of communication as a consequence both of cultural
               expectations and the act of exhibition. Describing an interactive display of the
               Declaration of Independence at the Library of Congress that allowed visitors, by
               touching a kiosk screen, to view changes to drafts of the document, Edward Rothstein
               wrote, I doubt that I would have felt
                  these transformations with the same force had I just tried to read the faded ink
                  on Jefferson’s rough draft of the Declaration of Independence, protected behind
                  glass
               . James O’Toole has pointed out that most visitors
                  simply glance at [the original
                  manuscript of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution] and move on;
                  only a few pause to read a few lines, motivated perhaps by the challenge of
                  deciphering the unfamiliar handwriting. Almost no one takes the time to read the
                  entire texts
               . The Library of Congress’s interactive display,
               then, works to correct not only for the puzzling illegibility of the unfamiliar
               handwriting style and faded ink, but also for the myth of this seminal document as
               image-text and as a fully formed artifact without a contextual history. Its success
               is such that, although its presentation in virtual form removes the user from the
               original document, Rothstein nevertheless perceived the digital display of the
               Declaration of Independence as more accessible than the original. He
               regarded the original artifact’s glass case, like those at the Anne Frank Museum that
               reflect glare rather than offering visual access to their contents, as a mediating
               barrier, while the kiosk’s glass screen becomes, by contrast, a transparent portal
               through which Rothstein could experience the emotional force of the document’s
               transformation from draft to final version. 
            By encouraging the visitor to engage with the manuscript beyond its initial visual
               effect, the interactive display counteracts handwriting’s opacity to create an
               opportunity for the viewer to access the other messages that a document carries. In
               the process, the digital representation of the manuscript is made to seem more
               transparent to the user than the original manuscript itself by imposing upon the
               document yet another mediating layer — the computer screen — which the user
               nevertheless perceives as granting unmediated access to its contents.For
                  discussions about perceptions of transparency and opacity of computer interfaces,
                  see ; ; and . Indeed, the
                  perceived immediacy of the computer screen intensifies as keyboard and mouse give
                  way to the so-called natural user interface exemplified by the touch-screen
                  technology many exhibition kiosks employ. According to Eric Horvitz, a scientist
                  at Microsoft Research, It’s part of
                     the general trajectory we’re on in the computing industry — this whole notion
                     of making computers more open to natural human gestures and intentions…The
                     future’s going to be in fusing together several different natural human
                     behaviors — how people point, gesture and coordinate with each other…Touch is a
                     beautiful tip of the iceberg for talking about where things are really
                     headed
                  .
            
            Exhibition designers deliberately encourage this perception. Selma Thomas, for
               example, a designer and producer of museum multimedia interactive exhibits, wrote
               that [t]he best electronic
                  programs...present an immediate invitation to participate in an exploration, to
                  move behind the screen into the seamless reality of another world...The technology
                  [of a museum program] should be transparent, interfering as little as
                  possible with the experience
               . Accordingly, Rothstein juxtaposed the
               immediacy of his interaction with the facsimile of the Declaration of Independence on
               a touch screen to the perceived inaccessibility of the original document, protected behind glass. Touching the
               screen becomes a satisfactory — even superior — surrogate for the visitor’s physical
               manipulation of the actual artifact.Studies suggest that interactive media do
                  help to draw visitors into exhibitions as well as increase the amount of time they
                  spend there; see ; and . Visitors’ responses to interactives are generally
                  positive; see ; ; ; and
                     . COMPASS (Collections Multimedia Public Access
                  System), for example, a project begun by the British Museum in 1997 to make the
                  museum’s collections available on interactive kiosks and the Internet, also
                  allowed the museum to track users’ behavior. According to David Jillings, the head
                  of new media at the British Museum, We logged around 800 hours of unsupervised public use on five workstations
                     during April this year [2002]…We recorded some 2,250 user sessions. The average
                     user session was 21 minutes. The average number of museum artifacts looked at
                     in each session was 18. Over 24,000 searches of the database were made, and
                     some 66,000 records were displayed on screen in total. See  (cited in ). Yet at least
                  one scholar has cautioned against the use of interactive media to measure and
                  quantify visitor experience. The abilities of COMPASS and other digital systems to
                  gather quantitative metadata about their use translate [visitors] into data to be processed,
                  and Michelle Henning warns that increased numbers do not necessarily correlate
                  with an improved learning experience .
                  For more on human-computer interfaces, see .
            
            Moreover, although Rothstein privileged an engagement with the intellectual content
               behind the document over an emotional reaction to the sight of the artifact, he, too,
               employs the language of emotion to describe his interaction with it: I doubt, he said, that I would have felt these
                     transformations with the same force had I just tried to read the faded
                  ink on Jefferson’s rough draft (my emphasis). Indeed, as viewers’
               emotional responses to Reagan’s handwriting were generated not by the sight of the
               original letter but rather by a faxed copy of it, so the transformations that
               Rothstein felt are triggered by a facsimile of Jefferson’s handwriting. These
               experiences, however, appear on the surface to differ in one striking respect:
               Rothstein explicitly acknowledged the role of digital technology in bringing the
               document to life for him, whereas the fax machine that brought Reagan’s letter to its
               viewers vanished from subsequent discourse. Indeed, digital interactive exhibits, far
               from eliding their mediating presence, boldly offer added value to the museum-going
               experience through touch-screen
                  kiosks, CD-ROMs, computer games, large-screen installations and videowalls with
                  multiple images, digital orientation centers, smart badge information
                  systems, 3-D animation, virtual reality, and sophisticated museum web
                  sites
               . Selma Thomas, however, asserted that music sheets from a young Duke Ellington, an
                  early draft of the United States Constitution...are pieces of paper, flat
                  documents that require a film
                  or a video, or an interactive program, to make these paper artifacts come
                  alive
               ; visitors like Rothstein accordingly interpret
               such hypermediacy as an immediate conduit to the living heart of the artifact. In the
               same way, Reagan’s choice to handwrite a letter at the end of the twentieth century,
               when handwriting had become virtually obsolete as a means of mass communication,
               prompted viewers to imagine his handwriting as an embodiment of Reagan himself.
               Although handwriting’s perceived quality as a transparent conduit to the creator’s
               physical presence is one that Morris and other theorists have argued that digital
               artifacts cannot achieve, Rothstein’s emotional reaction to the digital Declaration
               of Independence, not in spite of but because of its digital
               presentation, suggests that an oppositional dichotomy between the emotionally
               meaningful handwritten document and the emotionally hollow digital artifact
               inadequately captures the potential of interactive exhibits to disrupt assumptions
               about embodiment and artifactuality. As digitally manipulable representations of
               handwritten documents, these displays couple viewers’ emotional reactions to the
               sight of handwriting with the perception of digital transparence, offering users a
               means by which to understand creators’ minds, hands, and bodies as accessible through
               digital, rather than physical, means. As such, these interactive exhibits pave the
               way for a new paradigm for exhibitions, the eventual display of floppies that,
               two decades ago, some believed would never come to pass. 
            Interactive digital technologies, after all, are often designed to increase users’
               access to rare and fragile material while protecting the originals from the stresses
               of repeated handling. Due to the extreme brittleness and fragility of the specimens
               in Emily Dickinson’s herbarium, for example, Houghton Library restricted virtually
               all access to the book shortly after its arrival there in the 1950s, placing it in a
               vault where it has remained ever since .
               Nevertheless, black-and-white photographs, a published color facsimile, and now,
               interactive kiosks can provide users with the opportunity to engage with the
               herbarium. From this perspective, such technologies speak to cultural fears about the
               loss or degradation of human embodiment in yet another way. Just as medical
               technologies are designed to prolong the human body with surrogate body parts that
               ease the workload on the original part, enhance its functional abilities, or replace
               it entirely, so do digital technologies prolong the physical manifestation of the
               artifact by substituting for, and enhancing, its capabilities. The current debate in
               the field of digital preservation over what constitutes a handwritten document’s
               essential elements — whether it includes the material on which it was written, the
               ink and visual properties of the script with which the words were traced, or the
               information those words carry, to name only a few potential significant properties —
               not only functions as a metaphor for but is in some ways inseparable from the debate
               generated by advances in biomedical technologies over whether the human body is a
               disposable container for or an integral element of humanness.For discussions
                  from an archival perspective about digital artifacts’ significant properties, see
                     ; and . This
               is not merely a facile comparison; rather, as I have argued here, the creator’s
               embodied presence is embedded within the cultural value that has historically been
               placed upon handwriting. Thus, the renegotiation of our understanding of handwriting
               in a digital age is inextricably bound up with our evolving understanding of the
               expanding limits of the human body. Morris’s concern that pixels cannot represent the
               warmth and immediacy of human thought is, in fact, a concern about the dehumanization
               of technology. His resulting prediction that museums are not about to display the floppies of any
                  contemporary Flaubert is as much a claim about the extent to which
               artifacts are defined by their physical containers as it is a claim about what makes
               artifacts worthy of display. Yet a recent exhibition on the works of Salman Rushdie
               at Emory University, A World Mapped by Stories: The Salman
                  Rushdie Archive, demonstrated not only the exhibition potential of just
               such born-digital objects, but also the potential ability of such objects to reveal
               their creator’s presence and intention. Emory developed emulations of Rushdie’s
               original computers to allow researchers not only to see but also manipulate the files
               as Rushdie did when he worked with them.
                  Salman Rushdie Archive to Open Feb. 26. January 2010.
                     http://shared.web.emory.edu/emory/news/releases/2010/01/salman-rushdie-archive-to-open-at-emory.html.
                  Accessed September 14, 2010. At the exhibition, visitors can log onto
                  a computer and see the screen that Mr. Rushdie saw, search his file folders as he
                  did, and find out what applications he used. (Mac Stickies were a favorite.) They
                  can call up an early draft of Mr. Rushdie’s 1999 novel, The
                     Ground Beneath Her Feet, and edit a sentence or post an editorial
                  comment...It may even be possible in the future to examine literary influences by
                  matching which Web sites a writer visited on a particular day with the manuscript
                  he or she was working on at the time. 
                  It should be noted that Emory is, at the time of this writing, unique in
                     developing such an extensive emulation of a single collection. While their
                     approach has garnered much admiration, emulation is also expensive and
                     time-consuming, raising barriers to more widespread implementation. See . For more on the benefits and challenges of emulation,
                     see ; .
               
            
            These materials, handwritten but not in the traditional sense, not only redefine the
               relationship between the body of the creator and the body of his work, but also
               invite questions about what constitutes a body in the first place. Rushdie himself
               described Emory’s archive as my life
                  with barcodes, imagining an existence defined and structured by digital
               apparatus; at the same time, alluding to a physical body behind the archive, he said
               of turning over his papers to Emory that it does feel a bit like undressing in public
               . Morris’s reluctance to imagine an exhibition of floppy
               disks, then, is indicative of a previous paradigm, in which an artifact’s content
               could not be separated from its container.On the differences between physical
                  and digital records, see ; and . The potential for migration of digital records as a
                  means of preservation implies the changeability of the digital record’s container,
                  although scholarship on this subject also acknowledges the ways in which migration
                  can alter the record’s information. See . 
               Nevertheless, the essential replicability and migratory capabilities of digital
               objects reveal that although content and carrier are sometimes interdependent, they
               are separate entities: digital information does not rely on its physical carrier in
               the same way as does analog information.For articulations of this argument, see
                     ; and .
               Yet, as Rushdie’s sense of nakedness suggests, the body of the creator and the body
               of his work cannot be severed from each other without discomfort, either. The Rushdie
               exhibition, then, offered visitors a new paradigm in which to consider a digital
               artifact’s value in the context of a physical as well as cultural and intellectual
               network, demonstrating how pixels may, in fact, be able to represent the
                  warmth of human thought, effort, and intentionality, and, in the process,
               offering new ways of considering what an artifact essentially is. The
               convergence between archivists’ attempts to identify a digital object’s essential
               meaning and posthumanist concerns about the potential disposability of the human body
               presents the possibility for a profounder consideration of the ways in which the
               digital enhancement of handwriting, so closely allied with the hand as a synecdochic
               representation of the human body, facilitates discussion about what it means to be
               human in a digital age. 
            In the Middle Ages, the inclusion of a sign of the cross on Edward the Confessor’s
               seal was an appropriation and reinterpretation of that older handwritten mark of
               authentication. Now, as we enter the first decades of the twenty-first century, the
               venerable technology of handwriting as a communicative medium has not yet
               disappeared. Rather, it has consistently functioned as an important site of cultural
               complexes about embodied identity, within and against which a growing array of new
               media continues to situate itself, a process that is bound up with the ways in which
               a growing array of biotechnologies are prompting continual remediations of the human
               body. Through these displays of the traces of human hands, then, the multivalent
               negotiations, frictions, and alliances between technologies and human bodies can come
               into view.
         
