Title:  Treebanking in the world of Thucydides. Linguistic annotation
                    for the Hellespont Project
Volume:  010
Issue:  2
Date:  7 June 2016
Abstract:  
                
                The Hellespont project (DAI, Tufts University) aims to structure the text of a
                    passage from the ancient Greek historian Thucydides (1.89-118), in order to
                    highlight events, persons and peoples that populate the world of the author and
                    connect the different digital sources available for their study. Event
                    annotation in the text in particular requires an in-depth linguistic analysis of
                    morphology, syntax and semantics. However, the available resources for Ancient
                    Greek do not provide adequate standards to support the encoding of semantic and
                    pragmatic phenomena in Ancient Greek texts. In this paper, we discuss the
                    motivation of the project and how we adapted the so called
                        tectogrammatical annotation of the Prague Dependency Treebank
                    to identify the events and describe their structure. The linguistic notion of
                        valency, which is central to tectogrammatical sentence
                    representation, proves very useful for this analysis of Ancient Greek.
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                As the papers presented at the 2013 Digital Classics Association conference
                        Words, Space, Time and collected in this volume
                    attest, digital resources for the study of the Greek and Roman civilizations are
                    rapidly growing in quantity and quality. In many fields of Classical Studies
                    (such as digital archaeology or epigraphy), progress has been spectacular. In
                    other areas, however, the gap between the resources that can be applied for
                    studying the ancient world and the state-of-the-art technologies for processing
                    and exploring data is still considerable. In terms of Natural Language
                    Processing (NLP), for instance, the resources for classical languages are still
                    far less numerous and sophisticated than those available for modern languages
                    such as English.
                In the case of Ancient Greek and Latin, the creation of linguistically annotated
                    corpora, which has been carried out by several institutions in the last decade,
                    has brought at least some of the tools and resources that are commonly used in
                    modern computational linguistics to the attention of the Classicists. In current
                    linguistic research, corpora that integrate a fine-grained annotation of
                    morphology and syntax, as well as potentially many other levels of analysis, are
                    known as treebanks
                    . Started between 2007 and 2008, projects like the
                        Ancient Greek
                        and Latin Dependency Treebank (Perseus Project at Tufts University),
                    the PROIEL treebank , the Index Thomisticus Treebank (Catholic University, Milan) of Mediaval
                    Latin  have already reached quite a mature
                    status. All of the mentioned projects provide several Greek or Latin texts with
                    complete annotation on the morphology of each word and on the syntactic
                    structures of each sentence; all the annotated texts are encoded in
                    machine-readable format and freely downloadable from the websites of the
                    different projectsMore details on the composition of the
                            AGDT in its latest release and on the formalism used to
                        encode linguistic analysis will be provided in Section
                            2.1. However, syntax and morphology are the only level that
                    are annotated in the Greek and Latin treebanks that are currently published:
                    other areas of linguistic studies, such as semantics or pragmatics are still not
                    represented. Moreover, while the available treebanks provide a set of schemas
                    and guidelines for the treatment of morpho-syntacitc phenomena, no standards or
                    manuals for the annotation of semantics and pragmatics of the ancient languages
                    exist that can serve as a model to extend the current schemas.
                This is the situation that we found when, in the context of a project entitled
                        Hellespont (see Section 1), we
                    decided to perform an in-depth linguistic annotation of a section of an ancient
                    Greek literary text. The goal of this project was twofold. On the one hand, we
                    wished to produce a comprehensive linguistic analysis in a digital format that
                    would enable readers to get a better understanding of the historical events that
                    are narrated in the text. On the other hand, we intended to lay the foundations
                    for a complex linguistic description of Ancient Greek that could also take
                    semantic and pragmatic phenomena into account, along with syntax and
                    morphology.
                In what follows, we will present the motivations (Sections 1.1 and 1.2), as well as the
                    methodology, models and solutions that we have adopted (Section 2).
            

                1 The Hellespont Project
                
                    1.1 Introduction: views, entities and events
                    The Hellespont Project (http://hellespont.dainst.org/) was launched in 2009 by the
                        Deutsches Archäologisches Institute (DAI) and the Perseus Project at Tufts
                        University. The team, led by A. Thomas (DAI and University of Cologne),
                        built on the experiments performed by Thomas and others at the Perseus
                        Project on linking textual and archaeological sources, as well as modern
                        scholarly works, in a digital edition of Thucydides .
                     The project targeted a limited period and context, the history of Athens in
                        the years between the end of the Persian Wars (479 BCE) and the outburst of
                        the Peloponnesian War (431 BCE). One single textual source of the events was
                        selected, that of the Athenian historian Thucydides, who deals with the
                        period in a digression (chapters 89 to 118) of Book One of his Histories; since Antiquity, this digression has
                        been known as the Pentecontaetia (Greek for
                        “fifty-year period”)The word is used in the ancient Scholia to Thuc. 1.89.1 ; for a general reading of the passage see
                            most recently Bresson (2010), with many
                            references to the previous literature.. In terms of raw numbers,
                        the segment is composed of 178 sentences, for a total of 4641 wordsTo
                            be more precise, this count refers to treebank tokens (see,
                                Section 2 and note below), which do not always correspond to words.. 
                    Hellespont aimed to answer two fundamental questions. First, how should a
                        literary text be structured, so that the relevant data can be accessed,
                        browsed and retrieved by historians? Second, how should digitized documents
                        be presented so that they leverage the power of a digital environment and
                        show the meaningful connections between different sources?
                    The first task was carried out as a part of a bigger effort to link the data
                        from the main collections of the two sponsoring institutions, the
                        archaelogical database Arachne (http://arachne.uni-koeln.de/) and the Perseus Digital Library
                            (http://www.perseus.tufts.edu).Details of this effort were
                            presented by the staff of Hellespont in a session of the Digital
                                Classicist — Berlin 2013-4 seminar .
                    
                        Hellespont, reading view
                        
                    
                    The most important part of this task was the annotation of the named
                            entities mentioned in the ancient source. The names of places,
                        persons, and peoples were annotated and disambiguated, and they were then
                        linked to authority files and gazetteers; this process of disambiguation
                        allowed us to display the text of Thucydides and all the other data in our
                        collections, such as monuments or other objects in Arachne, that include
                        references to the same entities in a unified reading environment. The
                        interface that was chosen for visualizing the structured text of Thucydides
                        and to highlight the connections between it and the materials in Arachne and
                        Perseus is based on the model of GapVis (http://nrabinowitz.github.io/gapvis).
                    The work of Thucydides is browsable in multiple different views. In the
                            Reading view, the passages of the text are displayed with
                        the named entities highlighted: different colors are used to distinguish
                        between the classes of entities (persons, geographical names, man-made
                        landmarks, organizations); on a side pane, those entities that are linked to
                        a geographic location (e.g. the Spartan people, which are annotated as a
                        collective organization, but are clearly identifiable with the city of
                        Sparta) are represented on a map (Figure 1).
                        The Entity detail view lists all the linked data from
                        Arachne, the iDAI gazetteer (https://gazetteer.dainst.org/), the Perseus Project and other
                        external repositories, such as Pleiades (http://pleiades.stoa.org/); the
                        most important co-refenced entities in Thucydides' Pentecontaetia are also listed for readers and visualized on a
                        map (Figure 2).
                    
                        Hellespont, entity detail view
                        
                    
                
                
                    1.2 Events and the event view
                    Entities in history are not important per se except as they are involved in a
                        series of human activities.
                    At first glance, it would seem obvious that a work of historical prose
                        dedicated to the war between the two superpowers of its times should mostly
                        contain narrations of events and that consequently it should not be
                        difficult to recognize and identify them in the flow of the text. The
                        reference model that Arachne is currently adopting to link
                        the different objects in its collections, the event-based CIDOC-CRM (http://www.cidoc-crm.org/),
                        seems also ideal to leverage this notion and bridge the world of texts and
                        archaeological realia. CIDOC-CRM is precisely built on the idea
                        that the common involvement in the same historical event or activity
                        is a point of contact between monuments, objects, actors, and places .
                    The designers of Hellespont decided to proceed in the same direction and to
                        thus also include passages of ancient texts within the data that are linked
                        in the model. For example, if we know that one object (the walls of Athens)
                        and one actor (e.g. Themistocles) are involved in the same event (the
                        Athenians, following Themistocles' advice, rebuilt the city fortifications
                        destroyed by the Persians), and if we identify a specific passage in a
                        textual source (Thucydides, Histories, 1.89.3)
                        that makes reference to that episode, the annotation would provide an
                        effective link between the archaeological traces of a given monument and the
                        text excerpt. Then, by setting up a chronology of the annotated events
                        (either absolute or relative), it becomes possible to create a timeline that
                        allows readers to access the related sources in the collection.
                    Thucydides’ text has been read as a source for the history of the
                        Peloponnesian War for centuries. Therefore, several readers in the history
                        of scholarship have already undertaken the task of indexing and summarizing
                        the text according to the most relevant content of each paragraph. These
                        summaries, that are found in the printed editions and translations of
                        Thucydides, can be adopted as a guide for event annotation. The portion of
                        the text between Histories 1.102.1 and 1.102.3,
                        for example, is often paraphrased in the indexes of Thucydides as: the Athenians summoned to Ithome, then
                            dismissed; thus, this label can be used to isolate a part of the
                        text (the two paragraphs) as referring to one event (the siege of Ithome),
                        or two events (the Athenians intervention in the siege; their
                        dismissal).
                    This approach was adopted for a first stage of Hellespont; it was then
                        implemented in the event view within the GapVis interface,
                        where the content of the Pentecontaetia can be
                        accessed from a timeline; each event is further described in its structural
                        relations with other related episodes (which is particularly useful for
                        skirmishes or operations that are part of a larger campaign) and in its
                        internal articulation (its actors, or its temporal and geographical
                            frame)For one example, the revolt of Samos and its suppression,
                            see http://gapvis.hellespont.dainst.org/#book/1/event/55.
                        The historical commentary of Hornblower
                            (1991) was chosen as the main reference for the identification of
                        the events.
                    Different scholars may differ considerably even in their segmentation of a
                        text, and the choice for one solution over the others might be arbitrary.
                        Yet the main problem with this approach is often one of granularity. In some
                        sections of the text, especially in the second half after chapter 98, the
                        style of the narration becomes quick and rather unadorned : many facts appear to be piled up one after
                        the other. In such cases, readers are forced to summarize chapters and
                        paragraphs using general labels, while the stages and the articulation of
                        the facts remain difficult to capture. Thus, for example chapter 1.105 and
                        1.106 are summarized by Hornblower (1991,
                            164-6) as operations in the First Peloponnesian War: in the context of
                        event annotation, a reader would preferably know the exact nature of these
                        operations, rather than be left with such an unspecific reference.
                    In such cases, the reader that wants to isolate the stages of an event with
                        greater accuracy is forced to look closely at the linguistic structure of
                        each sentence. Consequently, instead of taking textual units like chapters
                        or paragraphs as a basis for the annotation, we were forced to consider the
                        linguistic articulation of the text itself. This task of isolating
                        real-world events in natural language, however, is extremely challenging. An
                        example from Thucydides (taken from the aforementioned narration of the
                        Athenian intervention in Ithome) may help in illustrating the kind of
                        pitfalls that we encountered:
                    μάλιστα δ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἐπεκαλέσαντο ὅτι τειχομαχεῖν ἐδόκουν
                            δυνατοὶ εἶναι, τοῖς δὲ πολιορκίας μακρᾶς καθεστηκυίας τούτου ἐνδεᾶ
                            ἐφαίνετο: βίᾳ γὰρ ἂν εἷλον τὸ χωρίον
                    [The siege of Ithome proved
                        tedious, and the Lacedaemonians called in, among other allies, the
                        Athenians…] [They] invited them especially because [they] considered [them]
                        particularly skilled in siege operations, while, since the siege for them
                        was dragging on, [their] own deficiency in that sort of warfare was clear:
                        for otherwise [they] would have taken the place by force
                    If we consider the two sentences in isolation, we may start from the
                        plausible assumption that the main verbs (ἐπεκαλέσαντο: called in; ἐφαίνετο: was clear; εἷλον:
                        would have taken) should lead us to identify a core set of the narrated
                        events. Yet it is immediately clear that the last one of them does not
                        belong to the domain of history, but the verb mood characterizes the event
                        as the unrealistic outcome of a counterfactual hypothesis, both in Greek and
                        in the English translation. On the other hand, even the first verb, which
                        may seem to those familiar with Greek history to point to the main fact that
                        is referred to here (the Athenians are summoned to the siege of Ithome), is
                        not unproblematic. If we consider the sentence that precedes, which is
                        reported in brackets at the beginning of the translation, we see that
                        Thucydides is not reporting a new event, he's instead alluding for the
                        second time to the same episode he narrated in the previous sentence; the
                        main focus of the first quoted sentence is the cause that brought about the
                        Athenian intervention, while the fact that they were called in is simply
                        repeated from the preceding statement. This distinction, which may seem
                        trivial to the human reader and is most likely performed unconsciously by
                        them, requires a subltler linguistic distinction between given and new
                        information.
                    The internal analysis of the kind that we would like to implement for our
                        event view (with the actors involved and temporal and geographical frames)
                        is also more complex than it may seem at first. In the given English
                        translation, all the actors involved, except from the Lacedaemonians, are
                        mentioned only by pronouns (they or them). Their identity
                        cannot be guessed without considering the whole contextIn fact, in
                            this case not even the context is sufficient. This passage is
                            notoriously ambiguous and may support two different interpretations. In
                            the one adopted, Thucydides comments about the Spartans’ deficiency in
                            siege warfare (this is the interpretation reflected by the English
                            translations of Jowett 1881 and Crawley 1910). But the Greek text
                            supports also a different reading, based on what we know of the sequel:
                            while the operations dragged on, the Athenians could not bring any
                            decisive aid to the siege and were therefore dismissed; probably, the
                            lack of progresses in the campaign was used as a pretext to hide the
                            political suspicions that the Spartans began to have on their former
                            allies, as Thucydides himself states (see 1.102.3-4). This passage can
                            then be translated accordingly, with the Athenians as the referent of
                            the pronoun τοῖς (the Athenians' deficiency in siege-warfare
                                became evident) and (implied) subjects of εἷλον (not even the Athenians could storm
                            the fortress); this interpretation is adopted by Classen (1919), Maddalena (1952) and De Romilly (1958).. In the
                        Greek original, however, it is not even a question of resolving the
                        reference of the pronouns, as it is in English: the bracketed theys
                        of the translation are entirely omitted in the Greek original, as it is
                        often the case with verb and noun arguments (and syntactic subjects in
                        particular) that can be identified in the context.
                    Therefore, if we want to assess how many events we can identify in these
                        sentences and what the named entities involved in them are, we must consider
                        a rather large spectrum of linguistic phenomena, from part-of-speech
                        tagging, to verbal modality, co-refence resolution, and syntactic structure.
                        Syntactic analysis, however, is not sufficient: subjects of active verbs and
                        agents of passive verbs are obviously distinguished in syntax, and yet these
                        arguments play the same role in the performance of an action, as in the two
                        sentences: Caesar was killed by
                            Brutus and Brutus killed
                            Caesar. A definition of the semantic role played by
                        each argument must then be introduced in addition to the labels for
                        syntactic function. Annotation of information structure can also be used to
                        distinguish between new and given information (as
                        in the case of the repeated they were
                            called of our example).
                    Our task, thus, became that of providing a comprehensive linguistic
                        annotation of all these phenomena, so that our annotated corpus may support
                        an alternative, more data-driven analysis than the one based on summaries
                        found in the scholarly literature. In other words, we intended to create a
                        treebank that could be effectively used to answer questions such as: What are all the actions that the Athenians
                            undertake in Thucydides' Pentecontaetia
                            (regardless whether the Athenians are explicitly mentioned by name in
                            the text or just implied from the context)?,Is there a difference between what they do and what the
                            Spartans do?Who is the most
                            influential person in the Pentecontaetia?Is the
                            role of individuals more or less important that that of the collective
                            actors?
                    Although a thorough discussion of these questions would be out of the scope
                        of our paper, we believe that the multi-layer treebank that we have created
                        support the kind of analysis that we were aiming at (see in particular Section 3 and figure
                            4).
                
            

                2 A Multi-layer Treebank
                
                    2.1 The Ancient Greek Dependency Treebank
                    As we have already said, treebanks are digital corpora that embed
                        word-by-word annotation on linguistic phenomena, including at least
                        part-of-speech tagging and syntax. For classical studies, a number of
                        treebanks of Greek and Latin (listed above)
                        have been recently made available to the public. Among them, the
                            Ancient Greek and Latin Dependency Treebank (AGLDT)
                        promoted by the Perseus Project aims in principle to include all the extant
                        literature in the two ancient languages.
                    Currently, the Greek section (AGDT, v.1.7) contains almost
                        375,000 annotated words, including the complete text of the Homeric poems,
                        the extant opera of Hesiod and Aeschylus, as well as five tragedies of
                        Sophocles and the Euthyphro of Plato. All the
                        texts are chunked into sentences and a complete morphological analysis
                        (including lemmatization) of each word is provided . The syntactic function of the words in a sentence is described according
                        to a formalism inspired by dependency grammar ;
                        in this representation (which may be contrasted with a constituency-based
                        formalism, where words are grouped into phrases), the words are put directly
                        in relation with each other; thus, a subject is made to depend directly on
                        its governing verb, articles and attributes on the nouns they are referred
                        to, and so on. The set of relations between heads and dependents can thus be
                        visualized as a dependency tree, with acyclic, directed edges connecting the
                        words (see Figure 3 below). The annotation of
                        morphology and syntax is provided for every word in each text, including for
                        example particles and conjunctions, as well as for punctuation marksTechnically, the units of annotation are called
                                token; in most cases, a treebank token corresponds
                            either to a word or to a punctuation mark, but there are notable
                            exceptions. A frequent case of mismatch is represented by coordinating
                            conjunctions: the Greek equivalent of the English neither, for
                            example, is analyzed in the treebank as two distinct tokens, one for the
                            negative particle, one for the coordinating conjunction. Sentence
                            tokenization is based on the punctuation of the edition of Jones and Powell (1942), as digitized in
                            the Perseus Digital Library.. The morphological annotation and
                        the type of dependency grammar adopted by Perseus are modeled on two layers
                        (the morphological and the so-called analytical layer) of the
                            Prague Dependency Treebank of Czech (PDT)On the PDT
                            see Bohmova et al. (2001). More
                            information on the dependency formalism of AGLDT and IT-Treebank can be
                            found in Passarotti (2009) and Mambrini (2011)..
                    At present, sentence- and word-tokenization of the Ancient Greek texts
                        included in the Perseus Digital Library is fully automated, nonetheless no
                        NLP-tool is available that provides reliable automatic tagging and syntactic
                            parsingThe results of the first experiments with automatic parsing
                            of ancient Greek are discussed by Mambrini
                                and Passarotti (2012).; therefore the work of
                        annotation is entirely manual. In spite of these limitations, the AGDT
                        provides an excellent standard that supports the morphological and syntactic
                        analysis of Greek.
                    Taking advantage of this model has turned out to be the best practice for our
                        own work. Our task was thus twofold. On the one hand, we used the format and
                        the rules of the AGDT to annotate the syntax and morphology of the Pentecontaetia. On the other hand, we still needed
                        to look for other possible models to supplement the analysis with the kind
                        of semantic/pragmatic information (such as semantic roles, valency,
                        co-reference resolution and information structure) that the format of the
                        AGDT does not support.

                
                
                    2.2 Tectogrammatical Sentence Representation
                    
                        Analytical (left) and tectogrammatical (right) tree of Thucydides,
                                Histories, 1.89.1
                        
                    
                    As we have seen, the treatment of syntax in the AGDT follows the model of
                        analytical annotation of surface syntax used by the Prague Dependency
                            Treebank. The PDT, which is built upon a theoretical framework
                        known as Functional Generative Description
                        , implements also a third level of annotation that
                        is aimed at capturing the meaning of a sentence. This layer, called
                            tectogrammatical, encodes many of those linguistic
                        phenomena that we hoped to describe in the text of Thucydides .
                    When we started considering this model for our work, tectogrammatical
                        annotation had been implemented only for Czech, Arabic and partially for
                        English . Its adaptation to Greek proved to be a
                        complex process, both in the definition of a set of guidelines for the
                        different grammatical constructions and in the concrete work of textual
                        annotation, which cannot be discussed in full hereA more comprehensive
                            introduction, with a lengthy discussion on the annotation of two
                            passages of Thucydides, can be read in Mambrini (2013). In what follows, we will limit
                        ourselves to describing some basic concepts of tectogrammatical sentence
                        representation.
                    The overall meaning of the sentence is captured by the set of head-dependent
                        relations and by a combination of other factors. In particular, a
                        tectogrammatical tree still represents the structure of a sentence as a
                        dependency tree, which is not different from what happens with the standard
                        syntactic annotation of the AGDT (compare the two trees of Figure 3). In the prototypical cases, the main
                        verb dominates all the other words, both in analytic and tectogrammatical
                        trees. The nodes of a tectogrammatical tree, however, do not represent all
                        the words that are attested in the text, but only those which carry an
                        independent lexical meaning. Functional words, like prepositions and
                        conjunctions, or those words that introduce special nuances of meaning, like
                        modal verbs, auxiliaries, or articles, are not reproduced as nodes, but
                        rather as properties of the lexical nodesThus, for example, in the
                            hypothetical English sentence I want to
                                dance only I and dance would be represented as
                            nodes of a tectogrammatical tree. Dance would acquire the
                                volition deontic modality for wanted/intended
                            events..
                    The head-dependent relations are described by a set of labels (the so-called
                            functors), that aim to describe the semantic relation
                        between the words. Thus, instead of syntactic roles, such as (direct
                            or indirect) object or adverbial, the functors
                        describe the complements as actor, patient,
                            addressee or benefactorA complete list
                            of the functors used in the PDT can be found in the manual for
                            tectogrammatical annotation .. The co-reference of the linguistic pointers (such as
                        personal or demonstrative pronouns) is also annotated: each pronoun is
                        linked directly to the words it refers to.
                    In tectogrammatical representation, words that are left out because they can
                        be recovered from the context are integrated with the introduction of
                        artificial nodes. The most important type of reconstructed nodes are the
                            valency arguments, and, most typically in Greek, the
                        implied subjects. In tectogrammatical annotation, the concept of
                            valency does indeed play a crucial role. The valency of a
                        word may be described as the list of the obligatory arguments that are
                        required in order to fill each of the particular meanings of a given word;
                            Tesnière (1959: 102) speaks of the
                        valency arguments as the actors that play a part in the drama evoked by a word, and distinguish
                        them from the circumstantials that are used to set the
                        temporal, spatial or discursive frame of an event. Valency arguments can be
                        omitted whenever they can be easily implied, but are semantically always
                        required; they are therefore always integrated in the tectogrammatical
                        trees. To come back to the example from Thucydides quoted above (1.102.2,
                        see Section 1.2), all the they and
                            them within brackets in the English translation would correspond
                        to newly inserted nodes in the tectogrammatical representation of the Greek
                        original, for both subjects and (direct) objects belong to the valency of
                        the Greek verbs used in the sentences.
                    One crucial feature in tectogrammatical annotation is that even the
                        co-reference of the reconstructed nodes is marked: in the example of
                        Thucydides, Histories, 1.102.2,
                        tectogrammatical annotation enables us to link not only the pronouns that
                        are explicitly used in the Greek original with either the Spartans or the
                        Athenians, but also the implied subjects of the verbs. Much more than a
                        modern translation, therefore, tectogrammatical sentence representation can
                        serve to disambiguate the interpretation of this passage.
                    Figure 3 (tree on the right) provides a clear
                        example of a newly reconstructed node with co-reference resolution in a
                        tectogrammatical tree. The subject of the relative clause ἐν οἷς ηὐξήθησαν (in which [they] prospered) is missing in
                        Greek. However, since it is a required argument in the valency of the verb
                            αὐξάνω (to prosper), an artificial
                        node is created, with the artificial lemma #PersPron that is
                        generally used for personal pronouns; in the visualization of Figure 3, this node is recognizable by its
                        square shape, which distinguishes it visually from the round nodes of the
                        words attested in the text. Furthermore, this artificial node is linked to
                        the word that it refers to, as it can be seen by the arrow that connects it
                        to the subject of the main clause (οἱ
                            Ἀθηναῖοι, the Athenians): the implied they of this
                        relative clause are none other than the Athenians.
                    The sets of arguments required by (the different meanings of) each verb in
                        Thucydides, Histories, 1.89-118 were registered
                        in a special valency lexicon, essentially a dictionary that
                        lists all the arguments that are requested to fill each of the senses of a
                        word A single word can have different valencies, which would be
                            recorded in multiple valency frames. For example, the
                            English verb to act can be used with the meaning to take
                                action, and in that case it only requires an actor
                            as argument; or it can be used with the meaning to play a role,
                            like in the sentence the Bank will act
                                as a trustee; this second frame will include an
                                actor (the bank, in the example) and a
                                predicative complement (as a trustee). Nouns and
                            adjectives can of course have valency too. Their argument structures
                            (with ellipsis and co-reference resolution) have been annotated in the
                            text, but the entries for nouns and adjectives in the valency lexicon
                            have not been created yet.. Conversely, each verb in the treebank
                        was annotated with the ID of the valency frame that is appropriate to the
                        specific meaning of the word. The valency frames in the dictionary are also
                        linked each to the specific meaning, and therefore to the specific English
                        translation, of the corresponding lemma in the Greek
                            English Lexicon of Liddell and Scott ,
                        digitized in the Perseus Digital Library .
                        In this way, every verb that is attested in our passage and is assigned a
                        valency frame is also effectively connected to the appropriate meaning and
                        translation in an authoritative dictionary.
                
            

                3 Conclusions
                Tectogrammatical annotation is a complex task. The representation of a sentence
                    at this level and the interplay with different surface phenomena is
                    language-specific: the rules that have been identified for the tectogrammatical
                    sentence representation of Czech and (partially) English are not immediately
                    applicable to Ancient Greek without thorough investigation. The process of
                    annotation and, especially, the writing of a set of guidelines for annotation
                    are still in progress. Readers that are interested can download the latest
                    version of our treebank (and valency lexicon) and check the current status of
                    annotation (http://hellespont.dainst.org/startpage/downloads.html).
                Nonetheless, the annotation that we have performed, especially on the valency
                    frame of verbs and co-reference resolution, already allows for a complex
                    analysis of the linguistic dramas
                     in Thucydides, Histories, 1.89-118. By using our annotations, for example, we can
                    already extract all the verbs where the Athenians fulfill the semantic role of
                        actors; this search is not limited to those contexts where the
                    Athenians are explicitly mentioned, but can be easily extended to include the
                    passages where pronouns are used or even when the Athenians are the implied
                    arguments. Moreover, by using the definitions of the LSJ lexicon that is linked with the valency frame in our dictionary,
                    we can choose to present the results of our investigations in English
                    translation, even if the data relate to the content of the original Greek text.
                    A visualization of the results for such a query, i.e. the English translations
                    of all the verbs that have the Athenians or a co-referenced node as the semantic
                    agent in the Pentecontaetia, is given in the
                    word-cloud of Figure 4.
                
                    Verbs of the Pentecontaetia that have the
                        Athenians as semantic agents; the translations are taken from the LSJ dictionary
                    
                
                Tectogrammatical annotation of Greek is still in progress: several areas (like
                    information structure and topic-focus articulation) require supplementary work.
                    The annotation of verb valency and co-reference resolution, however, is
                    complete. Our valency lexicon can also be used as a reference for any project
                    that intends to carry on this kind of annotation.
                The evaluation of the historical information that can be extracted from such a
                    corpus and its uses for research in ancient history is the first and foremost
                    task that awaits us right now.
            
