Title:  DH Moments, Caribbean Considerations: On
                    Reaction, Response, and Relevance in the Digital Humanities
Volume:  013
Issue:  3
Date:  14 October 2019
Abstract:  
                
                This essay was written specifically for NYCDHWeek 2018, the theme of which was
                        DH in the Moment: Reaction, Response,
                        Relevance. The author examines how we define digital humanities
                    activism and how we frame its histories. Relying primarily on examples from
                    Caribbean-oriented digital work, the author argues for a broad definition of DH
                    activism that allows for a variety of projects and intended audiences. In
                    particular, the essay responds to the tendency to focus on DH in the
                        moment (projects that can be done quickly and yield a high social
                    impact) as the primary form of activism, arguing that alongside such projects we
                    include as activist projects that have a more cumulative and less immediate
                    effect. Recently, we have begun to ask not just what the digital humanities
                    does, but what the digital humanities does for others. This essay considers why
                    it is that this has become a key question in this DH moment.
            
Full Body Text: 

            	
                The theme for NYCDHWeek
                    2018 was DH in the Moment: Reaction, Response,
                        Relevance, which the organizers note was designed to consider the ways in which DH work can be extremely timely,
                        political, and radical.This essay was originally presented as
                        the keynote lecture at the NYCDH week 2018, for which the theme was: DH in
                        the Moment: Reaction, Response, Relevance. I have left much of the reference
                        to that theme intact as it is central to my overall argument.
                    Projects that spring immediately to mind as prime examples of such work might be
                    the #PRMapathon initiative that began at Columbia University following the
                    devastation of Hurricane Maria in late 2017, or the more recent, multi-layered
                    #TornApart/#Separados data mapping in response to the USA’s
                        2018 Zero Tolerance Policy for asylum seekers at the US Ports of
                        Entry and the humanitarian crisis that has followed
                    . As Lindsay McKenzie pronounces, such rapidly produced and highly topical digital humanities
                        projects are challenging perceptions of the field
                     and are therefore drawing our attention to what
                    the digital humanities can do in the moment.
                There is much to be said for these projects, much that has already been said and
                    more than I am capable of saying here on the technical, the practical, and the
                    affective labors involved; but that won’t be my attempt in this essay. I focus,
                    instead, on the fact of the current questioning of how the digital humanities
                    can be timely, political, and radical. The timing
                    of this question interests me because it was not a prevalent question even a
                    decade ago. Judging from the focus of a majority of DH publications, which
                    increased significantly approximately a decade ago, the prevalent question for
                    many years was: What is the digital humanities?
                We certainly haven’t answered that question to everyone’s — or maybe even
                    anyone’s — satisfaction, but I find it more interesting that we are, in this
                    moment, asking not just what the digital humanities does, but what the digital
                    humanities does for others. For instance, in a recent article in Inside Higher Ed Will Fenton writes: It’s time that digital humanists own their role as public
                        humanists…. Framing digital work as public work raises important questions,
                        not just about what we do, but where and for whom we do it
                    . These questions mark a turn in the digital
                    humanities, a turn that signifies an acceptance of space in the academy and
                    ownership of a recognized (potential) public platform that now demands we do
                    something with it.
                In turning to this question of how we do what we may do for others in the digital
                    humanities, I speak from a rootedness in Caribbean studies and I begin with a
                    Caribbean-centered digital project from 10 years ago, a time when digital
                    humanists (newly named as such) were realizing the institutionalization of the
                    Digital Humanities. In 2007, commissioned by the Pulitzer Center on Crisis
                    Reporting, Ghanaian-Jamaican poet Kwame Dawes began research for a project on
                    HIV/AIDS in Jamaica. Dawes’ research resulted in traditional methods of
                    reportage: a standard, albeit extended, essay for The
                        Virginia Quarterly and two short documentaries for public
                    television. Additionally, Dawes was inspired to create a collection of poetry
                    from the experience and to perform the poems to music. Still unsatisfied with
                    these results, Dawes further collaborated with the Pulitzer Center to create
                        Live Hope Love, an
                    interactive web project that combined much of the above materials, with
                    additional video interviews, music and photography.
                Before I delve into more details about the project, I want to say that I was
                    hesitant to begin here because: 
                        Live Hope Love was, to all appearances, a
                            well-funded project, which is rare in cases of what may be defined as
                            activist digital work, and
                        It falls uneasily in that gray area between traditionally defined
                            digital humanities work and new media.
                     But, in keeping with Roopika Risam’s contention that given the many
                        earlier, oft­unrecognized instances of digital
                        humanities work that [engage] with difference, I agree that there
                    are alternate histories we must write about the digital
                        humanities
                    . I want to write Dawes into this DH genealogy and
                    therefore begin with the messy multimedia-ness of Live Hope
                        Love. It is partially the project’s straddling of this unclear
                    division between media formats that makes it ideal as a paradigm of the ways
                    that digital platforms are able to react, respond, and be relevant in the moment.Also, it won a Webby. So in 2009,
                        at least, that made it legit digital.
                The digital is what enables the seamless hybridity of the Live Hope Love project, as well as the ethical navigation of the
                    very real power differentials at play in a US-based report on HIV/AIDS in
                    Jamaica. The vital voices of those living with HIV/AIDS — whether they have the virus
                    themselves or are caregivers to those who do — are centered in the navigation of
                    the site. In terms of technology, the poetry, documentary footage, video
                    interviews, and performances are able to coexist coherently — the real alongside
                    the poetic, critical alongside creative — within the design of the platform. The
                    project itself is static, a closed aesthetic product, but it links back to the
                    Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting, where the continuous life of the project is
                    captured via articles and videos related to Dawes’ Jamaica research and links
                    also to a similar project Dawes later conducts in Haiti.
                The web-based production of Live Hope Love allows
                    for the results of Dawes’ research in the HIV/AIDS community in Jamaica to be
                    relatively easily available to the members of that community, for them to
                    consume or use as desired or needed. It also allows for the stories of and from
                    members of this community to be relatively accessible to those of us
                        outside said community, both within and without Jamaican
                    borders. Stories filtered, yes, in part by Dawes and his collaborators — the
                    photographer and the musicians — but also the community members’ stories in
                    their own voices.
                The ethics of this presentation of Jamaicans living with HIV/AIDS is what makes
                    the digital nature of this project so important. Though the entirety of the site
                    does frame the video interviews, they can be played in any order and without the
                    hierarchizing format of the documentary (for those who do want this fixed
                    format, the two documentaries produced from Dawes’ trips to Jamaica are also
                    included on the site). Live Love Hope demonstrates
                    how a digital platform can be designed to ethically respond to the needs of
                    vulnerable and marginalized Caribbean communities while representing them from
                    elsewhere.
                This is one face of DH Activism. It is not a workshoppable, immediately-produced,
                    immediately-reproducible, lightning-fast-results form of activism, but it is
                    nevertheless one attempt at redressing a social inequality and generating
                    positive social change. And this is what I take this question of response and
                    relevance to be about: redress of social inequalities and the making of positive
                    social change. But this is not new to the digital humanities. At least, the
                    question may be new, in this DH moment, but the practice is not. In particular,
                    those of us in Caribbean studies, in black studies, in women’s studies, who
                    intersect with the digital humanities, have always already been invested in
                    making our digital work relevant and responsive to the communities we work
                    within.
                To speak about those intersections, I’d like to go back to that DH moment of
                    institutionalization when many scholars were offering definitions of what DH is,
                    was, could and should be. At the end of his much cited essay, What Is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in English
                        Departments?, Matthew Kirschenbaum writes, 
                        Whatever else it might be, then, the digital humanities
                            today is about a scholarship (and a pedagogy) that is publicly visible
                            in ways to which we are generally unaccustomed, a scholarship and
                            pedagogy that are bound up with infrastructure in ways that are deeper
                            and more explicit than we are generally accustomed to, a scholarship and
                            pedagogy that are collaborative and depend on networks of people and
                            that live an active, 24-7 life online. 
                    This, of course, is not the definitive answer to Kirshchenbaum’s titular
                    question(s) but it aims to be as capacious as possible for that moment. There
                    is, however, a notable absence of activism in this definition, indicative of the
                    perspective of the field then. Kirschenbaum writes at a particular time in the
                    institutionalization of the digital humanities, one during which it was becoming
                    the next big thing and required much discussion of
                    definition and borders, which activism necessarily blurs.
                In the manner of the digital culture it is intimately engaged with, Digital
                    Humanities itself undergoes change rapidly, so that now, only 8 years after that
                        moment of definition, we are once again asking
                    questions of who we are and what it is we do. Specifically, how does DH work
                        in the moment and why have our embraced definitions
                    been noticeably devoid of an integrated activist component. But to ask such
                    questions is to exclude, to return to Risam’s phrasing, the many earlier, oft­unrecognized instances of digital humanities work
                        that [engage] with difference. The we
                    on the margins of those definitions of the Digital Humanities have been steadily
                    hacking and yacking with our communities and with our communities’ interests at
                    the heart of our digital activities.
                In essence, it is not a coincidence that this question of how digital humanities
                    work can be timely, political, and radical arises
                    in tandem with an increased recognition of diversity in DH. Movements like
                    #TransformDH, #dhpoco, FemTechNet, HASTAC, GO::DH, etc
                    My thanks to Alex Gil for this list, almost verbatim, as an expansion on the breadth and
                        diversity of such movements. — many of which think (or thought)
                    activism alongside research and pedagogy — focus on members from marginalized
                    communities who have used digital tools to further their voices and existence.
                    The two (activism and diversity) are inextricable. The
                        relevance of DH, therefore, is not a new question for
                    those who have relied on it as part of their activism, and who have incorporated
                    their activism in their DH work. Black studies, gender studies, Caribbean
                    studies are founded on the question of how academic research connects to the
                    communities under study (at least when it is done well). In recognizing the
                    contributions of these methodologies to DH (and vice versa), digital humanities
                    is being forced to also recognize ways a definition based on scholarship and
                    pedagogy reveals only part of the whole picture.
            

            	
                In using the term activism in conjunction with the digital
                    humanities, I am thinking more broadly perhaps than the standard definition of
                    political activism. Rather, I am thinking along the lines of how Amy Earhart
                    implicitly defines it in, Can Information Be Unfettered?
                        Race and the New Digital Humanities Canon. Earhart speaks of
                    leveraging materials and knowledge … to change the social
                        position of people of color; in particular for the digital
                    humanities, to use the space of the Internet [to] allow
                        those who [have] been silenced to have a voice
                    . In this way, DH activism can form a necessary
                    bridge between the lingering theory and practice divide of digital humanities.
                    Asking not so much what it is you are doing, but rather, how does what you are
                    doing serve to generate positive social change?
                To make concrete the range of how digital work within black studies largely, and
                    Caribbean studies particularly, is already built on these questions of relevance
                    to the community or communities at the center of the work, I offer below two
                    very different examples of digital work committed to social change. First, Ruddy
                    Roye, a Brooklyn-based photographer raised in Jamaica who as early as 2013,
                    styled himself as an Instagram activist; and
                    second, the Slave Societies
                        Digital Archive, which since 2003 has digitally
                        preserve[d] endangered ecclesiastical and secular documents related to
                        Africans and Afro-descended peoples in the Americas
                    .
                Ruddy Roye, already a photographer by trade for over a decade, embraced the
                    affordances of the digital right after Hurricane Sandy hit New York. He headed
                    out with his iPhone and subsequently posted images of the effects of the storm
                    on Instagram. The gritty reality of Roye’s images and the humanizing elements of
                    his accompanying lengthy captions — unusual on the social media platform at the
                    time — grew his following. His insistence on lengthy captions to add dimensions
                    to his already-striking images on Instagram means he deliberately pushes against
                    the boundaries of how the social media platform is supposed
                    to be used, creating what Moya Bailey calls digital
                        alchemy. As Bailey writes: 
                        Alchemy is the science of turning
                            regular metals into gold. When I discuss digital alchemy I am thinking
                            of the ways that women of color, Black women in particular, transform
                            everyday digital media into valuable social justice media magic that
                            recodes failed dominant scripts. 
                    
                    Social justice media magic is what Ruddy Roye has
                    been making with his Instagram account for the past five plus years. In an
                    interview about his objectives with his work, Roye is not shy about his
                    ambitions. He states, a photographer once told me, about 13
                        years ago, that photography does not change anything. I have been trying to
                        prove that photographer wrong ever since
                    . If anyone is using digital tools to react and respond
                    and make change in the moment, it is certainly Ruddy Roye. In one
                    of his trademark mini-essays on a 2017
                        Instagram post from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, he
                    reflects on traditional works of art and what he calls places that hold art, asking: who do we do
                        this work for, what spaces should the work occupy, who gets to see the work,
                        who gets to tell the work, and on what platform should the work be told to
                        achieve maximum engagement? These are the questions of community and
                    access that identity-based studies have historically asked and that digital
                    humanities scholars are asking more explicitly today. Roye’s own work with the
                    digital implies some of the answers even as it merely clears space for him to
                    continue asking the questions.
                Moya Bailey’s theorization of digital alchemy grew from her work with black trans
                    women and the ways they build community through and across digital platforms.
                    Along with the concept of digital alchemy, Bailey presents in this article the
                    ethics of such work; encouraging academics to think, from the outset, of
                    designing a project with explicit questions about how what we do as scholars
                    might affect the community or communities we study. In the spirit of Ruddy Roye,
                    who insists that his photographs show his collaborators rather than
                    his subjects, Bailey also involved members of the black trans community in
                    designing her investigation of their use of digital platforms. She directly
                    asked: how can this project answer not only my research questions, but also
                    questions that black trans women themselves might have about their networks?
                Bailey positions this as a feminist approach to digital humanities work, but I
                    would argue that it also grows out of the tenets of black studies, which has at
                    its heart the historically activist mandate to work towards self-determination
                    and self-definition for black peoples. With the institutionalization within the
                    academy of departments and programs for Africana and African-Diasporic Studies
                    and related fields, there is a growing community of scholars who themselves may
                    be seen as the community for whom we do this work. That is, though the digital
                    humanities may often overlap with public humanities
                    and may be asking questions directly relevant to, or responding to, a
                    non-academic audience, it is also possible for the intended audience to be
                    specifically academic.
                I turn here back to the moment of defining DH; in his introduction to the 2012
                    edition of Debates in the Digital Humanities,
                    Matthew Gold writes: 
                        Clearly, this is a significant moment of growth and
                            opportunity for the field, but it has arrived amid larger questions
                            concerning the nature and purpose of the university system. At stake in
                            the rise of the digital humanities is not only the viability of new
                            research methods (such as algorithmic approaches to large humanities
                            data sets) or new pedagogical activities (such as the incorporation of
                            geospatial data into classroom projects) but also key elements of the
                            larger academic ecosystem that supports such work. 
                     The larger questions of the nature and
                        purpose of academia have come to include questions of activism and
                    public intellectualism in recent years (both not least facilitated by the
                    digital itself). It is not that activism is new to the university — think here
                    of service learning courses as precursors — but that the public nature of
                    digital humanities work, or the forced public nature of it, alongside a heavier
                    emphasis on assessment and outcomes,
                    has meant that the humanities must more transparently (and measurably) serve a
                    tangible and visible purpose.
                As unpopular as it may be to say it, however, we also have to serve ourselves. We
                    — academics, humanists, Caribbeanists — have to make information and tools
                    available to others in our discipline so that the discipline may itself survive
                    to serve our students and, perhaps by extension, the larger public. As we
                    increasingly recognize the integration of digital humanities into the
                    interdisciplinary margins of the academy, we cannot afford to accept what Gold
                    describes as the fault line…between those who use new
                        digital tools to aid relatively traditional scholarly projects and those who
                        believe that DH is most powerful as a disruptive political force that has
                        the potential to reshape fundamental aspects of academic practice
                    . In order to be disruptive, we must also shore up
                    traditional forms of academic research and publication.
                This is not a new argument and not my argument here. I draw attention to it in
                    order to speak again to the question of relevance. The focus in that question of
                    relevance tends to be too much on a non-academic public. Or rather, too much on
                    the direct impact of a DH project or initiative on that imagined
                    non-academic public. But that impact, that relevance, can — and in some cases,
                    should — be a multi-step process. For example, a project like the Slave Societies Digital
                        Archive is purposely directed toward researchers. Formerly known as
                    the Ecclesiastical and Secular Sources for Slave Societies, the project is a
                    preservation initiative housed at Vanderbilt University. It digitizes, and in
                    some cases preserves in analog format, records from churches and municipal and
                    provincial archives in what were the Iberian colonies in the Caribbean and Latin
                    America. It is a massive archiving project that has at its heart the mission to
                    provide full and complete open global access to these
                        documents. In particular, [for] researchers in and of Latin America and the
                        Caribbean to have increased access to their own histories
                    . According to Angela Sutton, project fellow at
                    Vanderbilt, The availability of these records has allowed
                        historians, both academic and public, to re-create the histories of Cuba and
                        Brazil in a more representative fashion, centering on the Africans whose
                        forced labor built these nations. 2017 Google
                        Analytics reports show that the ESSSS site received nearly 50,000 unique
                        visitors monthly and the digitized records have
                        been and are currently being used to produce [several] doctoral
                        dissertations and master’s theses as well as course content and
                    teaching tools. Such digital projects as the Slave Societies Digital Archive,
                    then, are responding directly to a research-based, or pedagogical, need rather
                    than an explicit public need, though the line between academic and public
                    audience cannot in most cases be firmly drawn.
                However, the positioning of an academic audience as the direct beneficiary of a
                    digital project, particularly a project designed to speak to the needs of
                    research on communities underrepresented in academic spaces, is an activist
                    mission in itself. The success of Caribbean scholars is a part of my own
                    objective with sx salon and
                    was a major part of the conversation when I worked with Alex Gil, Kaiama Glover,
                    and Dennis Tenen on refining the ideology and design of sx archipelagos. In
                    particular, we prioritized access to research material, mentoring, and
                    publication opportunities for scholars from outside the US. In asking what it is
                    that the Digital Humanities does for the nebulous public, we run the risk of
                    overlooking this very important community of scholars who need support in
                    generating positive social change in the classroom. Admittedly, my understanding
                    of the question of relevance and activism in the Digital Humanities is supported
                    by, and inseparable from, my commitment to Caribbean studies. My choices to use
                    digital tools for research, digital methods of analysis, and digital
                    dissemination and presentation of scholarship are already tied to a much earlier
                    decision to center the Caribbean and Caribbean peoples in spaces my training
                    gives me the privilege to occupy; whether that be the classroom, or digital
                    platforms, or this journal.
                Having been too often in the position of claiming and justifying space for
                    Caribbean literature in English departments, and for Caribbean studies in
                    interdisciplinary spaces, I understand the efforts at defining the digital
                    humanities for academic gatekeepers skeptical of what DH is and does. And I
                    understand the desire to define for ourselves the relevance of the work we do
                    for the communities we engage with and belong to. But, we need to be careful of
                    how we frame the current attention to DH activism. Careful that in our framing of this
                    moment, we don’t write a history of the digital humanities that excludes
                    projects like Kwame Dawes’ Live Hope Love and
                    Thomas Spears’ long-running Francophone site, Ile-en-Ile, projects that have always
                    had contemporary communal self-determination and the betterment of the lived
                    experiences of marginalized peoples at the center of their mission. Careful that
                    we don’t relegate projects like the Slave Societies Digital Archive or
                    publications like sx archipelagos to outside this
                        moment or irrelevant to activist genealogies because
                    their explicit audience is academic.
                These are some additional dimensions of the reaction, response and relevance of
                    digital humanities that I wish to insist not only into the histories of DH, but
                    also into the now now now of workshop weeks and lightning-fast,
                    immediate-results-oriented activism. To present a deeper and broader picture of
                    what it means to depend on the digital to redress social inequality and generate
                    positive social change. This defining DH moment corresponds with increasing
                    recognition of work being done by digital humanists already committed to diverse
                    minority communities and, therefore, it goes beyond questions of building vs
                    interpreting, beyond who’s in and who’s out. One can hack or
                        yack all one wants, but if either is divorced from a real-time
                    community, then what use is it?
                Engaging with real-time communities, however, necessitates caution, with all
                    forms of DH activism, that we don’t in our rush to be timely, political, and radical become a cadre of privileged DHers
                        doing for underprivileged populations in ways that make
                    us feel relevant; and then patting ourselves on the back (while also accepting
                    the rewards and accolades of the academy) for our benevolence. The caution is
                    that, like Roye and Bailey, we collaborate with our communities, rather than see
                    them as subjects of our work.
            

            	
                In closing, I’d like to turn to a different defining moment, this time in
                    Caribbean studies. In a special issue on What is Caribbean
                        Studies, David Scott asks:
                    What is the picture that informs our various imaginaries
                            (scholarly, fictive, visual, poetic) of the Caribbean as a space of
                            investigation? What is the content of the form of that image and what is
                            the rhetorical labor that it performs? What is the point
                            (political, conceptual, disciplinary, moral) of mobilizing this
                            particular image, rather than some other, of the Caribbean in these
                            particular discourses? 
                    It’s not a one-to-one analogy, but I think the theme of this NYCDH week —
                    DH in the Moment: Reaction, Response, Relevance — is asking a similar question
                    of the digital humanities. What is the image we have of the digital humanities?
                    What is the image we have of who we are and what we do and how what we do might
                    be in service with and for our various other communities? What is the
                        point of imaging ourselves thus, of defining ourselves in this
                    way at this moment? And how might it spur us to change this thing we call the
                    digital humanities?
                In some ways, I am asking us to revisit the question of what
                        is the digital humanities from the perspective not so much of what
                    we do, but what we do for and with our diverse
                    publics. In clearly defining our digital humanities efforts in terms of audience
                    and communities, we can more ethically engage with those audiences and
                    communities, and more ethically serve both our and their needs for information
                    and digital tools and platforms.
            

                Acknowledgements
                My thanks to Sonya Donaldson, Alex Gil, Tzarina Prater, and Roopika Risam for
                    their help as I shaped my arguments. I cannot do this work without a community
                    of engaged and informed interlocutors.
            
