Title:  Whitman Tracked Between Editions, Rossetti as a Complex Subversive, and the
					Collective Sense of Authorship: A Mixed Methods Accounting of a Hyperlinked
					
Volume:  017
Issue:  1
Date:  22 December 2022
Abstract:  
				
				I examine the influence of one literary text upon another by the open-source
					programming methodology of information science. In particular, I look at
					how the Calamus sequence as rendered in the 1867 Leaves of Grass may be understood to be
					topically present, although most of the sequence was removed and regrouped
					by William Michael Rossetti toward publishing the first British Whitman
					edition in the 1868 Poems by Walt Whitman. I
					further demonstrate the complement of theory testing as I examine the
					laudatory and cautionary nature of the Calamus poems. Those
					celebrations and reservations about loving out of bounds may at once apply
					either to the radical inclusivity of a new republic or in same-sex love.
					While the utility of that laud-caution categorization remains tenuous,
					looking at both the limitations and strengths of the approach demonstrate
					the utility of employing a non-linear, even hypertextual sensibility
					readily available to readers who wish to encounter the social cognitive
					terrain of a literary work. On that terrain, I argue, readers can better
					understand a mind produced in time and responding to its time.
			
Full Body Text: 

			
			In editing Poems by Walt Whitman (1868) for a British
				readership, William Michael Rossetti strode the line between censorship and
				advocacy, as well as that between an enabling and co-opted subversion. That
				Hotten edition removed about one-half of Leaves of Grass
				(1867) — including what would become Song of Myself — toward making
				possible Whitman’s broader circulation in the United Kingdom. Poems was praised by the Saturday Review for
				bringing forth the comely after removal of the indescribably filthy . That Poems was published at all, and continued to be
				published into the 20th century, remains remarkable in a British publishing
				culture that allowed officials to seize an entire press run before either the
				author or publisher appeared in court to argue its merit.
			Declaring Poems to be a bowdlerized, censored or expurgated
				text betrays an editorial/critical orientation contrary to the values of a
				digital humanities community underscored by openness to process and
				collaboration with others. It permits authorial identity and preferences to
				trump the slate the values that permitted publication, however second-guessed
				that edition was. To understand Poems to be bowdlerized
				puts it in the company of The Family Shakespeare: in which
					nothing is added to the original text, but those words and expression are
					omitted which cannot with propriety be read in a family . That family-friendly Shakespeare
				continues to remove the vulgarity and bawdy joys that Thomas’s sister Henrietta
				sensed more than two centuries ago; the entire six volume set published by
				Cambridge University Press can be acquired for about $350. Encamping Poems with The Bowdler Shakespeare,
				while distantly viable, is to dismiss its achievement as the end result of
				another morally squeamish, superficially selective editor whose first purpose is
				to serve the family rather than the author. It is also to place Poems in a
				timeless void, removed from the very social dynamics upon which production and
				dissemination take place in the digital humanities. 
			More viable is to describe Poems as an expurgated Whitman.
				Rossetti can be accurately but narrowly understood as expurgating Leaves in his selection criterion to omit entirely
				every poem which could with any tolerable fairness be deemed offensive to the
				feelings of morals or propriety in this peculiarly nervous age . However, Henrietta’s editing of Shakespeare made no allowance for the
				limitations of an age; her Shakespeare was in fact elevated as that fit for all
				time. By contrast, Rossetti’s edition was qualified and even necessitated by his
				particularly Victorian nervous age. Just as importantly,
				one purpose of Rossetti’s edition was to serve a living author rather than the
				sanctity of the family. He upheld American endorsers Burroughs (1867/1971) and
				O’Connor (1866/2021), who each declared Whitman to be the
				poet of the epoch . In judging Whitman as particularly
				suited for the present age of his edition, Rossetti declared that Victorian
				readers would benefit by judging for themselves the merits of Whitman, who
				beyond all his competitors is incapable of all compromise and an initiator in
					the scheme and form of his works . 
			Less viable, by far, is to judge Poems as a censored text.
				First, Rossetti served no official office in presenting his selected Whitman. He
				merely offered his edition to the court of literary deliberation. Second, I
				doubt any censor has so thoroughly considered and documented a case for
				censorship. Rossetti offered his edition at invitation of a commercial
				publisher. Further, he did so after first encountering Whitman’s work as a
				reader and a leading commentator of Victorian publishing 12 years before his Chronicle article. That secretary to the Pre-Raphaelite
				Brotherhood may have even identified in Whitman the American complement of the
				movement. Yet further, his goal was to advance reception of an author rather
				than thwart it.
			Rather than argue Rossetti was either an advocate for or an expurgator of Whitman,
				I offer a conciliatory, more utilitarian position. Rossetti brought forward a
					selected Whitman that he thought possible to publish
				within the constraints of his time. Moreover, he did so for the benefit of a
				living author and a readership whose understanding of the man was all too
				frequently shaped by the hearsay-report of the periodicals of the day. While his
				depiction of a democratic spokesman championing the humanity of all is only one
				aspect of Whitman, he also presented a Whitman who yearned to receive the love
				that he offered to others and yet could only indirectly state. Accordingly, I
				argue that Rossetti presented a Whitman who was both an all-too-humanly needy
				American citizen and an egalitarian spokesman for the inherent worth of all —
				regardless of nationality, vocation or any caste formation. This Whitman should
				be the herald for the digital humanities on his dual insistence on hearing
				others — all others — well, and being heard. This is a Whitman that should leap
				off the page of any particular edition into the life of a poem inside and
				outside of an edition. This is a Whitman that can be summoned from the free
				access universe of individual editions and re-animated for present readers. 
			Rossetti’s pragmatism was also noted by Folsom (1991), who observed that Whitman
				granted Leaves was a commodity in a publishing market
				(642). From the 1868 Poems through Selected Poems , Whitman
				sought that larger audience not yet ready to read the ever-growing Leaves editions but who might be prompted to do so after
				a kinder, gentler introduction. The compromise was not that of Whitman’s
				redactors, but Whitman’s in his complicity to allow Leaves
				to be partitioned into slimmer volumes and anthology samples .
				Any excerpt — no matter how large or tamed into making Whitman one of other
				conventional poets — called into question Whitman’s lifelong insistence that Leaves should be read as a whole. Only the entirety of
				that reading experience with its lauds for cities, immigrants, commerce, mass
				culture, industry, physicality, nondiscrimination, democratic affection,
				equality and anti-Puritanism  could secure for Whitman the
				place he wished to occupy in American letters. Any less thorough presentation
				amounted to a sanitizing process, making Whitman palatable for a public that
					he had set out to challenge and remake . 
			Challenging that sanitizing assessment of Poems, in particular, motivates my examination of the
				multi-dimensional, variegated Whitman I sense Rossetti surveyed in Poems. Simultaneously, I challenge another dearly held
				cultural narrative that locates authorship most authentically achieved in the
				literary vision and products of a single writer. Today, Whitman is a brand name in present publishing, translation and
				commentary more than an author who oversaw nine editions of Leaves in his lifetime. Even from the outset, Whitman ceased to be an author whose name was merely a placeholder
				for various literary works. In reception and by his own design, Whitman was seen at once as shamelessly
				self-aggrandizing, noble in promoting democratic virtues, and beastly in
				celebrating the place of sex in human affairs. The ongoing attention he receives
				depicts an author who rewards, cautions and edifies readers so variously that
				the author Whitman must make way for various Whitmans, who indeed contain multitudes  and, in fact, are prompted by their many receptions. The multitudinous
				author of the poem that would become Song of Myself is not overtly present in
					Poems because Rossetti excerpted no portion of it.
				However, a Whitman comprised by and capable of containing multitudes is surveyed
				by Rossetti in the various narrative voices that collectively illustrate both a
				complexly declarative and privately evasive author. 
			In support of that position, I annotate the lexical and semantic traces of the
				Calamus sequence. Even while the sequence has been consistently regarded as
				the most overtly homoerotic material of Leaves — and among
				that glossed as gross and indecent — Rossetti included 11 of 40 of those poems
				that appeared in the 1867 Leaves. I do so by the semantic
				indexing technology by which many of us daily access the world wide web.
				Accordingly, I argue that Poems is truer to the spirit of
				the 1867 Leaves than was apparent both to Whitman
				dismissing it as a dismemberment and subsequent readers who primarily see
				authorship as the stylistic verve at work in a singular literary work, as
				envisioned by one writer. The alternative sense of authorship that I explore is
				found in a Whitman who strides among the various editions
				of his work, even while he is assisted by others. This Whitman in particular
				should be considered as a herald of our particularly nervously collaborative and
				open-access age. Among those are sympathetic readers and editors. That is to
				suggest that even the career tendencies indexed by oeuvre
				fail to contain an author understood as much by his particular literary
				projects as by reception from his many sorts of readers proposing and disposing
				of critical approaches. That Whitman may be empirically tracked in Poems not only by the Calamus, content that Rossetti
				included, but also by that excluded. This hypertextual
					Whitman Rossetti knew as a sympathetic reader because in his selection
				and framing of Leaves he had to acknowledge its past and
				present reception, even as he anticipated what may entice future readers in Poems. 

			A Cross-Atlantic Reception
			Before addressing the present reception of Whitman and Calamus, in particular, I
				pause to frame the case for how Whitman the author was initially presented to
				readers on each side of the Atlantic. I merely sample that reception and so
				refer Whitman enthusiasts to the exhaustive catalogue of reviews prepared by
				Barney et al. (2007). In doing so, I argue that neither the acerbic dismissals
				nor sympathetic receptions were singularly instrumental in shaping the Whitman
				whose name came to index a person and poetic more than singular literary works.
					Whitman as a cultural product is implicitly
				acknowledged whenever the man is equated with either his body of work or his
				critical reception. I do so, moreover, because his early reception continues to
				shape present commentary in this age in which cultural studies is a new edifice
				framing authors for the next generation of authors seeking to ally themselves to
				or reject influence. These present authors are not only
				emerging and canonical writers, but also those who make the cases for authorship
				and who few may even be regarded or come to be regarded as authors in their own
				rites. 
			Rossetti’s advocacy for Whitman enfolded the poet’s career. That story begins with
				Rossetti reading the 1855 Leaves, recommended to him by
				William Bell Scott, the Pre-Raphaelite painter and poet who introduced the
				brother of Christina and Dante to the 1855 first edition.
				Then, as he argued in a republished letter to Scott prefacing his
				introduction to Poems, Rossetti perceived its
				substantiality and power were still ahead of any eulogium with which it might
				have been commended to me . As the Pre-Raphaelite
				chronicler perhaps eager to recognize an international cadre devoted to
				depicting people at their quotidian best and worst, Rossetti favorably reviewed
				Whitman’s poetry in the (London) Chronicle in 1867. One outcome of that review was an invitation by John
				Camden Hotten to edit a selected poems offering the first tolerably fair chance
					Whitman has had of making his way with English readers on his own showing . That edition was presented as a counter to the mostly
				short-sighted, sneering, and depreciatory reception Whitman had so far
				received. 
			In his 1867 Chronicle review of Whitman’s work, Rossetti
				declared the American was an exemplary man of his time, even while he granted
				that Whitman alludes to gross things, and in gross words — the clearest,
				bluntest, and nearly the least civilly repeatable which can come uppermost to
				the lips . For him Whitman’s entire originality demanded
				some allowance among readers if their hesitations over his coarse language
				would exclude him from court  run by censors. He found Leaves intensely modern and intensely American, even while he
				declared the book to be the largest poetic work of our
					period . He defended his selected Leaves  because
				it was clearly impossible that the book, with its audacities of topics and of
				expression included, should run the same chance of justice, and of circulation
				through refined minds and hands, which may possibly be accorded to it after the
				rejection of all such peccant poems . Regardless of Whitman’s reservations
				of Poems, Peattie declared in his introduction to
				Rossetti’s Selected Letters that Poems
				helped secure Whitman’s place in literature outside of the United
				States.
			In a letter to Moncure Conway, an American pastor working at South Place Chapel in
				London while Rossetti was preparing Poems, Rossetti
				relates he is pleased to work on a British edition of Whitman’s poetry . In one letter to fellow Whitman critic James McNeill Whistler,
				Rossetti maintains a debtor and creditor account in his critical commentary.
				That sober balance between expounding beauties and detailing faults is
				particularly important in the case of so aboriginal and transcendent a genius
					as Whitman . In responding to Whitman’s complaint of receiving ungrateful
				treatment for his work in the United States, Rossetti returns the encouragement
				lacking among Whitman’s countrymen: I suppose it is a very general if not
				universal experience that anything that is at once great and extremely novel
				encounters for some considerable time much more hostility than acceptance . In that letter he offers further consolation to Whitman by observing that
				the hostile reception the poet reports is rather indeed a testimonial … [to]
					the great intrinsic value of your writings . 
			Whitman’s animus toward his American contemporaries may be understood to be the
				result of his radical eschewal of traditional rhyme and meter, and the radically
				dissident voice of self-creation he named Walt, rather than Walter, in the
				long untitled poem that became Song of Myself. Readers’ conflation of persona
				and poet is a constant in the 150 years of commentary and scholarship reviewed
				in the Cambridge Companion to Whitman .
			One early anonymous reviewer of the Brooklyn Daily Times
				well represents that trend in an opening assertion: Judgment on real
					poems requires an account of the poet himself . The
				fecund, coarse language of the opening poem in which Whitman names himself as
				Walt Whitman, an American, one of the roughs, a kosmos prompted the reviewer
				to declare, Politeness this man has none, and regulation he has none .
				The depiction of a rude child of the people! — No imitation — Nor foreigner —
				but a growth and idiom of America parodies Whitman’s introduction to the first
				edition written in an equally unorthodox, but ecstatic manner. The reviewer
				derided both the style and the man in judging the literary effects as those of a
				fine brute who self-satisfyingly refuses the artificial teaching of a fine
					writer or speaker . While other poets celebrate the actors and sites of
				history, the poet of Leaves  celebrates natural
					propensities in himself; and that is the way he celebrates all . The end
				result of that what I assume you shall assume poetic  is
				what the serpent left the woman and the man, the taste of the Paradisiac tree
					of the knowledge of good and evil, never to be erased again . Equally offensive to the reviewer is the class betrayal of a poet who
				fails to acknowledge other poets, even while he likes the ungenteel ways of the
				laborers — is not prejudiced one mite against the Irish — talks readily with
				them — talks readily to niggers — does not make a stand on being a gentleman,
				nor on learning or manners . 
			Soon afterward, Edward Everett Hale reviewed the 1855 Leaves
				in North American Review, similarly conflating
				persona and poet. However, Hale credited the unnamed author as bringing to the
				reader the freshness, simplicity and reality of what he reads, just as the
				tired man, lying on the hillside in summer, enjoys the leaves of grass around
				him . Hale’s greatest praise for Leaves,
				however, comes in his commentary on Whitman’s broken prose preface celebrating
				the unique possibilities of producing a national literature equal to the promise
				of the nation. Hale praised Whitman’s assertion of native genius found most
				urgently among the common people. Thus, Whitman’s public literary persona was
				accorded the egalitarianism to which Rossetti was drawn and especially
				represented in his handling of the Calamus poems.
			The commentary most out of the step with Whitman’s contemporary reception came
				from a woman remarkably out of step in her own rite. That came from Fanny Fern,
				a.k.a. Sara Payson Willis, the highest paid columnist in the mid-19th century,
				and one of Whitman’s inner circle of New York writers and artists. She declared
					Leaves to be unspeakably delicious, after the
				forced, stiff, Parnassian exotics of the reigning literati. She found the world
				was in want of Whitman on two counts. First, she found him an advocate for women not ladies. Second, the
				world was in want of men not gentlemen.
				The man she found in Leaves dared speak out his
				strong, honest thoughts, in the face of pusillanimous, toadying, republic
				aristocracy . While the persona and poet remain conflated, Fern
				grants that Whitman spoke to and for others.
			Rossetti also advocated for Whitman in introducing the American poet to his circle
				of intimates. The most sustaining of those for Whitman was Anne Gilchrist, who
				was introduced to Whitman’s poetry by Rossetti as he was compiling Poems. Gilchrist, widowed at age 33 and mother to four
				children, went on to complete Alexander Gilchrist’s biography of Blake with the
				encouragement of the Rossetti brothers. She first read Whitman at age 41 when
				serving as a single parent to her children and completing her husband’s great
				life work. At that difficult time, Rossetti gave her his copy of the 1867 Leaves. In response to the transport she experienced as
				a reader, she wrote a series of letters to Rossetti wondering how words could
				cease to become words, and become electric streams like these . At Rossetti’s encouragement, Gilchrist turned those letters into the one
				of the earliest substantive critical commentaries on Leaves. Among the poems prompting her to lay aside Leaves at times in response to all that it demanded of her was the
				Calamus, sequence. What became known as An Englishwoman’s Estimate of Walt
				Whitman was first anonymously published in The Radical
				(Boston). One commentator annotated Gilchrist’s reading of Leaves as an intellectual revolution, a spiritual
				illumination, a physical arousal, a personal passion toward accounting for how
				a book reporting itself to be a man allow[ed] her to realize, after a lengthy
					dormant period, tendencies that had been long in developing .
				Only a year later did she reveal herself to and declare her love for Whitman in
				the first installment of a life-long correspondence. 
			At the end of the century, well after the deaths of both Whitman and Gilchrist,
				Rossetti in a letter to Anne’s daughter, Grace, laments the vapid praise given
				to Whitman, whom he believed was due the reasonable, solid, and lofty homage to
					which his writings are entitled . Before Whitman’s
				death, Rossetti believed Whitman’s life as an artist and patriot should also be
				acknowledged. Accordingly, Rossetti wrote then President Grover Cleveland in
				particular and more generally the American public to succor the impoverished
				poet in his remaining years . 
			While Peattie well annotated the background to the professional relationship
				between Whitman and Rossetti entirely conducted by correspondence, Erkkila
				(1989) and Ramsey (1997) are among the few commentators who acknowledged how
				Whitman benefitted as a poet. In particular, both scholars recognized how
				Rossetti’s grouping of Whitman’s civil war poems under the heading Drum-Taps
				was instrumental to the later 1871 Leaves. Erkkila found
				the final Drum-Taps cluster of the 1881 Leaves
				appealing to Providence as it moves from patriotic exultation over the
				mustering of troops to the suffering and loss of the war. Ramsey extended those
				insights to argue that Whitman borrowed this suggestive ‘providential’ sequence
				for the Drum-Taps (166) sequence as it was realized in 1871 Leaves. She observed that the underlying structure … remains
				Rossetti’s, who provided … the thematic ‘cycle of war’ pattern by which Whitman
				is taken to have interpreted the American civil upheaval (166).
			To Whitman’s collaboration with Rossetti, and through him to Tennyson, Symonds,
				Swinburne and Carpenter, the paradigmatic poet was more widely celebrated in
					Britain than in his own country  at the time of his death in
				1892. Drawing the admiration of English composer Vaughn Williams, as well, was
				Whitman’s political egalitarianism — expressed through notions of ‘manly love’
					and comradeship . That manly-love fellowship, Collins
				observed presented a powerful alterative to prevailing Victorian forms of
				political and social relations (65). For that depiction of Whitman’s
				egalitarianism Rossetti should receive some credit.
			
			Simultaneously, Rossetti could be understood as one of Whitman’s (albeit
				sympathetic) redactors. In his presentation of a Whitman heralding an
				international brotherhood of comrades and celebrating the general revelation of
				nature, he altered Leaves’ clusters, at once reassigning
				and renaming poems in complement to his sense of thematic unity. See Table 1 for
				an overview. Rossetti is censorious in removing the material that would prompt
				righteous indignation, rather than a considered response, from readers.
				Rossetti’s dual role of redactor of and advocate for Whitman introduces the
				complex terrain of subversion. 
			In introducing a collection of essays annotating Victorian publishing, Womack and
				Decker (2016) observed the entangled relationships among writer, text, and
				reader (xi) that accompanies any act of subversion. For Rossetti that demanded
				acknowledging a peculiarly nervous age in which readers were expected to
				principally object to any overt expression of sexual agency. Simultaneously,
				however, he had to present that aspect of Whitman’s work that the dominant
				culture of his day rejected. More distantly, in allying himself 
			
			
				Calamus, Included and Excluded from ‘Poems,’ and Assessed as
					Laudatory or CautionaryIn all commentary to follow I employ the 1867 label
						for each poem.
				
					1867 Leaves
					
					1867 label
					
						Poems title
					Rossetti group
					laud
				
				
					Whoever You are Now Holding My Hand
					Whoever
					Fit Audience
					Songs of Parting
					0
				
				
					These I Singing in Spring
					Sing
					Singing in Spring
					Songs of Parting
					1
				
				
					A Song
					ASong
					Love of Comrades
					Songs of Parting
					1
				
				
					Not Heaving from my Ribb'd Breast Only
					Heaving
					Pulse of My Life
					Songs of Parting
					0
				
				
					Of the Terrible Doubt of Appearances
					Terrible
					Appearances
					Walt Whitman
					0
				
				
					Recorders Ages Hence
					Record
					The Friend
					Walt Whitman
					1
				
				
					Of Him I Love Day and Night
					DayNight
					A Dream
					Walt Whitman
					0
				
				
					To a Stranger
					Stranger
					To a Stranger
					Walt Whitman
					1
				
				
					This Moment Yearning and Thoughtful
					Yearn
					Other Lands
					Walt Whitman
					1
				
				
					When I Peruse the Conquer'd Fame
					Peruse
					Envy
					Walt Whitman
					0
				
				
					What Think You I Take Pen in Hand
					Pen
					Parting Friends
					Walt Whitman
					1
				
				
					I Dreamed in a Dream
					Dreamed
					The City of Friends
					Walt Whitman
					1
				
				
					Among the Multitude
					Multi
					Among the Multitude
					Walt Whitman
					0
				
				
					Full of Life, Now
					Full
					Centuries Hence
					Songs of Parting
					1
				
				
					As I Ebb’d with the Ocean of Life
					Ebb’d
					Elemental Drifts
					Walt Whitman
					
				
				
					Starting from Paumanok
					SP
					Starting from Paumanok
					Chants Democratic
					
				
				
					In Paths Untrodden
					Paths
					
					
					1
				
				
					Scented Herbage of my Breast
					Scented
					
					
					1
				
				
					Are You the New Person Drawn to Me
					NewPerson
					
					
					0
				
				
					Roots and Leaves Themselves Alone
					RootsLeaves
					
					
					1
				
				
					Not Heat Flames Up and Consumes
					NotHeat
					
					
					1
				
				
					Trickle Drops
					Trickle
					
					
					0
				
				
					City of Orgies
					Orgies
					
					
					1
				
				
					Behold This Swarthy Face
					Behold
					
					
					1
				
				
					I Saw in Louisiana a Live-Oak Growing
					Louisiana
					
					
					1
				
				
					I Hear It Was Charged Against Me
					Charged
					
					
					1
				
				
					The Prairie Grass Dividing
					Prairie
					
					
					1
				
				
					We Two Boys Together Clinging
					Clinging
					
					
					1
				
				
					A Glimpse
					Glimpse
					
					
					1
				
				
					A Promise to California
					Promise
					
					
					1
				
				
					Here, Sailor!
					Sailor
					
					
					1
				
				
					Here the Frailest Leaves of Me
					Frailest
					
					
					0
				
				
					No Labor-Saving Machine
					Machine
					
					
					1
				
				
					To the East and to the West
					EastWest
					
					
					1
				
				
					Earth! My Likeness!
					Earth
					
					
					0
				
				
					A Leaf for Hand in Hand
					Leaf
					
					
					1
				
				
					Fast Anchor'd, Eternal, O Love
					Eternal
					
					
					1
				
				
					Sometimes with One I Love
					Sometimes
					
					
					0
				
				
					That Shadow, My Likeness
					Shadow
					
					
					1
				
				
					To a Western Boy
					Western
					
					
					0
				
				
					Of You Whom I Often and Silently Come
					Silently
					
					
					1
				
			
			
			to Whitman, he had to account for a literary movement that emerged in response to
				its time rather than was engineered by a coterie of young artists dissatisfied
				with the Royal Academy. 
			Rossetti’s solution, I argue, was to present the new man of a new democratic
				nation, whose love-longings for comrades could be spiritualized as canonically
				as did Dante in La Vita Nuova, Edmund Spenser in Amoretti, and Elizabeth Barrett Browning in Songs of the Portuguese.  Framing Whitman as a
				transcendental wooer of soldiers, stevedores, farmers, and tradesmen was also
				resonant with the Pre-Raphaelite standard of naturalism. Those roughs were for Whitman in his broken prose manifesto the genius of
				the United States [in] Their manners speech dress friendship — the freshness and
				candor of the physiognomy — the picturesque looseness of their carriage 
				. Perhaps in Whitman’s egalitarian trope of the President’s
				taking off his hat to them not they to him (iv) Rossetti early on found another
				Pre-Raphaelite brother. The depiction of Whitman as the outsider artist
				unfettered by existing conventions  complemented the
				self-creation of an author who learned carpentry from his father and was trained
				in a trade at the printing press. More certainly, by 1868, Rossetti surveyed
				Whitman’s attempt to define the new man in a new nation by eschewing rhyme and
				even blank verse to the point that some poems may be regarded as a warp of
				prose amid the weft of poetry (3). 
			More urgently, however, Rossetti celebrated Whitman’s open, extending and inviting
				humanity. The poet’s subject, he noted in his introduction to Poems, is every subject . He summarized Whitman’s
				verve as realizing One’s self amid the En Masse of humanity. For Rossetti,
					Leaves is the poem both of Personality and of
				Democracy … in it the most literal view of things is continually merging into
				the most rhapsodic or passionately abstract (5). Whitman’s British advocate and
				Pre-Raphaelite chronicler, thus, illustrates the entanglement of relations that
				Womack and Decker observed in reading and positively responding to the
				subversive presence of a new art form. 
			Consider the double-edged subversion evident in the Swedenborg epigraph leading
				off Poems. That emendation was entirely Rossetti’s, who
				employed it to spiritualize Whitman’s emphasis on the body as another sacred
				site of creation. Rossetti excerpted the reflections of the 17th century
				Christian mystic on the bodily presence of angels to suggest that both Whitman
				and his panoply of American citizens may be regarded as emanations of heaven,
				despite the gross ignorance Swedenborg observed respecting Angels and Spirits
					as to suppose them to be minds without a form, or mere thoughts . Through Swedenborg, Rossetti at once elevates the peripheral citizenry of
				the United States, exhorts readers for failing to entertain angels well, and
				sanctifies Whitman’s work as that proceeding from an other-worldly messenger
				finding his subject matter in the very stuff of the world. That gesture could be
				understood as an enabling subversion because it honors Whitman’s project of
				recognizing the inherent value of the entire citizenry, even those who are
				rarely seen and still more rarely lauded. Yet, that spiritualization of people
				in their material conditions simultaneously reifies understanding some as
				radically Other than the captains of commerce, statesmen and exceptional
				artists. In even acknowledging that polarism of spiritual and material
				conditions to which Swedenborg objected and by which readers were likely to
				dismiss Whitman, Rossetti may be understood to accede to the values and thinking
				of a dominant culture well practiced in bigotry. In Rossetti’s gesture of
				elevating manly love as a trope for egalitarianism, his
				subversion may be understood to be co-opted and absorbed within the dominant
				culture’s practices of finding and treating some more worthily than others. That
				is to observe that if the roughs, criminals and men attracted to other men
				should be entertained as possible angels, as Rossetti suggests in the epigraph
				he appended to his selected Whitman, then the editor has only further muddied
				their better reception as members of a common humanity. Likewise, if Whitman’s
				celebration of manly love is spiritualized to emphasize a new and better
				humanity emerging, then that better world remains shackled in caste and
				entitlement by even acknowledging a material-spiritual split. 

				
			Present reception of the ‘Calamus’ sequence in the United States
			Rossetti’s tenuous walk among his cultural terrain of reception has been
				undertaken more recently by Calamus commentators who depict Whitman as a
				democratic, yet quite vulnerable speaker. Simultaneously, the sequence commands
				critical attention in indexing frailty and desire independently of sexual
				orientation . Cocks found it astutely illustrating the Victorian
				evasion of sexual desire by spiritual communion . 
				
				
					
					
					three depictions of whitman in three different editions of leaves
				
				
				Thomas found 
				Whitman adopting a different rhetorical strategy than Song of Myself in a
				speaker foregoing contradiction to state the complexities of love in order to
				more ambivalently and fully accept the polar pairing of life and death (2010).
				The Calamus sequence Thomas observed dramatizes love as predicated upon loss
				and vice versa (643) toward identifying the complexities of human experience
				(644). That more general human experience in love is a check to presidential
					incompetency and growing sectional tensions . In the 1860
					Leaves in which Calamus premiered, Reynolds
				observed a campaign to appeal to a middle-class readership and show Whitman
				neatly trimmed and conventional, rather than the rough persona of the first
				edition. Figure 1 illustrates that contrast in personae, as well as showing the
				more grandfatherly Whitman with whom Rossetti began a dialogue to launch the
				first British edition of a radically redacted and regrouped Leaves.
			
			That rebranded, more fashionable Whitman of 1860, enticed clerks and gaffers to
				become Whitmaniacs . Wheat identified Leaves
				as therapeutic literature meant to form the free reader into a free person
				and therefore an appropriate citizen for a fully democratic party ,
				while Calamus complements that spokesmanship quality of the sequence in its
				insistence on speaking to the political and philosophical appeals of democracy.
				How we adhere to one another, regardless of regional differences, is a primary
				driver of the content, which Wheat interpreted as a spiritual counterpoint to
				the far more carnal Children of Adam sequence. Sexual desire should be
				understood as another cultural production that exists in negotiation within a
				complex set of rules larger than our tendency to dichotomize sex into a private
				experience distinct from public consequence . Accordingly, in the
				evangel-poem Starting from Paumanok, Grossman found Whitman only implicitly
				figuring as the apologist for manly love, while explicitly he does so for the
				common mother of liberty, Ma Femme. 
			Common to all of these perspectives is the function of indirection in expressing
				difficult and even repressed content. In recognition of that skillful avoidance
				of explicit content that would raise the ire of a censor, gay writers emphasize
				the otherness they sense in their sexual desire and identity .
				Their otherness is particularly pronounced in a categorical, perhaps even
					ontological sense of difference from their heterosexual counterparts . The result is indirection, until that time when same-sex desire may
				be as simply and directly stated as does Whitman in A Leaf for Hand in Hand.
				Then we will see it common for you to walk hand in hand . 
			The sequence’s relation to the earlier manuscript grouping of Live Oak, with
				Moss brings attention both to the subversive act of declaring same-sex love and
				self-censorship. Scholnick reviewed charges that Whitman self-censored in
				distributing the contents of the 12-poem Live Oak, with Moss throughout the
				larger Calamus sequence. Doing so effectively blunted their meaning
				, two commentators held. Allen anticipated this dispute by
				noting that Whitman’s notebook manuscript of the Live Oak sequence more
				coherently told the love story of one man for another than was evident in
				Calamus, . While Scholnick agreed that the narrative unity of Live
				Oak, with Moss was compromised in Calamus, he argued that the sequence
				extends and deepens its themes in quite surprising ways (110). Countering a
				charge of Whitman self-censoring , Parker assessed Live Oak, with
					Moss as a gay manifesto  when he selected it for inclusion
				in the fourth edition of The Norton Anthology of American
					Literature. The sequence Parker commented upon was that which Bowers
				found in 1958 in the Valentine Collection of Whitman’s manuscripts, while the
				one that Helms read was restored to its original manuscript order but gathered
				from the 45-poem Calamus of the 1860 Leaves. Scholnick
				observed that both critics make textual judgments on the basis of their
				assumption that Whitman faced such widespread homophobia that he was forced to
				engage in self-censorship . The silencing homophobia each argued
				must have influenced the dissolution of Live Oak, with Moss into Calamus was
				not present in American letters until much later in the 19th century, Scholnick
				argued. 
			A further commonality is this: Both Helms and Parker privilege particular texts in
				noting authorship. Neither regarded process as an integral process in
				publication and a fostering component in authorship. By contrast, I argue that
				the typeset-altered printer’s copy for the 1860 Leaves
				that Whitman prepared co-existed in his mind with the manuscript version of
				Live Oak, with Moss. That is a nod toward a new era of critical commentary
				enabled by computer-aided assessment of texts that may be understood to
				co-exist, regardless of manuscript dates and year of publication.
			In that simultaneity of texts in dialogue with one another, an inter-edition
				Whitman emerges who ever reminds readers that Leaves is
				accretive as the Mississippi delta in receiving the stuff of a continent. If
				left unchecked, the river would shift its banks. Within the unchecked and
				celebrated accretion of Leaves, one current is Calamus
				as another is the Children of Adam cluster. Both find common expression in the
				human need to adhere to one another, regardless of
				expression in sexual attraction.
			In Starting from Paumanak (SP), the poem that serves as a Genesis function for
				Whitman and that which Rossetti selected to introduce Poems,
				Whitman illustrates the primacy of the sexual drive in listening to a
				mockingbird inflating his throat, and joyfully singing (78). The moment
				underscores not only lyric beauty and a poet finding his counterpart in the
				natural world, but also that drive to find the best expression of ourselves — as
				citizens and sojourners — in the subtle, clandestine, away beyond (78).
				Immediately following Whitman allegorizes democracy as Ma Femme and pledges to
				make the songs of passion, to give them their way (79). Among that humanity
				Whitman declares he will represent are outlawed offenders whose songs Whitman
				will transform into the true poem of riches — To earn for the body and the
				mind whatever adheres, and goes forward, and is not dropped by death (79). 
			In this manifesto celebrating life itself and the lives of all citizens, even
				those outlawed offenders, Whitman naturalizes his commitment to egalitarianism
				and his stance in indirection. Whitman realizes the mockingbird sang not only
				for himself, his mate attending to her brood, and for others listening. That
				song was also a charge transmitted, and gift occult, for those being born (78)
				delivered in a poem surveying the circumstances and settings of a poet’s birth.
				That birth song I sense resounding in Poems as much for
				the citizenry of a new nation as for men loving one another in nonchalance in
				the regrouped and disguised Calamus poems. 
			Accordingly, I neither seek to arbitrate which Whitman is at work in the Calamus
				sequence nor what that sequence held for its own time. Neither do I wish to
				assess the aesthetic or ethical merit of one edition over another. More urgent
				is simply following its rhetoric of indirection through two distinct groups of
				Calamus poems toward showing a method of establishing influence in a literary
				text. However rebranded, compromised and appropriated is that content, I sense
				the Calamus content of Poems substantively recalls the
				entire sequence presented in the 1867 Leaves. Those poems
				also underscore both the loudly declarative Democratic spokesman and the more
				personally evasive, vulnerable speaker Rossetti recognized in Leaves. 
			The extra-human processing that enables texts to co-exist may be understood as hypertextual. This term from information science is now
				commonplace. Presently, hypertext is not merely a device by which additional
				information may be clicked and so accessed in a moment.
				It also suggests a state of mind that returns readers to the cacophony of
				literary texts speaking to and against one another before
				being orchestrated by the activity of critical response.

				
				
			Inside a Semantic Indexing Machine
			
				Hypertext was first introduced as a device through which,
				for example, the work of handling personal file systems may be better effected
				during the drafting of a technical paper . At that early
				meeting of the Association for Computing Machinery, Nelson observed that those
				files shade into manuscripts while the assembly of textual notes becomes the writing of text without a sharp break (84).
				Those personal files exist in non-linear relation to what becomes the linearized
				account of a paper read from start to finish. However, he noted a cost to that
				linear ordering. The alternative or unrealized connections among the strands of
				those information swirls are lost. Hypertext, by contrast, allows for a body of
				written or pictorial material to be interconnected in such a complex way that
				it could not conveniently be presented or represented on paper (96). 
			That hypertextual mind, I argue, is fundamental to those who write poetic
				sequences. Nelson may be understood to well account for that simultaneity of
				poems speaking to one another in complement, contrast and qualification in the
				title of his paper, A File Structure for the Complex, The Changing and the
				Intermediate. That provisional world variously ordered in either a literary
				work or a technical paper becomes yet more revealing when all possible content
				is proximately represented in a relevance score.
			Hypertext as an idea rather than a technique in information relay implicitly
				acknowledges the modern topical indexing accomplished within a search engine.
				Search terms survey a collective sensibility. Search engines simultaneously
				offer assessment of the fit of our terms to particular internet resources. As
				the ideas of a literary work are executed in but one of many possible linear
				presentations, search terms similarly reveal the possible but not exhaustive
				components of any given inquiry. While the results of a search may be judged to
				be either spurious or helpful, we soon learn how to better locate that
				information, audio or video that prompted an inquiry. Our trial and error
				employment of the terms that may take us to internet topics may be understood as
				the theoretical framing we bring to understanding a literary work. If our search
				terms represent the theoretical framing we bring to any reading experience, then
				the relevance scores of our internet queries represent assessment of fit for a
				critical perspective. 
			I offer the analogies of internet searches and relevance scores to literary study
				to illustrate a different approach to interpretation enabled by the digital
				humanities. Regardless of the critical framing we bring either knowingly or
				naively to reading literature, we can assess the rightness of its application
				against the givenness of the word to word associational terrain fundamental to a
				literary work. In that capacity alone we may be saved from imposing a critical
				framing on a literary work. In complement to any exegetical program of
				interpretation is the empirical presence of words proximately represented.
				Open-source programming techniques in natural language processing, then, offer a
				boon to the reader who first wishes to proceed from the radical givenness of a
				text’s composition. 
			I pause over these now familiar wonders of search engine inquiry to illustrate the
				basic mechanics of latent semantic analysis (LSA). It developed as an
				information retrieval tool to index the relation of one term to another within a
				static dataset, like a literary corpus . It has become a
				theory of knowledge acquisition for the human capacity to infer meaning by the
				context of usage . In demonstrating that an LSA
				application could correctly supply the right answer to a multiple choice synonym
				test at a better-than-guessing rate, Landauer and Dumais offered two
				interpretations. The more conservative explanation is that the contextual
				statistics of usage alone (211) sufficiently enable a machine to make the
				appropriate choice. The more radical interpretation is that this inductive model
				of learning reveals an important underlying mechanism of human cognition in
				general (212). I follow that stronger argument in exploring the machine-aided
				complement to demonstrating the relation of one poem to another. 
			The web of the present study is comprised mainly by the
				word to word relations of Poems, as well as the largely
				absent Calamus sequence as Whitman realized it in the 1867 Leaves. That inter-edition resonance of influence may be understood
				as hypertextual to suggest a state of mind that returns
				readers to literary texts speaking to and against one another. It is anterior to
				critical response. Accordingly, I use LSA to index the radical givenness of
				terms within Whitman’s poetry. 
			LSA works by surveying the frequency of terms whittled down from words by
				root-stemming in order to approximate their cross-document senses in a static
				corpus. It is a bag-of-words method because neither
				syntax nor part-of-speech is integral to the representation of content.
				Fundamental is the frequency of terms in the corpus as a whole, not only within
				individual documents. That corpus is assumed to model a system of simultaneous
				equations that can determine the similarity of meaning of words and documents to
				each other , thus approximating shop talk or
				discourse.
			LSA is only one approach in distributional semantics. However, whether the
				architecture employed represents a corpus by its term-to-term relatedness or
				from a window of its terms as does Hyperspace Analogue to Language (HAL) , word count is formative. Context is indirectly established by
				a matrix formed by a survey of the words retained for analysis as those appear
				in a document by document indexing. Both HAL and LSA are count models , or bag-of-word approaches in
				modeling meaning through a set of term to term co-occurrences. This
				approximation of sense-making Landauer and Dumais (1997) equated with the verbal
				conditioning that prompts learning by means of inference. One limitation of
				count models is that all information must be present before meaning can be
				represented in a series of statistical transformations that represent a corpus
				by only its most resonant terms. Syntax, however, never entirely weights a count representation. 
			Count and predict approaches each benefit the digital humanities. Selecting the
				appropriate representational method should hinge upon the purpose for bringing a
				set of texts together. If that collection of literary texts is assembled because
				novelty of trope is expected, then the count method of LSA makes sense, for the
				corpus itself argues against the value of predicting the likelihood of a term
				followed by another. By contrast, if the corpus were comprised, for example, to
				understand the nature of stylistic continuity between passages, then a predict
				model is the appropriate choice. 
			The count model approach is right for the present study because novelty of trope
				is instrumental in a poetic sequence. It is also appropriate toward
				understanding the sensibility of an author rather than its expression in
				particular works. The poems Rossetti excerpted from Calamus are identical to
				their Leaves presentation; regrouping and redacting the
				number of them were Rossetti’s most important editorial tasks. The central
				matter of the present study is tracking the possible resonance in sense between
				excluded and included Calamus content. 
			This study hinges upon the ideational, non-linear presence of words summoned to
				speak for the content of a literature meant for a new republic. Its emphasis is
				the numinous presence of words like love, state and manly rather than development within a field of
				expertise or the continuity of one draft of a novel with a later draft.
				Accordingly, I selected LSA to model the influence I sense in the entirety of
				Calamus being resonant within Poems and the excluded
				content found in Leaves.
			
			LSA emulates an inductive method of learning by two principles in cognitive
				psychology: 1) we understand a topic by a set of words, and 2) those
				associations are enriched, refined and schematized by further and even widely
				variant exposure to that topic. LSA, then, is both a method for statistically
				emulating induction and a theory of human learning . It
				represents semantic sense in three steps. The first is by indexing the
				co-occurrence of terms within and between documents of a corpus. The second step
				of LSA employs a widely used factor reduction process known as singular value
				decomposition (SVD). This step multiplies a matrix of term values by those of
				the documents to produce ranked cross-products, or singular values. The greater
				the singular values of those cross-products, the more information each provides
				for the representation of a corpus. More concretely, those singular values in
				the present study represent the sensibility most central to Rossetti’s edition
				even as those poems are simultaneously influenced by the excluded Calamus
				content of Leaves. 
			
			The final LSA step truncates the full representation of a set of documents to one
				that preserves its complexity but also eliminates noise. Each poem or section
				contributes to semantic space by its unique term to term relationality.
				Truncating dimensions, then, does not eliminate the full array of terms used to
				summon sense, for documents rather than terms are ranked by their singular
				values. This dimension reduction step eliminates not terms assigned to the row
				of a matrix, but the column-defined documents that address corpus wide
				tendencies. Because those columns are rank-ordered or orthogonal, the singular
				value as the cross-product of both documents and terms offers a way for less to
				say more. This dimension reduction step is precise enough that the original
				matrix can be recomposed. Truncation, then, may be understood as the decision at
				what decimal place to the right of the zero may be rounded up. 
			In the following research questions, I follow the distributed semantics of one
				poem considered in its similarity to another. I do so without hyperlinks per se,
				for that would require some personal set of files to have been constructed in
				advance of inquiry. However, I follow a hyperlinked sensibility in allowing the
				poems to speak to their relatedness in a common metric that can be readily
				employed within the digital humanities. Moreover, I do so without imposing any
				program to their relatedness. Rather, while entertaining a rhetoric of
				indirection, I simultaneously test a theory that Calamus is comprised by both
				lauds and cautions for those who would love by standards not yet publish’d
				(Paths 6). Accordingly, I asked:
			
				What is the within-group relatedness of “Calamus” poems included in Poems?
				
				How related are Calamus poems across editions?
				What is the relation of the Calamus content Rossetti sampled to
					Elemental Drifts in Rossetti’s Walt Whitman group? 
				Does the excluded content show resonance with the evangel-poem Starting
					from Paumanok?
			

			A hypertextual program of reading the Calamus sequence
			I account for the importance of Rossetti’s Poems more truly representing the
				Whitman’s legacy than either Whitman or modern scholars grant by a hypertextual
				frame. That allows the 1867 Leaves to co-exist with Poems, even as Live Oak,
				with Moss may be understood to co-exist with Calamus. In that hypertextual
				field an author’s texts may speak simultaneously before they are ordered to
				represent the linear frame of an argument conducted within the bounds of any
				critical reading approach. Doing so implicitly derides the New Critical claim
				that a text is sufficient onto itself. I argue otherwise, especially in the case
				of Poems’ troubling relation to the 1867 Leaves. Accordingly, I argue Poems
				reveals a greater sense of authorship than any of Whitman’s singular products of
				composition, whether those be found in a poem, sequence or book. The present
				study, then, courts the New Historicist allowance for the formative presence of
				extra-textual material, especially that of the Calamus poems excluded in Poems
				even while the 1867 Calamus has been completely erased by Rossetti’s
				alternative groupings. In that sense of authorship I necessarily call into
				question the power dynamics evident in dismissing Poems as the compromised,
				bowdlerized or sanitized Whitman. 
			To examine that hypertextual Whitman, I employ the open-source statistical
				platform R, which enables 10,000 distinct statistical operations, data handling
				and imaging techniques. In complement to two particular software packages, I
				used a freely available editor (Rstudio 2021) to process the text set, which I
				captured in poem and section divisions on an Excel spreadsheet. The lsa package allowed me to create a corpus comprised by
				the whole of Poems and the excluded Calamus content
				. I also employed that package to aggregately score the similarity of
				one poem’s words against those from another poem. See Tables 2-4. That
				representation I could further pass on to the LSAfun
				package toward doing the passage to passage scoring featured in Tables 5-8
				. That package also enabled me to examine the closest
				semantic neighbors of a word. 
			I found 111 poems or sections sharing the greatest semantic similarity indexed by
				stemmed terms comprising the whole of Poems and the excluded Calamus content.
				Those most generally applicable components of a text set retained for analysis
				are called dimensions. In general, an LSA best performs in a space of 200 to 500
				dimensions, although an empirical survey of 49 studies found optimal factors
				from 6 to 1,000 dimensions . Singular values < .94 were
				effectively removed from the corpus representation by setting each to 0. This
				procedure highlights the underlying semantic structure of words. Those words
				that are most similar are shown to be proximate to one another even if they
				never co-occur in a document, while documents similarly benefit even if they
					share no types (or words/terms) in common . This
				technique, then, removes the limitations of tracking lexile usage. The advantage
				of the share function in the present study is that the reduced set references
				the semantic space of the corpus by the largest poem/section-level tendencies
				and the entirety of the word-set that comprise it. 
			As reported in Table 1, I labeled each Calamus poem either as a laud or a
				caution for living out comradely love either in same-sex desire or in the
				service of a new republic. That designation I held to be provisional, for it
				springs from my own reading of Calamus as a poetic sequence granting that
				those who love will experience both a sense of wondrous revelation and
				resignation over lovers’ human limitations. I granted, too, at the outset that
				one poem may have elements of each sensibility motivating it. A laud I took to be celebratory of a lover’s progress
				through the difficult terrain of desire that can only be sensed at the periphery
				of those standards Whitman in Paths declared depart from the pleasures,
				profits, conformities (4) of social sanction. I considered a caution to be either a warning to those who would dare to love or an
				illustration of a hazard in love. However, Whitman troping his poems as
				herbage may make each a laud in celebration of an authentic life, even while
				those same poems, or body-leaves growing up above me above death (Scented
				3), resound in caution. 
			I test that laudatory-cautionary distinction by the distributed relation of one
				word to another across both Poems and the Calamus
				sequence excluded from it. That distributed sense of one poem’s relation to
				another I annotate by the cognitive science fundamental to information retrieval
				, disciplinary trends in language use , and what mood or mind is operative within a discussion 
				. I do so first to demonstrate a method of reading that allows to literary
				texts to speak to one another, even while offering metrics that approximate the
				degree of similarity that may be found within and between groups of texts.
			Such proximal indexing of a term within a poem and across others consequently
				allows us to follow the aggregated relation of all terms within a poem to
				another. That relation, or resonance, I track in the present study by reporting
				the cosine approximation of relatedness. Most generally,
				a cosine may be interpreted as a correlation, which in the present study range
				continuously in strength from 0 to 1. Those correlations are more precisely
				stated as the semantic distance between two vectors … given by the cosine of
					the angle between them . Accordingly, I report a degree of
				topical and thematic resonance between Whitman editions as the averaged cosine
				similarity of one passage to another . Because cosine may
				be understood as a correlation, we can expect different statements of concept
				overlap. I consider the categorical predictor of Calamus content to be either
				included or excluded in Poems to be weak for a cosine of .10, while moderate is
				> .30 and strong > .50 . 
			All Whitman texts employed in the present study came from the 1867 Leaves of Grass and 1868 Poems by Walt
					Whitman archived on the Whitman archive maintained by the Center for
				Digital Research in the Humanities at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln. All
				pages cited conform to the eBook edition of Poems
				archived by the center. I cited excluded Calamus content by the line
				number of the center’s 1867 Leaves edition. 
			The more nuanced decisions came in deciding which texts supply a non-Calamus
				complement to examine Calamus phenomenality. I also considered what
				introductory sequence Rossetti admitted could possibly serve the naming function
				of what became Song of Myself, but what Whitman called in 1867 the Walt
				Whitman sequence.
			Calamus bridges Poems and the 1867 Leaves. Accordingly, I used it to examine the within-group and
				between-group relatedness of its poems (Q1 and Q2). I partitioned the poems
				either by the laud or caution distinction earlier described. I further
				partitioned the text set by Calamus content included or excluded from Poems. I selected Elemental Drifts for two reasons to
				explore the resonance of Calamus content with an introductory poem Rossetti
				believed he could publish without having to go to court (Q3). First, it appears
				in Rossetti’s Walt Whitman cluster, where most of the Calamus he excerpted
				is contained. Second, Elemental Drifts is widely anthologized and so serves it
				as its own Whitman introduction to new readers. Finally, to examine the semantic
				resonance of Calamus content with another of Whitman’s origin poems (Q4), I
				selected Starting from Paumanok (SP). Grossman identifies what would become
				SP as Proto-Leaf, which introduces the 1860 Leaves
				. Likewise, Rossetti allowed this evangel-poem to introduce
					Poems. Its mission to bring comity by day and by
				night between all The States (73) is present in the Calamus sequence as well.
				Grossman observed that SP celebrates the Union as the evangel-poem of
					comrades (74).

			Results
		
			
			
				Correlations in the Laudatory and Cautionary Calamus Content
					of Poems1=Sing, 2=Asong, 3=Record, 4=Stranger, 5=Yearn,
						6=Pen, 7=Dreamed, 8=Full; labels refer to the fully named poems reported in Table 1.
						
				
					
					1
					2
					3
					4
					5
					6
					7
					8
				
				
					Whoever
					.75
					.58
					.41
					.41
					.10
					.46
					.04
					.20
				
				
					Heaving
					.46
					.07
					.27
					.47
					.003
					.27
					.39
					.02
				
				
					Terrible
					.54
					.16
					.52
					.27
					.32
					.30
					.05
					.03
				
				
					DayNight
					.34
					.18
					.28
					.52
					.04
					.31
					.71
					.04
				
				
					Peruse
					.17
					.03
					.17
					.12
					.01
					.02
					.01
					.03
				
				
					Multi
					.06
					.02
					.17
					.05
					.03
					.10
					.01
					.01
				
			

				
					Q1: What is the within-group relatedness of Calamus poems included in Poems?
					Precisely because of the novelty of trope expected in a poetic sequence, few poems
					designated either as a laud or a caution resonate strongly in that distinction.
						Rather, some poems celebrate manly love while others caution its practice. That
						is clear in the poem to poem
					comparisons measured by the averaged correlations of cosine that comprise each 
					poem. More toward illustrating a method in testing the caution-laud distinction in
						Calamus 
					than toward arguing for its utility, I discuss the relationship of the cautionary
						Whoever to 
					poems I take to be lauds for those who love others unconventionally or in service
						of a new 
					republic. My primary point is this: Reader’s conclusions can be put to the test
						within that 
					distributive semantics fundamental to either a count or predict approach. Any
						argument can then be assessed and reconsidered by the evidence of document to
						document and word to word 
					phenomena. 
				
					In the cautionary Whoever, the speaker warns away a suitor. That intimate must 
					complete an apprenticeship to be in relation with the speaker. Better that the
						suitor Put [him] 
					down and depart on [his] way (12) than give up all else (8). In the laudatory
						Record that 
					warning is not issued to a suitor, but to any who would love as does the speaker
						and understands the dread of an indifferent response from another. In Stranger
						the speaker returns to the direct address, but in possibly warning the stranger
						away from the fervor he or she may expect. While 
					the speaker in Whoever grants the suitor may perhaps be worthy of his attention, 
					the counterpart in Sing declares he is the only one worthy to praise the love of
						comrades. 
					By contrast, a troop gathers around him in Sing. To that possibly worthy suitor
						in Whoever, the speaker names himself the new husband and comrade (26).
						That identity is most explicit in Sing at another pond-side, where him that
						tenderly loves me, and returns again never to 
					separate from me (19) receives a calamus root as token from the speaker. In
						ASong that 
					husband fathers the most splendid race the sun ever shone upon/ … With the
						life-long love of 
					comrades (2-3). Those who remember Whitman as the husband of the few who dare to
						love as 
					completely as he does and father to the many in Record should name him the
						tenderest lover (3). Although unacknowledged in Stranger, the speaker might
						have surely lived a life of joy (3) with another. Whitman again fancies
						himself as the husband who received parting [as] the 
					parting of dear friends (5) in Pen, where he sees the embrace of two men on a
						pier. In Full, which concludes the Calamus sequence, the speaker is husband
						to you yet unborn (4). He 
					can only fulfill that office by his poems. Yet, the Calamus speaker also grants
						a legacy of 
					being misunderstood, as he does in Whoever. In Pen that speaker cautions that
						his subject 
					matter is neither the majestic battleship nor splendors of the past day (3), but
						only that scene of two men parting as dear friends. His future readers, he
						grants in Sing, will find only what they need in his poems, while fewer still
						would receive calamus as their due. That husband-longing 
					professed in Record reframes the speaker as one Who was not proud of his songs,
						but of the measureless ocean of love within him (5).
				
					The caution-laud distinction, then, does not define a sub-genre for Whitman as
						much as provide poles by which a non-scripted love will be experienced by the
						wooer, the beloved and 
					the society framing both. The non-scriptedness of expressing that love either for
						another man or 
					in service of a more radically inclusive republic is a topic larger than either a
						cautionary or 
					laudatory rhetoric. Whitman’s sometimes cautious, sometimes joyful negotiation of
						manly love 
					returns us to the experience of reading a poetic sequence. The difficult, even
						damning terrain of 
					loving both out of bounds and out of measure is recognized even within the same
						poem 
					celebrating that adventure. Accordingly, while the way to that greater love in
						Whoever is 
					suspicious and uncertain, it rewards by revealing the new husband of a new
						republic. 
					The Calamus content Rossetti selected for Poems qualifies
						the laud or caution theme 
					defining each of the selections, for as was shown above, the decidedly cautionary
						Whoever 
					strongly resonates with the exemplary laud found in Sing. In Table 3 reported
						below, I further 
					test that laud-caution distinction in examining the lauds included and excluded
						from Poems, thus 
					beginning to explore inter-edition resonance between Poems
					and Leaves. I next do so with 
					poems I take to be cautionary (Table 4). Those annotations I offer in response to
						Q2. I continue 
					that rippling-outward investigation to examine resonance in two other thematic
						groups identified by Rossetti toward answering Q3 and Q4. The first cluster,
						Walt Whitman, holds most of the 
					Calamus content excerpted for Poems. The second cluster I
						examine is Rossetti’s Chants 
					Democratic, which introduces his Whitman edition. I examine the first poem of
						that cluster, Starting from Paumanok (SP), in particular. 
			
			
			
				Correlations of the Laudatory Calamus Included and Excluded
					in Poems
				
					
					1
					2
					3
					4
					5
					6
					7
					8
					9
					10
					11
					12
					13
				
				
					Sing
					.49
					.75
					.66
					.11
					.08
					.45
					.58
					.11
					.02
					.03
					.15
					.16
					.01
				
				
					Asong
					.46
					.51
					.33
					.09
					.15
					.44
					.38
					.32
					.10
					.09
					.04
					.28
					.03
				
				
					Record
					.16
					.45
					.24
					.17
					.19
					.40
					.78
					.05
					.01
					.04
					.01
					.09
					.01
				
				
					Stranger
					.29
					.49
					.31
					.03
					.03
					.16
					.39
					.08
					.06
					.03
					.05
					.10
					.02
				
				
					Yearn
					.15
					.08
					.24
					.09
					.01
					.02
					.12
					.01
					.01
					.10
					.09
					.20
					.01
				
				
					Pen
					.15
					.40
					.15
					.15
					.21
					.56
					.75
					.002
					.17
					.05
					.01
					.20
					.12
				
				
					Dreamed
					.01
					.04
					.06
					.02
					.04
					.14
					.21
					.05
					.004
					.004
					.01
					.001
					.01
				
				
					Full
					.37
					.07
					.22
					.01
					.01
					.02
					.11
					.01
					.01
					.004
					.012
					.001
					.01
				
			
			
				Correlations of the Laudatory Calamus Included and Excluded
					in Poems continued.Excluded Calamus content: 1=Paths, 2=Scented,
					3=RootsLeaves, 4= NotHeat, 5=Orgies, 6=Behold, 7=Louisiana, 8=Charged,
					9=Prairie, 10=Clinging, 11=Glimpse, 12=Promise,
					13=Sailor, 14=Machine, 15=EastWest, 16=Leaf, 17=Eternal, 18=Shadow, 19=Silently
				
					
					14
					15
					16
					17
					18
					19
				
				
					Sing
					.11
					.04
					16
					17
					18
					19
				
				
					Asong
					.27
					.01
					.10
					.14
					.08
					.36
				
				
					Record
					.08
					.01
					.01
					.08
					.03
					.08
				
				
					Stranger
					.05
					.04
					.47
					.10
					.27
					.42
				
				
					Yearn
					.01
					.01
					.08
					.02
					.49
					.12
				
				
					Pen
					.03
					.03
					-.01
					.02
					.49
					.04
				
				
					Dreamed
					.004
					.01
					.02
					.01
					.01
					.35
				
				
					Full
					.004
					.01
					.02
					.01
					.01
					.02
				
			
			

			
			Q2: How related are Calamus poems across editions?
			Sing and Scented (.75) most dramatically resonated in the laudatory Calamus
				content Rossetti included and excluded. Both poems are united in praise for
				lovers and in the speaker’s unique ability to issue that praise. More strongly
				at the level of trope, these poems advance through catalogues of the natural
				world tokens the speaker imparts to those whom he finds have joined him in
				approaching a liminal space defined as much by nature as desire. The leaves and
				roots of Scented are more directly troped as the pages of a book springing
				from the speaker that will yet be better regarded in the days to come. In Sing
				those leaves take many forms: lilac, pine branches, moss from a live-oak,
				laurel, maple, chestnut, wild orange and the calamus root, which is the token
				of comrades (19). These other tokens of the natural world the speaker dispenses
				as each follower needs and as he desires. He only reserves the Calamus, root to
				them that love as I myself am capable of loving (28).
			The strongest thematic resonance between the poems is the poet commissioned to
				represent that love of comrades that will make possible a truly inclusive and
				fostering democracy. In Scented that commission is expected to enable
				immortal reverberations through the States (25) and will one day be seen when
				comrades can dissipate this entire show of appearance (36). That coming
				enlightenment is more immediately sensed in Sing as the troop that gathers
				around the speaker in his wildwood walkabouts. This troop comes to take on the
				presence of a cloud of witnesses (Hebrews 12:1) because
				it is comprised by dear friends dead or alive (13). These friends surround the
				speaker, at once commissioning him and in need of the tokens he dispenses.
			The poems are also joined in their strong resonance with other poems in the
				Calamus
			sequence. Of the 16 that may be understood to be laudatory, two are strongly
				resonant 
			(RootsLeaves and Louisiana) in comparison to Sing, while three others
			demonstrate moderate resonance between aggregate cosine relations between .25 and
				.49. 
			Scented resonates strongly with one of the laudatory poems Rossetti included in
					Poems, while moderately so with three others. The
				near-zero correspondences of Calamus content occur most generally in the
				briefest poems (e.g., Full and Prairie). 
			I considered the moderate resonance of Full with Paths (.38). This final poem
				of Calamus proposes that the Whitman who was once 40 years old in 1859, then
				visible in public and as a poet of these States, would be invisible when the
				imagined reader finds his poems a century or more later. That second life for
				Whitman is in the reader’s imagination, Fancying how happy you were if I could
				be with you (8). The complement for the first poem of the sequence comes also
				in 1859, as the speaker is Bequeathing hence types of athletic love (14). In
				establishing the project of the Calamus sequence and in anticipation of the
				imagined reader finding it one day, the speaker Proceed[s] for all who are or
				have been young men,/To tell the secret of my nights and days,/To celebrate the
				need of comrades (16-18). That moderate resonance between its place as a laud
				for a comradely literature that Rossetti included in Poems,
				 Full bears no greater relation to the excluded, far more overtly amorous
				content of Calamus. 

			
				Correlations of the Cautionary Calamus Content Included and
					Excluded in Poems
				
					
					NewPerson
					Trickle
					Frailest
					Earth
					Sometimes
					Western
				
				
					Whoever
					.28
					.18
					.03
					.04
					.19
					.12
				
				
					Heaving
					.09
					.03
					.01
					.01
					.09
					.01
				
				
					Terrible
					.03
					.05
					.01
					.08
					.01
					.06
				
				
					DayNight
					.03
					.02
					.01
					.02
					.03
					.02
				
				
					Peruse
					.02
					.01
					.01
					.01
					.01
					.01
				
				
					Multi
					.01
					.01
					.01
					.01
					.01
					.02
				
			
			In these poems that might all be considered cautionary, there is at best only near
				moderate resonance. Whoever provides exempla of that point in its various ways
				of figuring caution. Its speaker cautions that he is not what a suitor supposes,
				for the way to meet him is at best uncertain and even destructive. That suitor
				would have to become a novitiate in order for the speaker to become your sole
				and exclusive standard (8), that requiring the suitor to abandon The whole
				past theory of [his] life and all conformity to the lives around [him] (10).
				Because the courtship would require so much, the speaker warns away the suitor,
				unless he is willing to seek him by stealth in some wood for trial (11). Only
				in the marginal spaces of Paths will the suitor find the speaker as the new
				husband or comrade (21). The peril of approaching the Beloved is equal to
				that of reading his poems. Those poems, moreover, are evasive, for it is not
				for what I put into it that I have written this book (32). 
			Of all the poems that may be considered cautionary in the sequence, NewPerson is
				the most resonant with Whoever (.28). That relation is weakly moderate, but is
				best underscored by warning a suitor against his suppositions. To press that
				point, the speaker of NewPerson asks the suitor if he believes friendship to
				be an unalloy’d satisfaction (5). That metallurgical framing of friendship
				suggests an unlikely but marvelous union of materials. In New Person those are
				suggested by regard for trust, fidelity and heroism, all of which the speaker
				offers as instances of maya, or illusion. That difficult union in Trickle is
				troped by the wounds the speaker receives made to free you whence you were
				prison’d (4). Those wounds also attend the confessional, sacrificial sense of
				authorship summoned in Whoever, for they Stain every page, stain every song I
				sing, every word I say (8). Yet, because the caution voiced in each poem is so
				differently troped, there is only a weak correlative resonance (.18). 
			That capacity of the trope to level thematic resonance is clearly demonstrated in
				the near zero correlations of Multi with the cautionary Calamus content
				Rossetti excluded from Poems. Multi congratulates the
				suitor for identifying the speaker by secret and divine signs (2), even as the
				poem cautions that recognition of a comrade can only proceed by such faint
				indirections (6). The obstacle in recognition catalogued by NewPerson is
				expecting a more socially scripted, idealistic relationship. Common to both
				poems is the speaker acknowledging the interest of another at the cost of
				prioritizing the Beloved above all others. Yet, because the poems so differently
				address courtship and even recognition by another, they bear almost no
				measurable relation (.03).

			Q3: What is the relation of the Calamus content Rossetti sampled to Elemental
				Drifts in Rossetti’s Walt Whitman group? 
			
			
				Resonance of Calamus and Ebb’d Part 1
				
					Ebb’d
					PathsUntrodden
					ScentedHerbage
					RootsLeaves
					Behold
				
				
					1 — her castaways
					
						for all who are, or men have been, young men
					
					the many passing by 
					
					
						Scents brought to men and women from the wild
							woods
					
					
						a Manhattanese
					
				
				
					2 — hoarse and sibilant
						the Soul of the man I speak for
					
					
						immortal reverberations through the States
					
					
						To hear the sibyl one must nourish love.
					
					The poet as sibyl, drawing only those who ready to hear.
					
				
				
					3 — seized by the spirit
					
						the soul of man I speak for rejoices in
							comrades
					
					
						O slender leaves! O blossoms of my blood!
					
					The prompt to wander wild-woods
					A robust kiss
				
				
					4 — likenesses 
					
						the life that exhibits itself
					
					
						That you hide in these shifting forms of life
					
					Poems as roots reaching into the reader
					Nonchalance dramatized in a kiss offered and returned
				
				
					Average cosine 
					.40
					.53
					.55
					.31
				
			
			As I followed the resonance of Calamus into Ebb’d, in Rossetti’s Walt
				Whitman cluster, I selected passages from the first two sections of Ebb’d I
				thought might have counterparts in the Calamus content. I also shifted my
				analysis from looking at the thematic resonance of entire poems to passages I
				sensed following a rhetoric of disclosure modeled by portions of Ebb’d and
				SP. In common for Tables 5-8, I first briefly outline the structure of those
				non-Calamus poems Rossetti selected. I then examine their counterparts to the
				Calamus excluded in Poems and so note that thematic
				continuity if I could identify it. I italicize those
				structural counterparts when suggested by the very language Whitman employed. In
				Table 5, I could find Ebb’d counterparts in four Calamus poems excluded from
					Poems, but did not find the Ebb’d structure of
				part 2 as uniformly resonant with Calamus content examined in Table 6. In
				measuring the similarity I detected, I gathered passages in the Calamus
				content I found resonant with the non-Calamus content. That resulted in the
				final row of Tables 5-8, in which I report the aggregated cosine of that
				multi-passage similarity for each Calamus poem in relation to either Ebb’d
				or SP passages. All passage to passage comparisons were either moderate or
				strong in magnitude. Those far more consistently stable statements of thematic
				resonance resulted from the tighter focus each demanded. While the poem to poem
				comparisons reported in Tables 2-4 are useful in globally examining the
				laud-caution tendency I find in Calamus, the passage-driven analysis of Tables
				5-8 forced me to identify precisely how I found excluded Calamus content to be
				in dialogue with material in Poems.
			
			The castaways in Edd’d trope all who wander, have wandered and will wander the
				beach. While Paumanok is a birth site for Whitman who hears a fierce old
				mother in the surf and embraces a father in the sand, Paumanok is more urgently
				an elemental site of creation. The castaways of Edd’d then may also be found
				in the young and old men whom Whitman addresses in Paths as much as in the
				many passing by (6) the poems Whitman tropes as scented herbage, the scents of
				foliage brought to those wandering the wild-wood, or the Manhattanese come with
				a robust kiss for the Swarthy speaker. The sibilant surf of Ebb’d summons
				the standards published and unpublished of Paths. In Scented the speaker
				offers sibilant utterances in those immortal reverberations through the States
				(25). That revealing spirit requires sympathetic magic, if not also sacrifice,
				in RootsLeaves as its speaker promises the reader that love-buds will open If
				you bring the warmth of the sun to them (9). In Behold the Whitman speaker
				performs the sibilant function by drawing to him only those worthy in their
				nonchalance. The spirit seizing the speaker of Ebb’d may also be understood,
				alternately, as the soul rejoicing in comrades in Paths, while the spirit most
				manifestly reveals itself in the poems of Scented speaker. Spirit seizure
				prompts a robust kiss in Behold, while in RootsLeaves it is sensed in the
				walkabouts of wild places. At Paumanok Whitman finds likenesses of himself
				strewn on the beach. In Paths those likenesses are resonant with standards
				exhibiting themselves as much in the drawing room as in the margins of
				pond-waters. The Scented speaker finds likeness itself blurring the
				boundaries between life and death, while Whitman’s catalogue of woodland wonders
				in RootsLeaves are likened to poems exhorting love for the reader whoever you
				are (7). Nonchalance is likened to the urge to bestow and return a kiss between
				comrades in Behold.
			
			
				Resonance of Calamus and Ebb’d Part 2 in Rossetti’s Walt
					Whitman GroupItalicized passage represent poem quotes.
				
					Ebb’d 2
					PathsUntrodden
					ScentedHerbage
					RootsLeaves
					Louisiana
				
				
					1 — I know not
					
					Writing to know, if only in retrospect
					Knowledge only comes in time and practice
					
				
				
					2 — the dirge, the voices of men and women wreck’s
					the speaker escaping the clank of the world
					
					The dirge heard in recognition of death inseparably entwined with
						life
					Men and women sufficiently dissatisfied with the conventional world
						to seek authenticity in the natural
					
				
				
					3 — merge myself
					
						the margins of pond-waters
					
					Immersion within poems both bitter and beautiful
					A woodland walk
					The poet as a live-oak 
				
				
					4 — the real Me stands yet untouch’d
					Unpublished standards
					The authentic self is that behind the mask of
							materials
					
					
					
				
				
					5 — have not really understood anything
					
					That real reality hidden among forms of life
					
					
					The poet disavowing the utility of his own trope
				
				
					Average cosine 
					.33
					.70
					.32
					.33
				
			
			
			The speaker of Ebb’d is less a spokesperson for Everyman than Just Another
				Person as seemingly strewn and randomly assembled in the detritus washed ashore.
				That speaker makes no qualification for his ignorance at the start of the second
				section. His not-knowing is that of other men and women deposited on shore by
				the surf mother of whom they did not ask to be born. His oppression is daring to
				speak sense to his condition; more so to ours: before all my arrogant poems the
				real Me stands yet untouch’d, untold, altogether unreach’d (28). That abashed
				humility finds counterpart in the Scented speaker who writes to be perused
				best afterwards as much by his readers as himself. The RootsLeaves speaker
				claims time and practice precede knowledge, for the intuited revelation of a
				poem is only seed material for that greater to come. The dirge the Scented
				speaker enjoins comes in recognition of our common end as both bitter and
				beautiful. In RootsLeaves that dirge is the dissatisfaction with the
				conventional world that prompts men and women to wander in wild spaces. In
				Louisiana the speaker again senses himself in another natural world wonder: a
				solitary live-oak rude, unbending, lusty (4). He, then, disavows the trope
				because he could not prosper as solitarily since he thinks of little else (9)
				than of friends. That unknown, authentic self of Ebb’d seeks the unpublished
				standards in Paths. Death hiding in these shifting forms of life in
				Scented does so for its own reasons beyond what the speaker can sense in other
				than the material world obscuring the real reality (33). 
			The thematic resonance above identified brings evidence for the possibility that
				the excluded Calamus content is more largely at play in Poems than has been previously acknowledged. However, that resonance
				indexed by the aggregate cosine relations of one poem to another simultaneously
				illustrates that the thematic resonance suggested by words’ distributional sense
				may and may not find complement between poems. The self-confessed ignorance in
				Ebb’d only speaks in part to the confidence of a speaker dismissing some
				standards but affirming others in Paths or proposing a trope for himself in
				Louisiana and then resolving the poem by dismissing it.

			Q4: Does the excluded content show resonance with the evangel-poem Starting from
				Paumanok?
			In the commentary below, I annotate hypertextual inquiry in responding to poem
				excerpts and ideas reported in Table 8. I wanted to know if Calamus content is
				resonant in the non-Calamus poems Rossetti assembled to represent Whitman to a
				UK Victorian audience. I selected Starting from Paumanok (SP) because the
				sequence had always provided for Whitman a prelude-like purpose: from these origins I proceed because I was formed to do so.
				The sequence also serves as a proxy for another prelude poem, the Song of
				Myself sequence Rossetti chose neither to excerpt nor include in whole. In
				particular, I wanted to know if the excluded Calamus content was resonant with
				the poetics presented in SP.
			While I could have more exhaustively catalogued such passage to passage resonance,
				I opted to look at only those SP passages I found to be thematically present.
				Accordingly, I confine my annotation to SP7 of Poems,
				which, as reported in Table 8, is either moderately or strongly
				semantically resonant with the content from four Calamus poems Rossetti
				excluded. While the cosine similarity score reported refers to the entire set of
				words’ relationality from one passage to another, I reported the textual prompts
				I found thematically resonant. 
			In the frame of Calamus content, I find four components realized in SP7:
			
				An orienting poetic sprung from the natural world: I
						will make poems of materials
				
				Stating subject matter: I will sing the song of
						companionship
				
				Consequents for that decision: I will therefore let
						flame from the burning fires that were threatening to consume me
				
				Statement of commission: And who but I should be the
						poet of comrades?
				
			
			
			
			
				Correlations of Starting from Paumanok, 7 and Excluded
					Calamus Content
				
					SP7 component
					Paths
					Scented
					RootsLeaves
					Behold
				
				
					1
					In the growth by margins of pond-waters
					Herbage, roots, leaves
					
						Breast-Sorrel, pinks of love, fingers
					
					Swarthy face, these gray eyes
				
				
					2 
					Joy in comrades
					
						I write, to be perused best afterwards
					
					
						Scents brought to men and women
					
					
						Comes one of Manhattanese
					
				
				
					3
					
						No longer abash’d
					
					
						I will say what I have to say by itself
					
					
					
						Give a kiss in return
					
				
				
					4
					
						Manly attachment
					
					
						Sound myself and comrades only
					
					
						Love-buds put before you
					
					
						American comrades land and sea
					
				
				
					Average cosine 
					.47
					.82
					.46
					.41
				
			
			The poems found within the excluded Calamus content reported in Table 7 entirely
				spring from natural world settings. That may be done to naturalize or license
				the prohibited content of the same-sex love that may be only indirectly named in
					Poems. Perhaps, too, the settings resonate with the
				larger Romantic sensibility of turning toward the natural world as a site of
				authenticity. More certain is this: SP7 demonstrates either a high moderate or
				strong resonance with this group of Calamus poems. In all of the poems, the
				speaker identifies Nature as the spiritualized complement of human love.
				Further, each of the speakers are declaratively bold for manly love and
				camaraderie. Each speaker, moreover, can be identified as a moral spokesman. In
				Paths the speaker is concerned for the standard of a fostering companionship
				that can feed a soul. The false standards of pleasures, profits, conformities
				(4) in Paths have long enough stifled and choked (51) the Scented speaker.
				The common motivation of seeking companionship enfolds men and women in
				RootsLeaves, as well as young persons wandering out in the fields when
				winter breaks up (6). The Calamus poems become Love-buds put before you and
				within you whoever you are (7). That community united by the need for
				companionship fosters love in Behold, whose speaker returns the kiss of a
				Manhattanese and allows it to become natural and nonchalant (7). Companionship
				is so central of a standard in Louisiana that its speaker confesses that he
				thinks of little else than his dear friends (8-9). 
			The template or form of Calamus resonance I found apparent in SP7 is the
				structure of resonance suggested only by that section. That suggested by SP13
				takes own on its own rhetorical pattern and within the same magnitude of
				resonance found in SP7: 
			
				A figure of democracy summoned 
				Whitman insisting that this figure sings for all
				Poems spring from whatever adheres and goes forward (163)
				The bard of personality (164) will declare all worthy and equal, even
					while unifying our perceptions of separation
				All poems and all things reference the soul
			
			
			
				Correlations of Starting from Paumanok, 13 and Excluded
					Calamus Content
				
					
						SP13 component
					
					PathsUntrodden
					ScentedHerbage
					RootsLeaves
					BeholdSwarthy
				
				
					1
					
						for all who are, or men have been, young men
					
					Death as the great leveler, the real reality
					
					
					
						American comrades
					
				
				
					2
					
						the Soul of the man I speak for
					
					
						an example to lovers
					
					
					an I who can return a kiss in the public room, or on the crossing of the street, or on the
							ship’s deck
					
				
				
					3
					
						Bequeathing, hence, types of athletic love
					
					Herbage as poems to be perused afterwards;
						death and love are the perennial subjects of lovers
					
						If you become the aliment and the wet, [roots
						and leaves] will become flowers, fruits, tall
							branches and trees.
					
					Nonchalance 
				
				
					4
					
					
					the universal you as object of address
					The speaker’s use of we
					
				
				
					5
					Standards offered and reformed to feed the soul
					that soul aware of death ascending even to the
							atmosphere of lovers
					
					
					
				
				
					Average cosine 
					.44
					.74
					.47
					.26
				
			
			These poems excluded from Poems resonate within the
				rhetorical pattern of SP13. Rather than invoke a Ma Femme figure of democracy
				in these poems, Whitman implies he is such a speaker. The subjects of these
				poems — young and old men, the men and women who go a-Maying, American comrades
				— number among Ma Femme’s brood beyond us and of us . Death is the
				personified counterpart to Ma Femme in Scented, or the real reality awaiting
				all behind the masks we employ to be perceived (33). However, Death is addressed
				rather than addresses in Scented. Whitman’s various poem-level speakers serve
				as proxies to Ma Femme in this group of poems. The commonality of her brood
				Whitman finds in our moral condition of lovers’ mixed
				desires to increase and be relieved from passion (Scented), and in what should
				one day be a commonplace exchange of intimacy in the giving and return of a
				kiss. The what goes forward of these poems is that athletic love (14), the
				tendency of all poems to be understood best in retrospect (Scented), the
				generative imperative seen in plant life and sensed in love, and the nonchalance
				of all enabled to express that love (Behold).
			The two rhetorical patterns discussed reveal strengths and weaknesses of the
				associative reading method punctuated by similarity scoring. First, any pattern
				is an inference that may or may not fit the sound and sense of a poem. Second,
				that intuitive sense of fit I came to only by the strength of semantic resonance
				underscored by similarity scoring. In both Whitman editions considered for the
				present study, Calamus content follows SP. Yet, in asking after the
				foundational place for the Calamus content in Whitman’s work, I had to scroll
				up on a monitor and turn back pages from the Calamus poems to examine their
				resonance in SP. The structural patterns of Whitman’s evangel-poem preceding
				even Song of Myself simply offer possible expressions of similar content, even
				while suggesting the merit of a poetic sequence. The four poems excluded from
					Poems exist in dialogue with one another, by
				Whitman’s arrangement in the 1860 Leaves of Grass, as
				much as do the 20 components of SP. 

			Discussion
			This study refused to remain that of an almost quaintly removed drama of a
				self-styled, self-taught 19th century American poet trying to secure a British
				readership through a sympathetic critic, editor and advocate. In reviewing the
				similar concerns — and sticking points — for commentators removed from one
				another by more than 150 years, I sensed the present relevance of Poems as a study in authorship aided by reception and
				collaboration. 
			The author I sensed strode between the very different 1867 Leaves and Poems on two broad pathways. The
				first is his unconditional egalitarianism; the second is by daring and
				confessing to the hardships of loving others unrequited. That difficult love
				perhaps most poignantly surveyed resides in Calamus. The love-longings Whitman
				knew for both his own dear friends  and an adoring reading
				constituency escaped … from the pleasures, profits, conformities,/Which too
					long I was offering to feed my soul . He confessed this unrequited
				love in his career-long wooing of an audience he wished would grant him license
				him to speak and be read beyond his own span of days. The authorship he desired,
				however, had to be granted by others. 
			In his longing for acknowledgment and desire to speak authentically, Whitman keeps
				company with a radically different, internationally-received and yet equally
				idealistic Salman Rushdie reflecting on The Satanic
					Verses (1989). Despite the novelty and
				importance of their respective projects, each was stymied by the same narrowly
				moralistic reception that all but throttled authors set apart by a century. In
				retrospect, telling the story of the life in hiding he bore with the name Joseph
				Anton, Rushdie came to understand that his troubling and breakthrough novel
				possessed its own life story: 
			 When a book leaves its author’s desk it changes. Even before anyone has read it,
				before 
			 eyes other than its creator’s have looked upon a single phrase, it is
			 irretrievably altered. It 
			 has become a book that can be read, that no longer belongs
				to its maker. … It will make 
			 its journey through the world and there is no longer anything the author can do
			 about it. 
			 … The book has gone out into the world and the world has remade it . 
			That seeming agency of a literary creation, and certainly that of its readers,
				troubled Whitman from Poems forward. On his deathbed,
				Whitman eagerly awaited the fourth slimmer volume of Leaves
				that each of his editors promised would entice and prepare readers for his
				accretive, ever growing life work published in nine editions from 1855 to 1892.
				Folsom (1991) recounted how Whitman wanted to call the last sampling selected by
				Edmund Clarence Stedman’s son, Arthur, Leaves, Junior in
				ironic resignation to a literary culture dominated by anthologies and
				textbooks.
			I follow a reception-aided component of authorship into our present hypertextual
				age. As Rushdie found, Satanic Verses had become became
				radically separate texts for those who would silence it as heretical and for
				those who would defend it as an exemplar of free thought advanced in an open
				society. Leaves as a literary work cannot be understood
				apart from its various value-laden receptions. While it can be found in various
				complete editions surveying its development from 1855 to 1892, it also is
				partitioned in editions of Calamus generally faithful to the clusters Whitman
				oversaw. Simultaneously, Calamus annotates and is annotated by a group of
				contemporary photographers whose common subject matter is manly love . Perhaps equally unanticipated by Whitman is the present
				availability of Walt Whitman’s Whisper: 36 Sex Poems
				 , which brings together the most explicit material from
				Calamus and Children of Adam. Indeed, Leaves has
				tracked vistas Whitman could only distantly imagine in a future Manhattan, where
				only the frequent and swift flash of eyes offering me love could repay him
				for his candor . 
			I offer the terms hypertext and resonance
			for another age of reception in which  observed an
				inadequacy of descriptives in literary criticism for a way of speaking to the
				intersection of art and history. Hypertext, that digital device often shaded in
				blue, disrupts linearity and underscores the intertextuality that Nelson (1965)
				identified in composition. Resonance approximates the
				relatedness of texts grouped by rhetorical function. However, the relationality
				I sense among poems represents but a figure of the zodiac made visible not only
				by the proximity of starry points in the universe of texts of assembled, but
				also by their dynamic gravitational interactions. Other zodiac formations are
				surely present.
			Any set of corresponding passages may be indexed within the researcher’s concerns
				by the field of associations believed to be most germane to the constitution of
				those passages. Because I focused on the selected Whitman that Rossetti
				presented to a Victorian readership, I restricted the semantic field under
				consideration to Poems and the 29 poems of Calamus
				excluded. However, if I had asked how germane was Poems
				to the assemblage of subsequent Whitman editions, then that semantic field
				would have been radically different, as would each of the proximal weights a
				term possesses in its relation to other terms. The passage to passage
				correspondences I report uniformly exist as but singular expressions of a
				semantic relatedness only within Poem’s space.
				Accordingly, those statements of greater and lesser resonance can also be
				understood as hyperlinks that at once disrupt and enrich
				a particularly orchestrated reading experience.
			The Whitman Archive, curiously, prompts a hypertextual sensibility because its
				print predecessor imprints the e-edition posted by the Center. The structural
				trope of book structure argues for its status as a self-contained object
				, however proximate are other self-contained entities of e-book
				editions. Despite all of its archival duty to Whitman’s original print editions,
				the more dynamic sense of hypertext the reader must
				provide. It is the same that Whitman himself experienced in his various
				histories as the author of Live Oak, with Moss, Calamus and the 1855 Leaves. 
			
			In tracing the evolution of the computer understood only to relieve humans of the
				drudgework of thinking to opening up a new sort of thinking in the humanities,
				McCarty (2012) proposes that the most important question before us is how we can
				benefit the public imagination with a focus on literature akin to employing
				telescopes in surveying the heavens. The justification of our work is, then, is
				how we can contribute to the well-being of a citizenry. Examining the rich
				semantic dialogue between editions produces its own meta-edition of that
				enriched encounter that exists outside of thinking of authors as masterminds
				behind particular print editions. It invites dialogue with present readers, who
				ultimately can test their guiding assumptions within the radically descriptive
				terrain of literary texts of interest. 
			Hypertext is a reader response strategy to the extent it engages with concerns
				greater than a single reader’s experience with a text. Hypertext, in spirit,
				delimits and makes possible the interpretive community to which a critical
				interpretation appeals. However, annotating the mere presence of textual
				dynamics is only the precursor for making an argument for the utility of doing
				so. Regardless of the inherent properties deemed to be at work in a literary
				text, I grant that readers create readerly texts, or opportunities, to comment
				on those matters prompting interest after Fish (1980), who I first knew as a
				Miltonist aware of the various interpretive camps in dialogue with one another
				through the ages (1971). That reader-centered text-making I certainly employed
				by following the literary rationale of a poetic sequence identified within and
				between Whitman editions. 
			The hazard of any readerly writing of a literary text realized in interpretation
				is researcher’s bias, or seeing what we wish to see based on the expectations of
				inquiry. I argue that the distributed sense attending word usage brings a
				necessary check to researcher’s bias in its extra-human capacity to index the
				text created for interpretation, even if the text prompting interpretation
				springs from one that any reader can encounter — regardless of who reads it and
				for what purposes. It restores to texts their statuses as objects in the world,
				however much each is a puzzle to which only the individual reader can respond
				and however each reader responds as a member of an interpretive community. This
				much should ease reception of those who believe the physical text of a poem is
				sacrosanct . So does the digital humanist in recognizing the
				plethora of texts so often available. The danger inherent to reading
				hypertextually is that which attends any method: insisting that the marvel I see
				is more urgent than those others have seen. I can write whatever text I wish to see in the star field of word to word
				associations revealed by cosines. Simultaneously, and to my credit as a
				reader-researcher, I must follow that associative rationale into the very theory
				or discourse I believe constitutes the marvels I sense. 
			The largest stake of the present study is demonstrating a method that permits
				literary texts to speak within their own assembled star fields of meaning
				without insisting that they speak only as prescribed by an interpretive
				community. In that charge I put my understanding of literary indirection to the
				test. Whitman’s lauds and cautions in the Calamus sequence are as likely to
				motivate some poems as they are to exclusively define the lyricism of others.
				More important than those mechanics of presentation, however, is the terrain
				mapped by the word to word proximal semantics. Despite Rossetti excluding most
				of the Calamus sequence, its sometimes laudatory, sometimes cautious take on
				manly love pervades Poems, if only in the permissible
				sense of the love of comrades underlying the radical inclusion Whitman expected
				would be foundational to a new republic. Poems, then,
				succeeded in offering the first sample tolerably fair chance [Whitman] has had
				of making his way with English readers on his own showing 13 years after
				Rossetti learned of the 1855 Leaves .
				It presently succeeds in pointing toward a Whitman larger than a particular
				edition of his poems. Through Poems I find both the
				tireless speaker for democratic inclusion and a speaker, at times, exhausted by
				the indirection required to woo the Beloved. 
