Title:  Computer Vision and the Creation of a Database of Printers’
                    Ornaments
Volume:  015
Issue:  1
Date:  21 May 2021
Abstract:  
                
                This article describes the creation of a database of over 1 million images of
                    eighteenth-century printers’ ornaments (or fleurons) using computer vision, and
                    how the database was refined using machine learning. The successes and
                    limitations of the method used are discussed, and the purpose of the database
                    for research in the humanities is outlined. The article concludes with a summary
                    of recent developments in the project, which include the addition of a visual
                    search function provided by the Seebibyte Project. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                Throughout the hand press period (roughly from 1440–1830), many printed books
                    were decorated with printers’ ornaments and ornamental type.A Version of
                        this paper was first given at the Göttingen Dialog in Digital Humanities,
                        Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, 2016. These have all but vanished
                    from modern books, with the exception of the small number still printed on
                    private hand presses. The term printers’ ornaments encompasses wood- and
                    metalcut blocks, where designs were cut by hand (see , , and
                        ) as well as cast metal blocks, and
                    copies of hand-cut woodblocks made from molten type-metal (a process known as
                    dabbing, recently investigated by 
                    and ). Books were also decorated
                    with fleurons, or ornamental pieces of type (also known as printers’ flowers),
                    which could be used individually for a tiny flourish, or arranged into larger,
                    complex patterns. The history and use of fleurons has been documented by , , and . Ornaments and fleurons were used to
                    decorate title pages, the beginnings of chapters or sections (headpieces), blank
                    spaces between sections (tailpieces), and initial letters (using blocks,
                    arrangements of fleurons, or factotums).A block with a central hole in
                        which a type letter could be inserted.
                
                Printers’ ornaments of all kinds are useful as evidence in bibliographical
                    studies. Those cut by hand are unique, and although casts were reproducible,
                    they could develop unique patters of wear or damage over time. This means that
                    in the right circumstances ornaments can be used to identify when, where, and by
                    whom a book, pamphlet, or other printed item was produced. Books and printed
                    ephemera did not always include the name of their printer, or the date or
                    location of printing. Sometimes these details were omitted to conceal the
                    printer’s identity, in the case of a controversial work or pirated printing.
                    Most books include a date and location, but often the publisher’s name(s), and
                    the names of the booksellers who stocked it, are given instead of the printer’s
                    (the publisher was the book’s financial backer and marketer). Pamphlets and
                    leaflets are less likely to have complete production information than books. It
                    was very common for a printer to put his or her name to some but not all of
                    their output. A representative example is the eighteenth-century printer John
                    Darby II, who put his name to approximately 230 books between 1707 and 1732, but
                    probably printed over 1000 items during this period.Darby's signed output
                        is estimated from the The English Short Title Catalogue (ESTC), and . When
                        printers have been subjected to comprehensive study, their output has been
                        found to be in the thousands rather than the hundreds. See . If the items signed by a
                    specific printer contain ornaments, however, we begin to attribute unsigned
                    items. If an ornament is uniquely identifiable (not a cast, or a cast with
                    unique wear), and it can be found in multiple books with a known printer, we can
                    infer that it belonged to that printer. When it appears in an item with no known
                    printer, then, we can attribute the item to the printer who owned the ornament.
                    When making printer identifications in this way, it is good practice to find as
                    many examples as possible, since occasionally printers lent each other
                    ornaments, or shared printing jobs with one another. When several ornaments
                    known to have been owned by a single printer appear in an un-signed item,
                    however, we can identify the printer with some certainty. If an item is undated,
                    or the location of its production is unknown, the identification of the printer
                    can usually offer some useful information. Fleurons can also help in printer
                    identification, using a slightly different method. It is normally impossible to
                    distinguish between multiple casts of the same fleuron, but the arrangements
                    into which they were combined can be identifiable, because more complex
                    arrangements were sometimes kept as standing type and used in multiple books.
                    When this occurred, they are good indicators of when and where an item was
                    printed, and can potentially date items very exactly, as shown by . It is possible that the
                    identification of a book’s printer, or the date or location of printing, can
                    also help us to identify unknown authors, or confirm or refute suspected
                    authorship. 
                Printers’ ornaments and fleurons are potentially very useful as bibliographical
                    evidence. They are also neglected resources for the study of graphic design and
                    book production. Their role in the reading experience during the hand press
                    period has received very little attention. Samuel Richardson’s novel Clarissa (1748) is the only book to have attracted
                    serious attention for its fleurons, in particular from , and , largely because
                    Richardson himself was a printer of particular creativity. Despite their
                    potential as evidence and their interest for research, printers’ ornaments are
                    seldom used because they have been difficult to locate. Unlike illustrations,
                    the presence of ornaments is not routinely noted in library catalogues, and they
                    have not been tagged in digital repositories. To identify printers using
                    evidence from ornaments and fleurons, it has been necessary to search books page
                    by page. The mass digitisation of books has made searching page by page more
                    convenient, but it is still a time-consuming task. Occasionally scholars like
                        , , and  have
                    produced catalogues of the ornaments belonging to individual printers, but these
                    have been the work of years, or decades.
                Fleuron: A Database of Eighteenth-Century Printers’
                        Ornaments was created to speed up the process of locating and
                    studying printers’ ornaments. In 2014, Gale Cengage announced their intention to
                    make their content available for data mining projects. Gale Cengage are the
                    publishers of Gale Digital Collections, which includes the repository of
                    digitised eighteenth-century books, Eighteenth-Century Collections Online (ECCO)
                        (http://www.gale.com/primary-sources/eighteenth-century-collections-online/).
                    Together, Parts I and II of ECCO contain over 33 million page images from over
                    150,000 titles (in 200,000 volumes). ECCO has an emphasis on books in English,
                    but also includes items published throughout Europe and America, and in many
                    languages. All 33 million page images (2TB of data) were supplied to Cambridge
                    University on a hard drive. It was previously possible to download only 250 page
                    images at a time from ECCO, so the provision of 33 million page images in a
                    single location presented new possibilities for the location and extraction of
                    printers’ ornaments. This paper describes how a team of researchers used
                    computer vision and machine learning to create a database of more than 1 million
                    printers’ ornaments from the 33 million page images supplied by Gale
                    Cengage.
                Computer vision has been applied to printers’ ornaments before. In 1997, the
                    library of the University of Lausanne and the Université Paul Valéry,
                    Montpellier, created Passe Partout, a searchable database of printers ornaments,
                    described by 
                    (http://bbf.enssib.fr/consulter/bbf-2001-05-0073-010) It is based on software
                    produced by the Federal Polytechnic School of Lausanne. Passe Partout is
                    built around archives of locally-provided data, provided by research groups
                    working on specific printing offices, predominantly in Switzerland. The images
                    can be searched using a program called T.O.D.A.I, or Typographic Ornament
                    Database and Identification, developed in 1996 and 2000 at the University of
                    Lausanne, by Stephane Michel and Heike Walter, under the supervision of Josef
                    Bigün. T.O.D.A.I uses orientation radiograms to match ornaments within the
                    database. It is documented by , and .
                    Passe Partout uses relatively small datasets of 200 DPI jpeg images. It is
                    enormously useful for studies of specific printers operating in Enlightenment
                    Switzerland (particularly in Geneva and Lausanne). 
                Recently a team at Oxford University, headed by Giles Bergel and Andrew
                    Zisserman, developed a program called ImageMatch for Bodleian Broadside Ballads
                    Online, a catalogue of single-sheet printed ballads of the hand press period.
                    900 seventeenth-century ballads were scanned by the Bodleian Library in Oxford
                    for the project. Using these high quality scans, Bergel, Zisserman, and their
                    team employed a bag-of-words approach to develop ImageMatch, which allows image
                    searching of the woodcut illustrations in the Ballads, as outlined by .
                The data from ECCO presents a very different problem from the data used by these
                    two previous projects. There is much more data in ECCO, and it is of lower
                    quality. The images used in Passe Partout and Bodleian Broadside Ballads Online
                    are direct scans of books (in greyscale), whereas the images in ECCO are
                    secondary scans of the Eighteenth-Century Microfilm Set (in black and white).
                    The original microfilms were made decades ago in libraries around the world. To
                    identify and extract printers’ ornaments from the images contained in ECCO
                    required a different approach, on a bigger scale.
                The problem of extracting printers' ornaments programmatically from scanned pages
                    can be approached in different ways, each with their relative trade-offs. The
                    approach which was taken for Fleuron, which is outlined in this paper, is a
                    morphological one. A series of morphological operations (filtering, dilution,
                    erosion, etc.) was applied to each image, followed by a series of heuristics to
                    filter out those connected components that are deemed to be printers’ ornaments.
                    This was possible because ornaments do not occur randomly on the page, and they
                    have particular size and shape constraints. For example, ornaments depicting
                    capital letters have a fairly constrained aspect ratio (roughly square) and can
                    be found at the left-most margin of the text. Other ornaments are typically
                    horizontally centred with the text and surrounded by white space. This helps us
                    to distinguish them from illustrations and blobs of text that end up glued
                    together as a result of the morphological operations. Examples of these normal
                    ornaments are shown in Figure 1.
                
                    Three examples of typical printers’ ornaments. 1a: A headpiece and factotum; 1b: Two rows of fleurons; 1c: A Tailpiece
                    
                    Three examples of typical printers’ ornaments. 1a: A headpiece and factotum; 1b: Two rows of fleurons; 1c: A Tailpiece
                
                Each page can be treated independently, so the processing can happen in parallel
                    and the implementing code can make use of all the cores on a machine. The
                    processing was implemented with OpenCV, using the following steps. Illustrations
                    of the process are shown in two different examples, in Figures 2 and 3.


                
                    Preprocessing: Conservatively cleaning up the scanned image, removing
                        small artefacts introduced by the scanning process.
                    Threshold the image to black/white such that all white pixels are a 1 and
                        all black pixels are 0.
                    Apply a series of open and closing morphological operators in order to
                        remove small (white) speckles and close small (black) holes.
                    The contours of the image are found, and they are all closed; isolated
                        contours with a bounding box area of less than 50 pixels are removed.
                    Of the remaining blobs, a rough estimate of what are just lines of text is
                        performed, and these are removed.
                    Heavily dilate the image. This will cause ornaments that are made out of
                        many different small separate elements to be joined together as a whole.
                        Note this has as side effect that the letters in the text will be glued
                        together as well. Something has to be filtered out again later.
                    Remove small, negligible contours.
                    Loop over all remaining contours and decide for each one whether it is an
                        actual ornament, a full page illustration, a blob of glued together text, or
                        something else. This decision is made based on a set of heuristics which
                        were chosen to be optimistic. It was deemed preferable to minimise the
                        chance of type two errors (false negatives) at the cost of more type one
                        errors (false positives), in order to ensure we captured as many ornaments
                        as possible. 
                    If we are not sure whether the blob under consideration is an ornament or
                        not, we try to break it up into smaller pieces using the original (undilated
                        image) as a guide and recurse.
                    If, after recursing, it is still not clear what the object is, we treat it
                        as an ornament.
                    Finally, for each ornament we extract the bounding box, merge any
                        overlapping bounding boxes and write the corresponding coordinates to a json
                        file. 
                
                
                    Illustrations of the steps described: a) thresholding to black and white; b) removing speckles and holes; c) removing text; d) heavily dilating the image; e) small elements of ornaments are joined together; f) loop over remaining contours and decide whether each is an ornament; recurse if necessary.
                    
                    Illustrations of the steps described: a) thresholding to black and white; b) removing speckles and holes; c) removing text; d) heavily dilating the image; e) small elements of ornaments are joined together; f) loop over remaining contours and decide whether each is an ornament; recurse if necessary.
                
                
                    Another illustration of the steps described in Figure 2. 
                    
                    Another illustration of the steps described in Figure 2. 
                
                Each image contained in ECCO also has an associated metadata file, and the
                    metadata for each extracted ornament was also written to the json file. The
                    metadata is originally derived from the English Short Title Catalogue, so it
                    tells us the book’s title, author, date, publisher, location, format, and ESTC
                    number (the unique identification code assigned to all books by ESTC).
                The permissive approach that we adopted was necessary because of the presence in
                    the dataset of images like those shown in Figure 4. In Figure 4a the decorated
                    initial letter has no white space to the left side, because a tight binding has
                    prevented the scanner from reaching the full margin of the page. It is also
                    placed particularly close to the text on the right. Figure 4b features two
                    arrangements of fleurons (which we need to capture), but also manuscript notes
                    and significant shadowing. Figure 4c does not contain any ornaments, but it does
                    contain several elements that might mistakenly be characterised as ornaments. It
                    is from an almanac, where the frequent appearance of tables and charts present
                    problems, as they disrupt the normal division between white space and content.
                    This page also features the problem of show-through. The cheap, thin paper means
                    that the text from overleaf is showing through to this side, creating a blurred
                    area that may be mistaken for a non-textual element, hence the code’s
                    specification that an ornament has clear bounds.
                
                    Problem images. 4a: A factotum close to the text and page boundary; 4b: Manuscript notes interfere with the image; 4c: A table, and show-through.
                    
                    Problem images. 4a: A factotum close to the text and page boundary; 4b: Manuscript notes interfere with the image; 4c: A table, and show-through.
                
                The next step was to run the program, which we named Fleuron, on all 36 million
                    page images. This was undertaken in batches using the High Performance Computing
                    cluster Darwin at Cambridge University Information
                    Services. Each batch consisted of 50 books, and it required on average 6 hours
                    for Fleuron to process a single batch on a single compute node of Darwin. It
                    took five weeks to process all the batches using between 8 and 30 nodes in
                    parallel at any given time. In total, 3,257,956 images were extracted from the
                    pages.
                Due to Fleuron’s permissive approach to image extraction, described above, there
                    were a lot of type one errors in the extracted data set. Rather than try to
                    improve Fleuron’s heuristics, a more reliable approach is to use the data
                    produced by Fleuron to train a machine learning model that can review the
                    extracted images and automatically detect which images are type one errors. A
                    random set of 5,000 images was hand labelled as either valid or
                        invalid. To represent the images, a bag-of-visual-words
                    representation was used. RootSIFT vectors (see Arandjelović and Zisserman
                        (2012)) were extracted from all of the images in the labelled data
                    set to train a visual word dictionary with 20,000 visual words. The RootSIFT
                    vectors of each image were then matched to the nearest equivalent word in the
                    dictionary to create a tf-idf vector that represents that image. With the images
                    expressed as feature vectors a machine learning model can be employed.
                The data set was split into 12000 images for training and 3000 images for testing,
                    and linear SVM was trained on the data. It is more preferable in this case to
                    classify an invalid image as valid than it is to classify a valid image as
                    invalid. Therefore, the class weights were tuned in the SVM in order to trade
                    off some recall, and gain precision. The resulting algorithm has 95.4% accuracy,
                    93.8% recall, and 99.5% precision when detecting invalid images. After applying
                    the algorithm to the rest of the data set, 1,988,841 images were classified as
                    invalid, leaving 1,269,115 images. 
                The resultant database was launched online in October 2016 at http://fleuron.lib.cam.ac.uk. It
                    is hosted by Cambridge University Library. Although the full-page images
                    collected in ECCO are kept behind a paywall, all of the content is in the public
                    domain, so the images collected in Fleuron are freely disseminated for public
                    use. The database still contains a number of type one errors that were not
                    identified in the first round of removals. The images in Fleuron are currently
                    searchable by keyword in two ways, by book or by ornament. The Book Search
                    function allows searches by author, publication place, publisher, and ESTC ID.
                    The results can be sorted according to the following genres: history and
                    geography; social sciences; general reference; law; fine arts; religion and
                    philosophy; literature and language; medicine, science and technology. The
                    Ornament Search function allows individual ornaments to be located by their
                    size, and the results to be limited according to the criteria already outlined. 
                The ornament search can be improved considerably by using content-based image
                    retrieval. This will involve using images themselves as search queries and
                    retrieving images from the data set that look identical or very similar to the
                    query image. Like the machine learning filtering employed to remove bad images
                    from the data set, image searching can also be done using the
                    bag-of-visual-words methodology. By representing each image as a tf-idf vector,
                    similar images should have a smaller distance compared to dissimilar images.
                    Performing image retrieval like this is effectively a nearest neighbour search.
                    This application will allow researchers to quickly find identical ornaments from
                    different publications in the database, which can provide valuable evidence of
                    the authorship and publisher of documents where these are unknown.
                Fleuron has significantly improved and sped up the process of finding and
                    browsing printers’ ornaments of the eighteenth century. Fleuron offers an
                    opportunity for book historians, art historians, and historians of graphic
                    design to examine a wealth of ornaments with ease in one place. These miniature
                    works of art have much to offer, and the Fleuron bloghttps://fleuronweb.wordpress.com documents some of the
                    directions that may be taken by future researchers into the interpretation of
                    ornaments. For scholars working on the history of printing, and particularly on
                    printer identification, Fleuron will facilitate new bibliographical research. It
                    is currently possible to browse all ornaments with a known association (from the
                    imprint) with a particular printer, publisher, place, author, or year. This will
                    facilitate the compilation lists of ornaments known to belong to a particular
                    printer, or known to have been in use in a particular city. These can in turn
                    help to identify the printer etc. of books where the imprint is lacking such
                    information. As for solving the problem of an unknown printer where we have no
                    such leads, this process will be greatly facilitated by the image-match function
                    described in the previous paragraph, which could potentially enable the
                    identification of unknown printers on an unprecedented scale. We conclude,
                    however, with some necessary cautions on the use of Fleuron for printer
                    identification. The identification of unknown printers using ornaments should be
                    undertaken while bearing two facts in mind: first, that printers occasionally
                    lent one another their blocks, and second that printers often shared jobs (for
                    example, one printer printed sheets A–C of a book, and another printed D–E,
                    though actual arrangements could be more complicated than this). Both of these
                    facts mean that the presence of a single ornament belonging to a known printer
                    in an unsigned book does not offer concrete evidence that the unsigned item (or
                    all of the unsigned item) was printed by the individual who owned the ornament.
                    The ornament could have been lent to another printer, or the printer to whom it
                    belonged could have printed only one sheet of the publication, with a different
                    unknown printer (or printers) responsible for the rest. If only one ornament
                    appears in a given item, we can certainly speculate as to the identity of its
                    printer, but for a definitive identification multiple examples from throughout
                    the book are preferable. Likewise, when assigning an ornament to a printer, it
                    is desirable to find more than one example of the ornament appearing under that
                    printer’s name, again to eliminate the possibility of shared printing and
                    borrowed ornaments. Finally, because of the low quality of the images in
                    Fleuron, it is not always possible to see all of the delicate details of the
                    ornaments. Consultation of the original book will occasionally reveal very minor
                    differences between ornaments that do not show up in Fleuron, and indicate the
                    presence of a copy or a cast. Likewise, it is not always possible to determine,
                    from examinations of the grain and texture of the impression, whether a given
                    ornament on Fleuron was made from a woodcut, a metal cut, or a cast. The
                    original document should always be consulted where possible, before printer
                    identifications are published. Fleuron, then, is designed as a finding aid: its
                    aim is to make printers’ ornaments easily searchable, locatable, and browsable,
                    and to direct researchers back to the original documents for further
                    interpretation. Those interpretations, when grounded in bibliographical study,
                    have the potential to open up thousands of new avenues for research into the
                    history of printing, authorship, reading, and design. 
            

                About Fleuron
                Fleuron was launched in 2016; since then, a new collaboration has been
                    established with the Oxford Visual Geometry Group (VGG). The VGG created
                    Seebibyte, a suite of publicly available programmes for image analysis,
                    including the VGG Image Search Engine (VISE) (http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/software/vise/) and the VGG Image
                    Classification (VIC) Engine (http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/software/vic/).Development and
                        maintenance of VISE and VIC is supported by EPSRC programme grant Seebibyte:
                        Visual Search for the Era of Big Data (EP/MO13774/1). In 2018-19 the
                    VGG indexed the Fleuron database, and have used VISE to create clusters of
                    similar images from the database. Wilkinson has annotated the clusters to make
                    them searchable, and to provide a dataset for future work on the database using
                    VIC. The indexing of the database has also made it possible to remove the many
                    type one errors that remain in the database (library stamps, diagrams, clippings
                    of text, etc.) In 2020 the website http://fleuron.lib.cam.ac.uk was replaced with a new site at https://compositor.bham.ac.uk,
                    and rebranded as Compositor. With this update, it is possible to
                    perform image searches, supported by the VISE tool, and to search the database
                    by keywords pertaining to the subjects depicted in the ornament. This advance
                    will make the database easier to navigate, and will greatly improve the
                    efficiency with which we can perform the research described at the beginning of
                    this article.
            
