Title:  Why Digital Humanists Should Emphasize Situated Data
               over Capta
Volume:  015
Issue:  2
Date:  15 June 2021
Abstract:  
            
            This essay looks back on Johanna Drucker’s Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display (2011) ten years after its initial publication in Digital Humanities Quarterly, in particular Drucker's call to reconceive all data as capta. Drucker makes several crucial points about humanistic inquiry, but this essay argues against her embrace of capta as a replacement term for data in two ways: (1) furnishing a revised and expanded etymology for the terms data and (2) exploring the benefits of embracing concepts such as situated data rather than capta.
         
Full Body Text: 
As we pass the ten-year anniversary of Johanna Drucker’s Humanities
               Approaches to Graphical Display (2011), I believe it is an opportune time to
            revisit Drucker’s call to reconceive all data as capta
            .I would like to thank Sam Cowling, John Ladd, Rebecca
               Lee, and Scott Weingart for reading drafts of this essay at various stages of the
               writing process, as well as the peer reviewers of this piece for generously providing
               constructive criticism and suggestions for revision. Drucker’s argument for
            such a reimagining is based on the etymological roots of
            data and capta — data comes from the Latin given, and capta from the Latin
               taken — and raises a larger point about the differences between scientific
            realism and constructivist critiques of realism.In making this claim, Drucker
               gestures at two well-known positions on the relationship between theoretical claims and knowledge of the
                  world. However, these polarities can be divided into numerous
               subcategories, and many such positions do not fit neatly into the category of realism
               or constructivism. For a detailed summary of such responses, see Anjan Chakravartty,
                  Scientific Realism, The Stanford
                  Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2017 Edition), Ed. Edward N. Zalta,
                  https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2017/entries/scientific-realism.
            Realist approaches to visualization, Drucker argues, assume transparency and equivalence, as if the phenomenal world were self-evident and the
               apprehension of it a mere mechanical task
            . Drucker goes further in stating, Nothing in intellectual life is self-evident or self-identical, nothing in cultural
               life is mere fact, and nothing in the phenomenal world gives rise to a record or
               representation except through constructed expressions
            . Drucker lays out a lexical argument between data and capta
            that more or less parallels the realist and constructivist modalities of thought as she
            describes them (i.e., data suggests realism and capta suggests constructivism).In
               this essay, I have chosen to treat data and capta primarily as singular nouns when
               discussing either the term data or the concept of data. When referring
               to that which is signified by the term data, I have maintained the norm of treating
               data as plural. I have italicized when making statements that refer directly to key
               terms but not when referring to corresponding concepts. 
         
In this piece, I want to argue in favor of embracing some of Drucker’s points about
            humanistic inquiry while simultaneously arguing against capta as a term to
            be used in place of data. As a humanist, I do see value in emphasizing that
            data are taken and not given, but I believe there is a richer etymological narrative,
            and a richer history of the word data in English, to be described. There is
            also the more complicated question of whether all forms of empiricism require proceeding
               as if the phenomenal world were self-evident, and the
            degree to which social constructions mediate our experiences and understanding of the
            world. I will gesture at these larger questions in this essay, but my primary concern is
            with how scholars in digital humanities should approach conversations about data. 
The bulk of my essay is a revised and expanded etymology for the terms data
            and capta, which considers their Latin roots, as well as the close ties of
            the word data to the publishing history of Euclidis
               Data (1625) and subsequent translations and editions of that work. Euclid’s
            own use of the term given was a subject for discussion and debate, as was the
            degree to which his use of given resembled other Greeks’ use of the term. A fully
            fleshed out history of the term data in English includes its use in two
            related but distinct senses: geometrical and empirical, the latter of these emerging
            from the prior. To appreciate the difference between these senses, we must understand
            the degree to which early modern thinkers synthesized geometrical and numerical thought
            into what is now regarded as the singular discipline of mathematics. Further, these
            thinkers adapted and extended mathematical thinking to translate observations of or
            measurements from the natural world into generalizations and explanatory systems.
In the closing section of this essay, I will turn to the benefits of embracing concepts
            such as situated data over capta. Such an approach allows humanists to contest
            oversimplifications of poorly executed data-driven inquiry and simultaneously to create
            more opportunities for conversation with other disciplines. The tone of these
            conversations could be positively affected, as well, with digital humanities speaking
            and listening in equal proportion. Lastly, I will discuss the new possibilities that
            this rhetorical shift could create for how we teach data analysis, which has the
            potential to advance digital humanities as a discipline.

            Drucker’s Conceptual and Terminological Intervention
            My response to Drucker begins with a certain degree of uncertainty about how Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display has been received
               in digital humanities. Generally, I take it to have made a strong, positive
               impression. Drucker was not the first scholar to point out that capta
               might be a more appropriate term than data, but her work is arguably the
               most influential to make this point, especially in digital humanities.See, for
                  example, Stan Kelly-Bootle, The Computer
                     Contradictionary (MIT Press, 1995); H.E. Jensen, Editorial Note (1950) in H Becker, Through Values
                     to Social Interpretation (Duke UP, 1952): vii-xi. This essay, or
               the corresponding material in Drucker’s book Graphesis
               (2014), is widely referenced in digital humanities, and I have seen it listed on many
               DH course syllabi.At the time of writing this essay, Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display had 399 citations on Google
                  Scholar, and Graphesis had 348. Examples of syllabi
                  raising this topic directly or assigning Drucker on this topic include: https://cms633.github.io/assets/cms-633-syllabus.pdf; http://benschmidt.org/HDA19/syllabus__syllabus.html; https://dhcu.ca/portfolio/syllabus/; and http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~dbamman/courses/76829/schedule.html. There
               appear to have been numerous conference presentations, blog posts, and discussions of
               capta on social media. In various contexts, public displays of one’s agreement with
               Drucker might take the form of statements like, There is no such
                  thing as data. There are only capta.Shawn Graham,
                  syllabus for graduate seminar in DH, https://dhcu.ca/portfolio/syllabus/. On the original syllabus, the word
                     capta is hyperlinked to Drucker’s piece for DHQ. Broadly speaking, Drucker has set the terms of the debate
               on the subject of data and capta, and this influence has been both descriptive and
               normative. Simultaneously, I have not seen signs of a large-scale movement to purge
               documents of the word data, nor have the word capta or its
               cognates become especially prevalent in digital humanities scholarship. It is
                  conceivable that DH would begin publishing papers on captabases and metacapta, but
                  many who would prefer the term capta are probably using data cognates
                  and phrases out of convenience or preference. Kelly-Bootle satirically raises the
                  possibility of terms like capta entry, capta processing, and captabase in The Computer Contradictionary (1995) . When I attempt a Google search for
                  metacapta, I get the response, Did you mean metacarta,
                     metacipta, metacapital, metacafe? On Google Scholar, I get results for
                  metacaptcha and metacapita. (Results collected in Summer 2020.) 
            
            One might argue that Drucker makes a conceptual intervention and not a terminological
               one. I would concede that the essay is most concerned with reconceptualizing data as
               capta, and the importance of such a shift. With regard to data visualization, Drucker
               argues that the rendering of statistical information into
                  graphical form gives it a simplicity and legibility that hides every aspect of the
                  original interpretative framework on which the statistical data were
                  constructed
               . Data do not pre-exist their
                  parameterization because they are constructed as an
                  interpretation of the phenomenal world, not inherent in it
               . Drucker does not explicitly argue that humanities
               scholars should never say or write the word data, but she does claim
               that all data is capta nd that because of the
               etymological roots of the terms, capta
               is taken actively while data is
                  assumed to be a given able to be recorded and observed
               . As a result, I reject the idea that one can so easily
               separate Drucker’s conceptual intervention from the terminological one supporting it. 
            Another way of looking at Drucker’s influence would be to say that there is
               widespread agreement with her views on data and capta, but practical considerations
               outweigh other concerns. Such practical considerations include (1) maximizing clarity
               for particular audiences, (2) limits on space that would make it difficult to explain
               the choice to use capta, and (3) the question of how to invoke concepts
               like big data, data visualization, databases, datasets, metadata, and open data. One
               might attempt to stake out a rhetorical middle position by mentioning that data are
               really capta and to proceed with the word data thereafter, as Rob
               Kitchin does in The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open Data, Data
                  Infrastructures and Their Consequences (2014). Kitchin adds, since the term data has been so thoroughly ingrained to mean capta,
                  rather than confuse the matter further it makes sense to continue to use the term
                     data where capta would be more
                  appropriate
               . This seems like it would be an appealing option for
               many people, and I suspect it is widespread, although I have not investigated this
               question in any serious way. 
            Regardless, I am aware of no published work that disputes Drucker’s core points. That
               is: 
                  the word data connotes something given and
                  reconceptualizing data as capta is integral to rejecting realist assumptions
                     of transparency and equivalence between data and the phenomena they purport to
                     represent. 
               
         

            A Revised and Expanded Etymology for Data and Capta
            In direct response to Drucker, I hope to demonstrate that the word data
               does not assume a given that can be transparently and unproblematically recorded and
               observed. If this first point can be satisfactorily established, it should follow
               that one can say and write the word data, embrace the situated, partial, and constitutive character of knowledge
                  production, and recognize that knowledge is
                     constructed, taken, not simply given as a natural representation
                  of pre-existing fact
               . This line of reasoning is crucial to how digital
               humanists understand and talk about the concept of data, as well as how we teach
               computational methods. However, making such an argument first requires revisiting the
               origin of data as a term of use in English and discussing how the
               meaning of the term data has changed over time. 
            To begin, the word data indeed comes from the Latin for given,
               but the etymology of the English language word is less straightforward than Drucker
               suggests. A more detailed account of the early history of the
                  concept of data is Daniel Rosenberg’s Data
                  Before the Fact (2013), which discusses much of the early history of
               data’s English usage. As Rosenberg describes, In English,
                     data was first used in the seventeenth century. Yet it is not wrong to
                  associate the emergence of the concept and that of modernity. The rise of the
                  concept in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is tightly linked to the
                  development of modern concepts of knowledge and argumentation
               . Rosenberg emphasizes the specifically rhetorical status of the word data
               as something both pre-analytical and pre-factual, more so even than the related concepts of
                  facts and evidence
               . As he further explains, When a fact is proven false, it ceases to be a fact. False data is data
                  nonetheless
               . Rosenberg’s telling of the early history of
               data in English adequately distinguishes between the two earliest senses of the term
                  data, the first in the realm of mathematics,
                  where it retained the technical sense that it has in Euclid, as quantities
                     given in mathematical problems, as opposed to the
                     quaesita, or quantities sought and the second
                  in the realm of theology, where it referred to scriptural
                  truths — whether principles or facts — that were given by God and therefore not
                  susceptible to questioning
               . However, I want to argue that these two
               senses are more closely related than one might first assume, and there is a third
               early sense of the word that Rosenberg does not fully distinguish. 
            First, the Oxford English Dictionary provides an entry
               for data as something given or granted; something known or
                  assumed as fact, and made the basis of reasoning; an assumption or premise from
                  which inferences are drawn
               . We might call this data in the geometrical sense.
               This phrasing is intended to echo Rosenberg’s definition, except for the distinction
               that our contemporary concept of mathematics depends on a synthesis of geometrical
               and numerical paradigms of thought that had not yet fully unfolded in Europe circa
                  1600.The OED cites the earliest use of
                     mathematics as (a collective term for) geometry,
                     arithmetic, and certain physical sciences involving geometrical reasoning, such
                     as astronomy and optics to Christopher Langton, circa 1545  For more on the unification of geometrical and numerical
                  thought, see Patrick Suppes et. al., Foundations of
                     Measurement Volume 2: Geometrical, Threshold, and
                     Probabilistic Representations (Elsevier, 2014): 80-81. The story
               of the data’s entry into English must include some history of the translation of
               Euclid’s work from Greek to Latin and English, a story Rosenberg alludes to but does
               not detail in full. The Greek word δεδομένα (dedoména) means given. Δεδομένα
                  (Dedoména) is the title of a work by Euclid,
               which remains extant in manuscript form in Greek and Arabic. It was translated into
               Latin by the French mathematician Claude Hardy and printed alongside its original
               Greek as a volume titled Euclidis Data in 1625. An
               English translation with the title Euclid’s Data was
               included with an edition of Euclid’s Elements of
                  Geometry (John Leeke & George Serle) in 1661.English language
                  translations of Euclid’s Elements of Geometry date as
                  far back as 1570. See Adam Clarke, The Bibliographical
                     Miscellany (London: W. Baynes, 1806): 77-78. The OED traces this sense of the word data to Henry
               Hammond’s A copy of some papers past at Oxford, betwixt the
                  author of the Practicall catechisme, and Mr. Ch. in 1646 , which refers to a heape of
                  data, but, as Rosenberg states, this heap is not a
                  pile of numbers but a list of theological propositions accepted as true for the
                  sake of argument
               . It may seem counter-intuitive to associate
               the Greek-to-Latin geometrical usage of data with what Jonathan Furner
               calls data as gifts from God, but the theological or
               ecclesiastical notion of data is a direct antecedent of how Euclid used the term
                  data/dedoména
               . Furner elaborates that such uses go back to
               Thomas Tuke’s Nevv Essayes of 1614, and that the Latin
               word data is found in other Latin phrases in religious texts of early seventeenth-century England — for example, gratia gratis data (grace freely given), and
                     data desuper (given from above)
               . Like Rosenberg, Furner differentiates between
                  data in the geometrical sense and data in the
               ecclesiastical sense, but they both owe their meaning to a fairly literal translation
               of the Latin word as given.
            Quite different from this first cluster is what we might call data in the empirical sense. The OED refers
               to datum chiefly in plural (i.e., data), which describes
                  an item of (chiefly numerical) information obtained by
                  scientific work, a number of which are typically collected together for reference,
                  analysis, or calculation with first use listed as 1630 .The OED credits William
                  Batten’s A MOST PLAINE and easie way for the finding of the
                     Sunnes Amplitude and Azimuth, and thereby the Variation of the Compasse, by
                     Logarithme (1630) under a truncated title. Note, also, that the word
                     data appears in keyword searches of databases like Early English Book
                  Online (EEBO) before these 1630 because editions in Latin, or English language
                  editions with Latin quotations or epigraphs, were quite common. In Rosenberg’s
                  words, the Latin word data,
                     as a conjugation of the verb dare, was in constant use during the
                     seventeenth and eighteenth centuries...but data in Latin rarely translates to data in English
                  .  This sense of the word seems to
               relate to the OED’s entry for data as a count noun: an item of information; a datum; a set of data (first
               use listed as 1645) and later, as a mass noun, meaning
                  related items of (chiefly numerical) information considered
                  collectively, typically obtained by scientific work and used for reference,
                  analysis, or calculation with its first use listed as 1702 .The OED credits T.
                  Urquhart’s Trissotetras (1645) as the earliest known
                  example of data as a count noun, and credits Robert Morden’s An Introduction to Astronomy, Geography, Navigation, and other
                     mathematical sciences, made easie by the description and uses of the cœlestial
                     and terrestial globes (1702) as the earliest known example of data as a
                  mass noun. There are likely examples of historic usage where data appears
               to be something in between the geometrical sense and the empirical sense, but the
               difference between the two in their sharpest forms is quite significant, and assuming
               the associations of the first sense carry over to the second sense would be a
               mistake. To better understand the dissimilarities between these senses, we must
               reexamine the first English translation of Euclid’s Data.
            How Euclid had used dedoména/data is the subject of a commentary by
               Marinus of Neapolis, translated and included in Leeke and Serle’s edition, for the Ancients have defined it in one manner, and later Writers after
                  another
               . For Marinus, the question was whether
               Euclid’s notion of data could be defined as a combination of ordinatum
               (regulated or orderly) and poriman (available or provided) or as a
               combination of cognitum (infamous or known) and porimon.
               Marinus’ two candidate definitions may appear to map directly to the English language
               senses of geometrical data and empirical data, but this is not the case. Neither of
               Marinus’ notions would have been used as a term to describe aspects of the natural
               world, only for abstractions like the following: 
                  The length of a line C when line C equals the length of line A minus the
                     length of line B, and the lengths of lines A and B are both given. 
                  The length of line Z connecting two points A and B, when the positions of
                     points A and B are given. 
               
            Drawing on examples from Euclid and other ancient texts, Marinus concludes that
               Euclid is referring to data as a combination of porimon, that which may be exhibited by Demonstration, or which is apparent
                  without Demonstration and cognitum, that which is clear and comprehended of us
               . However, his recognition of a second
               candidate definition, describing data as a combination of ordinatum and
                  poriman should be noted, as it could point to others forming a
               similar impression. 
            More recently, Christian Taisbak notes that Euclid’s use of the word
                  data means both the clear and comprehended premise, and the
               demonstrated conclusion: When I started to translate the
                        Data, I found it very longwinded that a certain
                     phrase kept popping up time and again, several times in every proposition:
                        if this item is given, that item is also given. I
                     decided to cancel all those alsos and restore them only where they
                     were absolutely necessary. But then I discovered that I was leaving out an
                     essential feature of the Data: the Givens hang
                     together in chains, the purpose of any proposition being to produce more links
                     to them.
                   Taisbak is essentially describing
               deductive reasoning, that if some items are given, some other
                  items are also given, into the bargain so to speak
               . For Euclid, dedoména referred
                  not only to the input of a problem, but also to the
                  output
               . In this context, one might also compare
               Euclid’s use of data to akolouthia (ἀκολουθία), a term
               favored by Aristotle and others, which indicates the necessary
                  relationship between two propositions when one of them is the consequence of the
                  other
               ).See Michael Frede, Stoic vs. Aristotelian Syllogistic. In Essays in
                     Ancient Philosophy (U of Minnesota P, 1987), pp. 99–124; John Spangler
                  Kieffer, Galen’s Institutio Logica: English Translation,
                     Introduction, and Commentary (JHU Press, 2020); and Lucas Francisco
                  Mateo Seco and Giulio Maspero. The Brill Dictionary of
                     Gregory of Nyssa (Brill, 2010).  This perspective complicates
               Rosenberg’s gloss of data as quantities given and quaesita
               as quantities sought, since quantities sought can in fact become given through
               demonstration or deduction (ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι / hóper édei deîxai).See David
                  Dunér and Christer Ahlberger, Cognitive History: Mind, Space,
                     and Time (Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG, 2019), p. 100.
               These nuances remain specific to the geometrical rather than the empirical concept of
               data that I have so far discussed, but they are important aspects of the history of
               the term data, as well as the history of how that term became associated
               with quantitative reasoning. As a result, these details already suggest the
               beginnings of a pedagogical intervention in digital humanities, where the
                  given-ness of data is more complex that it might initially appear. 
            Data in the empirical sense appears to draw upon aspects of data as a geometrical
               given and extend these qualities to features of the natural world. For the likes of
               Apollonius, Euclid, and Marinus, the concept of data would never imply collecting
               information in this way. Observations of the sort said to be described in
               Eratosthenes’ Γεωγραφία (Geografíka), would be called φαινόμενο (fainómeno), or phenomenon, which translates to that which appears or is seen.The OED’s etymological entry for phenomenon describes, things that appear, appearances, phenomena, celestial phenomena
                     (title of a work by Eudoxus, versified by Aratus), use as noun of neuter
                        of ϕαινόμενος appearing, apparent (to the senses or mind), passive
                     present participle of ϕαίνειν to show, cause to appear
                  . For more on Eratosthenes’ Geography, see Eratosthenes, Eratosthenes’
                        Geography (Princeton University Press, 2010).
               Phenomena included anything that appeared to be true, such as illusions, mirages, and
               dreams. James Evans and J. Lennart Berggren explain that the
                  word phenomena is a participle of the passive verb phanomai, which
                  carries the meanings of to come to light, come to sight, be seen,
                  appear. They add, The last two are definitive for
                  the astronomical sense of the word, which is things that are seen/appear in the
                     heavens
               . An entire genre of Greek philosophical thought
               was dedicated to the idea that, from careful observation of the heavens, one could
               understand the positions of the earth, the planets, and the stars, as well as explain
               the circular motions of all celestial bodies. Hence the notion, originating in Greek
               astronomy, of σωζειν τα φαινόμενα (sozein ta fainómena) or save
                  the phenomena
               . Works within this genre included Euclid’s The Phenomena, Autolykos’ On the Moving
                  Sphere, Aristotle’s On the Heavens, Gemino’s
                  Introduction to the Phenomena, and Theodesius’ Sphaerics, which is thought to extend the work of Eudoxos.
               Contributions to this genre continued into the Middle Ages. 
            These writers did not appear to distinguish between their observations and the way
               they were structured or recorded. Much later, the genre of Almanack of
                  Ephemeris or Ephemerides seems to suggest a potential term that makes
               this distinction. The earliest use of the term almanac, meaning an annual table, or (more usually) a book of tables, can be
               traced to The Equatorie of the Planetis (circa CE 1392),
               whereas the term ephemeris was used as early as the mid-16th
               century . According to Arthur L. Norberg, an almanac of
               ephemeris, by the nineteenth century, contained information on
                  the phenomena for that year: eclipses of the Sun, Moon, and Jupiter’s satellites;
                  the orientation of Saturn’s rings and the apparent discs of Venus and Mars
               . For whatever reason, neither of these
               terms caught on as a more generalized word for the kind of structured information one
               might generate by making and recording observations. As with Taisbak’s point about
               givens, for Euclid, functioning as the inputs and outputs of problems, the seeds of a
               pedagogical intervention are here planted. Phenomena were recorded and published with
               the expectation that future observations might supplement, refine, or replace
               previous ones, which suggests a fundamental awareness that representations of
               phenomena were partial and imperfect. Certainly, at almost any moment in history,
               some were expressing their belief in a unified, coherent reality just beyond our
               reach, as well as their confidence that their tabulations would allow them to
               decipher its governing dynamics. I will return to this subject in this essay’s
               conclusion but, for now, it should suffice to say that this belief is best understood
               not as a position on the distinguishing properties of data, but rather a position on
               the possibility of obtaining objective knowledge through empirical means. 
            It is also crucial to note that the idea of a table as a textual and material device
               for structuring numerical information is at least 4,500 years old. According to
               Martin Campbell Kelly and his co-authors, While the list has
                  been hailed as a major breakthrough in cognitive history...the table as a
                  pre-modern phenomenon of structured thought has been completely neglected
               . In ancient Sumer, Babylonia, and
               Assyria, clay tablets were often if not primarily a repository of numerical
               information, often used as a memorization or calculation aid. Etymologically, the
               word table comes from the Latin tabula, which in turn, originates with
               the Greek term τάβλι (tabla), meaning a plank or board . The term was used to refer to a particular
               board game that is thought to be the ancestor of backgammon, and was also a general
               term for a tablet, a slate, or any flat piece of wood. In English, it eventually a
               particular piece of furniture on which food is served, and at or
                  around which people sit at a meal (circa CE 1300). The English word
                  table meaning a schematic arrangement of
                  information or an orderly arrangement of
                  particulars can be traced as far back as Byrhtferth of Ramsey’s Enchiridion (CE 986-1016), but the association between a
               tablet/slate and structured information recorded upon it appears to be much older
                  . 
            Today, the phrase tabular data suggests a strong association between tables
               and data, and the term observation is widely used to denote all values measured on the same unit (like a person, or a day, or a
                  race) across attributes or, in the context of rectangular data, a row of
                  values.See Hadley Wickham, Tidy Data,
                  The Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 59 (August
                  2014), pp. 1-23. In contrast to an observation, values are specific numbers or
                  string, and a variable contains all values that measure the
                     same underlying attribute (like height, temperature, duration) across
                     units
                  .  As Lisa Gitelman notes, the idea of
               converting that which one observes into data — a conceptual object that structures
               and represents that which has been perceived — seems like second nature to us. When phenomena are variously reduced to data, they are divided and
                  classified, processes that work to obscure — or as if to obscure —
                  ambiguity, conflict, and contradiction
               . For Gitelman, this relationship suggests both
               a dependency on hierarchy, and a kind of epistemological cover that protects users who perform logical operations on the data...from having to
                  know how the data have been organized
               . When terms like data-driven are
               invoked, there is often an assumption of order, imposed or revealed, by those
               engaging in analysis.
            Nevertheless, the idea of ordering and standardizing information for the purposes of
               facilitating numerical operations is much older than the English word
                  data. What seems to have changed is that the term data
               adopted a secondary meaning in addition to the geometrical sense of term associated
               with Euclid. An entry in Ephraim Chambers’ Cyclopædia
               (1728) offers two definitions for the term data. First, it continued to
               refer to a geometrical given. Second, From the primary Use of
                  the Word Data in mathematicks, it has been transplanted
                  into other Arts; as Philosophy, Medicine, &c. where it expresses any Quantity,
                  which for the Sake of a present Calculation, is taken for granted to be such,
                  without requiring an immediate Proof for its Certainty
               . According to Chambers, data had come to be
               used to describe a quantity, in a wide range of contexts, that was meant to be
               treated as a given for the purposes of analysis. This definition reinforces the
               distinction between data in the strictly geometrical sense and data in other
               contexts, and it is compatible with religious uses of the term, since information
               from scripture would qualify as data of the geometrical sort, or knowledge beyond
               question. 
            This explanation does not describe a specific process by which phenomena become data.
               However, the clause for the Sake of a present calculation seems to limit why
               and how the data are permitted to be taken for granted, which undercuts the idea that
               data would be regarded as natural or pre-existing facts. In turn, it contradicts the
               idea that data in this sense could ever be viewed as pre-factual, as Rosenberg
               describes. Among the natural philosophers of the 17th and 18th centuries, the idea
               that Nature would reveal its hidden structure or laws to those who spoke its language
               was predominant.See Peter H. Reill, Vitalizing Nature in
                     the Enlightenment (University of California Press, 2005); Lorraine
                  Daston and Peter Galison, Objectivity (Zone Books,
                  2010); Edward Dolnick, The Clockwork Universe: Isaac Newton,
                     The Royal Society, and The Birth of the Modern World (Harper Collins,
                  2011). In this light, it seems likely if not obvious that empirical
               observations would be considered facts given by God. However, if data were available
               or provided because Nature had provided them for us to analyze, then there would be
               no need for Chambers’ qualifying phrase. The entry in Chambers’ Cyclopædia seems more compatible with the idea that phenomena become
               data, or are granted provisional status as data, which suspends the need for an immediate proof and permits calculation to
                  occur.For more on early modern associations between knowledge and sin, as
                  well as associations between epistemological errors and sin, see Peter Harrison,
                     The Fall of Man and the Foundations of Science
                  (Cambridge University Press, 2007).
            
            Returning to Marinus’ two candidate definitions for Euclid’s notion of data — as
                  porimon plus cognitum or porimon plus
                  ordinatum — we can see a case for either or both.Taisbak
                  translates πορίσαοθαι (porizesthai) cognate to
                  the verb to provide, as available in this context .  Imposing Marinus’ analysis on
               Chambers’ definition is potentially problematic, but I would argue that our
               contemporary use of the term data is best explained by starting with the
               notion of data as porimon plus ordinatum. Recall that this
               sense — as a combination of something provided in a way that gives it order — was
                  not the sense Euclid was not using, according to Marinus. As Taisbak
               notes, however, ordinatum for Marinus was the Greek word τεταγμένων
                  (tetagmenon), literally fixed, but also
               used to mean organized according to some taxis, order
               . Regarding the Latin porimon, the
               Greek term πορίσαοθαι (porizesthai), Taisbak
               explains that Euclid uses the term to describe several
                  operations, including put together,
               draw,
               describe,
               make, or produce
               .Taisbak adds that porimon is
                     vital to the interpretation of the Data, but Euclid uses the word as being
                     self-explanatory. It seems to be imported from everyday market prose meaning
                        procure,
                     furnish,
                     get (for oneself): any kind of purchase without specification of method
                     and currency
                  .  By this logic, defining
                  data as both porimon and ordinatum would
               emphasize its being available, collected, or made, as well as being brought to order
               or revealed to have latent order by the act of demonstration.
            Broadly speaking, then, a full-fledged etymology of the term data
               suggests a narrative much more complex than data as given and capta as
                  taken. The Latin word for given was used by Euclid in a manner very
               different from how data was used by the mid-18th century, and the true meaning of the
               Euclidian concept of dedoména/data has disputed definitions among classical thinkers,
               as Marinus summarizes. Concepts such as saving the phenomena, an almanac of
               ephemeris, and tabular information suggest an ancient and longstanding tradition of
               making precise observations, placing them a structured format, and using that
               structure to facilitate calculation. Taking Chambers into account, it seems likely
               that facts became eligible to be regarded as data by being provided or made available
               by a person or group of people who had made observations or measurements, and then
               imposed some form of order or structure upon them in order to facilitate analysis.
               Drucker’s advocacy for capta as a key term and a guiding principle is rooted in the
               notion that the term data assumes a pre-existing given that can be
               naively recorded without being shaped by the observer. The story I have told suggests
               a more nuanced history of data, both as a term and a concept. There is room to
               embrace the word data and understand data to be inevitably fragmentary,
               imperfect, and tentative, yet simultaneously useful in their ability to organize
               knowledge and facilitate modes of analysis that would otherwise be impossible. In the
               section that follows, I will make the case for embracing concepts like situated data
               and data-rich literary history to convey this message, which includes potential
               benefits to scholarly discourse and digital humanities pedagogy.
         

            Situating Data for the Sake of Interdisciplinarity and Digital Humanities
               Pedagogy
            Up to now, I have attempted to show that the term data has a much more
               nuanced history that its translation to the English word given. This revised
               etymology leaves room for an understanding of both the term and concept as less
               closely linked to naive realism than Drucker suggests. As S.I. Hayakawa once famously
               wrote, the writer of a dictionary is a historian, not a
                  lawgiver
               . The meaning of data has changed
               over time and, at any given time, no singular meaning for the term was universal. I
               have pointed to one important sea change, by which data came to have special
               prominence in the context of empiricism. A longer essay could say much more on the
               subject of additional changes in prevailing notions of the term, or additional
               meanings that persist in specific contexts or among specialized groups. Along with
               the accepted range of definitions for data, their various connotations
               and their preferred rhetorical uses, have also changed over time. I think Drucker is
               right to point out that many today use the term data to suggest a kind
               unimpeachable concreteness rather than something partly born out of the assumptions
               made when selecting and organizing said data. I suspect that there is widespread
               disagreement among self-proclaimed empiricists about the degree to which data are
                  natural representations as opposed to situated,
                  partial, and constitutive, but I agree that scientific rhetoric often
               downplays or denies the artificial, conditional, and fragmentary aspects of data . 
            As an alternative to avoiding the term data, I would argue that digital
               humanities should focus on challenging and complicating beliefs about the purity,
               objectivity, or totality of data, all the while using the word data
               frequently, and without any shame. There is a strong defense for using the word
                  data mindfully and unapologetically based on the understanding that
               data are collected, assembled, and recorded by people (or their instruments). Data
               have structure, but this structure comes (at least in part) from how observations are
               gathered and organized, as well as shaped by the interpretive decisions made at their
               inception. Contextual information about these interpretive decisions is a vital
               component of a dataset. Many in digital humanities have already moved in this
               direction, shifting from notions of good data and bad data to concepts
               like data as situated knowledge, as described in Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F.
               Klein’s Data Feminism (2020) or data-rich literary
               history as described in Katherine Bode’s A World of Fiction:
                  Digital Collections and the Future of Literary History (2019). The
               benefits of these strategies are both discursive and pedagogical.
            The first benefit of this approach is to move away from an argument based on word
               origin. A word’s origins seldom tell an accurate story of a word’s historical use or
               contemporary valences. There are numerous Latin words with English homographs, and
               often their meanings have changed over time. Words such as plastic,
               stigma,
               campus,
               focus,
               versus,
               stimulus, and sinister all have Latin antecedents with meanings that
               differ greatly from their contemporary use in English. With the word
                  data, there is added ambiguity because the English word given
               has more than one meaning. Describing an idea as a given or a warrant
               in the context of a rhetorical argument remains common, and seems to carry no
               implication of pre-factualness or ineligible for questioning.The word
                     plastic comes from the Latin for capable of shaping
                     or molding
                   while stigma conveys the mark of a pointed instrument, puncture, tattoo-mark, or
                     brand
                  . Campus is Latin for field,
                  focus is Latin for hearth, and versus is Latin for a line of
                  poetry S. A stimulus was a
                  prod or a goad, which is to say a sharp stick used to urge livestock forward (Vaan
                  587). Sinister comes from the Latin word for left, and eventually
                  came to mean evil or unlucky, but was purportedly used by the Romans in the opposite sense, such that am avis sinistra
                  or bird in the left hand...was esteemed a happy omen
                  . If the frame is widened to include
                  linguistic doublets and cognates, the list balloons to the point of absurdity. The
                  words dose, antidote, anecdote, date, donatio,
                     addendum, addition, edition, editor,
                  mandate, and mandatory all share the Greek or Latin root word for
                  the verb to give, but they have a vast range of meanings and associations
                  today . Perhaps most ironically, the
                  portmanteau anecdata replaces part of the Greek root word for given
                  with the Latin word for given. See Anu Garg, A.Word.A.Day (http://www.wordsmith.org/words/anecdata.html) for a summary of the term
                     anecdata and Shipley for a summary of how anecdote originates
                  with the Greek didonai
                  .
            
            Capta, likewise, is Latin for taken and therefore has a certain surface appeal as a
               mirror term for data. However, capta can also mean caught,
               captured, and captive. The phrase Judæa capta refers to the
               siege and capture of Jerusalem by the Romans, as well as a series of coins issued by
               the Roman Emperor Vespasian to celebrate these actions . In the Roman Empire, the phrases manu capta
                and praeda manu capta denoted that
               which was captured by hand or acquired by force of hands from among
               Rome’s enemies.Such phrases referred especially properties taken in war
                  and could describe compensation paid by the
                     vanquished...either in kind (vectigal), with money (stipendium), or with a tribute (tributum)
                  .  Further, some enslaved people
                  (servi) were so called from the fact that commanders
                  are used to sell their captives, and by this means to preserve (servare) rather than kill them (Justinian Institutes, qtd. in Cameron (1972), 5).They are also said to be mancipia, because they were taken by hand (manu capta) from the enemy (Justinian Institutes, qtd. in Cameron (1972), 5). These potential associations are important
               because they complicate the idea that data straightforwardly means given
               and capta straightforwardly means taken as we think of those terms
               today. Moreover, these examples underscore the broader point that it can be a mistake
               to use a word’s denotation in its language of origin (or its historic denotation in
               English) as the primary criteria by which to judge its contemporary meaning or
               appeal. 
            Denotations, connotations, and rhetorical uses change over time, and this is good
               news. Such associations can change once again, and scholars of the humanities can
               help change them. As Helen Longino has argued, the notion of objectivity in
               scientific inquiry is bound up in two different senses of the term, the first
               emphasizing scientific realism, or the idea that science provides an accurate description of the facts of the world as they are
               . The second, associated with modes of inquiry,
               stresses reliance on nonarbitrary and nonsubjective criteria for
                  developing, accepting, and rejecting the hypotheses and theories that make up the
                  view
               . Further, scientists will often speak of the objectivity of data but objectivity in this
               sense should be taken as a claim of reliability . What makes data objective is the relationship of
                  measurements to one another within a particular dimension or kind of scale
               . According to Longino, it should not be assumed
               that these measures are real properties of real entities
               or that their measurements provide us with an unmediated view of
                  the natural world
               . In other words, there is an important
               difference between an etymologically inspired belief that data are natural
               representations of the world — given rather than taken — and the idea that scientific
               observation generates objective information by providing epistemological order. The
               two positions are based on competing definitions of objectivity. Adopting the
               perspective that phenomena become data only when they are structured by an
               investigative agent invites an important debate about the objectivity of data once
               they are standardized and assembled, and that is a debate that I would be glad take
               part in. 
            I would not deny the merit of distinguishing between the idea of data-as-given and
               capta-as-taken. However, this distinction may be more a matter of emphasis than
               definition. Whatever the etymological roots and contemporary associations of data, we
               can take capta to emphasize that the measurements, readings, observations have been
               taken. As I have suggested, the word capta may stir connotations of human
               bondage and violence. This association may be appropriate in some cases, especially
               in a moment when for-profit companies are covertly monetizing and selling data on the
               open market, often in direct conflict with the interests of its users. On the other
               hand, many data do not fit this description, and I think regarding all data as
               captive or hostage to their stewards is provocative, but ultimately misguided,
               especially where there is strong potential for unintended consequences. 
            As previously suggested, there are matters of utility to consider when deciding
               between data and capta as conceptual signposts. Many in digital humanists are likely
               using the term data at least some of the time, either as a standalone
               key term, or in cognates or phrases like metadata, database, or data visualization.
               Going further down this path would allow digital humanists to compete more
               effectively for search engine keyword searches, which could make digital humanities
               scholarship more visible to audiences from the sciences. This would include direct
               searches, as well as related searches like data analysis,
               data analytics, and data usage, all of which are top related to
                  data searches on Google Trends. It would also encourage digital humanities to
               continue any previous efforts to engage directly with specialized topics such as data
               pedagogy, data literacy, open data, data management, and data curation. 
            Along these lines, thinking differently about the word data may lead to
               new exchanges of information among and between disciplines. Digital humanities, as a
               field, has a deeply interdisciplinary history, but a precondition to such
               interdisciplinarity is the premise that different disciplines can learn from one
               another. By engaging directly with concepts related to data, we have opportunity to
               shifts scholarly focus from the nature of data to strategies that promote engaging
               critically, theoretically, and computationally with data. 
            Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein take an approach of this sort in Data Feminism (2020). They define data as information made
               tractable, which I immediately associate with Marinus’ discussion of
                  ordinatum. In various passages, D’Ignazio and Klein cite Donna
               Haraway, whose essay Situated Knowledges: The Science Question
                  in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective (1988) called for
                  a doctrine of embodied objectivity that accommodates
                  paradoxical and critical feminist science projects
               . Core to Haraway’s feminist objectivity is the principle of situated knowledges. Adapting
               and extending Haraway’s intervention, D’Ignazio and Klein argue that one of the central tenets of feminist thinking is that all knowledge
                  is situated
               . There is a more complicated discussion to be
               had about whether all knowledge is inherently situated or whether it is the work of
               feminism that situates it. Haraway seems to be arguing for the latter when she
               contrasts situated knowledges with unlocatable, and so
                  irresponsible, knowledge claims
               . Either way, all data have important contexts
               of creation and organization, and situating them (or emphasizing them as situated)
               includes critical examination of those contexts.See also Jill Walker Rettberg,
                     Situated Data Analysis: A New Method for Analysing Encoded
                     Power Relationships in Social Media Platforms and Apps,
                  Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 7, no.
                  1 (June 17, 2020): 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0495-3. Rettberg also frames situated data analysis as an extension of Haraway’s
                  concept of situated knowledge.
               
            
            D’Ignazio and Klein describe numerous practices related to examining the context of
               data. These practices begin with understanding the conditions of production
               associated with data, including information about those who constructed the data.
                  When approaching any new source of knowledge, they
               write, it’s essential to ask questions about the social,
                  cultural, historical, institutional, and material conditions under which that
                  knowledge was produced, as well as about the identities of the people who created
                  it
               . Like Gitelman, D’Ignazio and Klein argue
               against the existence of anything that might be called raw data . They advocate for considering the functional limitations of the data and any associated ethical obligations
               ; exploring and analyzing
                  what is missing from a dataset
               ; attending to power
                  differentials that have shaped and/or continue to be present in collected
               data ; and interrogating a dataset’s validity
               — that is, the degree to which it can be said to represent the concept being analyzed
                  . They emphasize the importance of context
               at the stages of data acquisition, data analysis, and framing
                  and communication of results
               . Their advocacy is empowered rather than
               hindered by their adoption of a precise vocabulary that practitioners in a range of
               disciplines can recognize and quickly understand.For a further indication of
                  such terminological compatibility, see Timnit Gebru et. al. Datasheets for Datasets,
                  ArXiv:1803.09010 [Cs], March 19, 2020. http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.09010.
                  The authors note, Despite the importance of data to machine
                     learning, there is no standardized process for documenting machine learning
                     datasets
                  . They propose a standard to encourage careful reflection on the process of creating,
                     distributing, and maintaining a dataset, including any underlying assumptions,
                     potential risks or harms, and implications of use and to ensure that
                     dataset consumers...have the information they need to make
                     informed decisions about using a dataset
                  . 
            
            Similarly, Katherine Bode has argued in A World of
                  Fiction (2019) for an intervention in computational literary studies based
               on the argument that distant reading and macroanalysis construct
                  and seek to extract meaning from models of literary systems that are essentially
                  deficient, which to say, inadequate for representing
                  the ways in which literary works existed and generated meaning in the past
               . Bode does not advocate that we reject data-driven
               literary history, as others have argued, nor does she endorse the adoption of new, more elaborate forms of computational analysis as a way
               around the conflict . Bode does not eschew
                  methodological rigor altogether. She writes, Although it is a
                     premise of the book that data- rich literary history should not focus on the
                     methods of analysis used to the detriment of the object analyzed, in a field
                     that attempts to understand literature and culture by applying techniques
                     devised for other purposes a critical approach to methodology is
                     essential
                  . Her critique of methodological emphasis lies in
                  a tendency of others to rely on trialing the newest or most
                     innovative digital methods instead of those best suited to the subject
                  matter and to responding to the requirements of humanities
                     inquiry
                  .  Instead, she anchors her intervention
               around the idea of a scholarly edition of a literary
                  system — which engages explicitly with modeling practices — as a mechanism through which to interrogate and refine conceptions of
                  literary works and systems
               . As with D’Ignazio and Klein, Bode calls for
               increased contextualization, for a data-rich model of a literary
                  system is inevitably an argument shaped by not only the scholar’s perception of
                  cultural artifacts and phenomena but the complex history by which those artifacts
                  and phenomena are transmitted to and by us in the present
               . Bode’s use of the key phrase data-rich is important to her argument, in that she presents it as an
               alternative to labels like distant reading,
               macroanalysis, and computational literary history
               . It is structurally reminiscent of
                  data-driven but the adjectival rich has a strong contrast to the
               past participle driven, both in terms of connotation and its symbolic
               rejection of that idea that data ostensibly occupy the driver’s seat. D’Ignazio &
               Klein and Bode make very different interventions, but they share a common position
               that the term data has purchase, especially when that term is qualified
               with productively descriptive modifiers. Further, they base their work, in part, on
               the premise that data-driven inquiry can be executed more effectively if instilled
               with feminist and/or humanistic values. 
            If this premise is to be accepted, our conversations about how to improve upon
               computational inquiry can go further. Most immediately, there are implications for
               digital humanities pedagogy. As Ted Underwood has argued, digital humanities classes, as currently defined, don’t really teach students how
                  to use numbers...So it’s almost naive to discuss barriers to entry. There
                  is no entrance to this field
               ). Underwood argues that the cultural analytics
               subfield, in particular, operates primarily as a social network. In such a context
               competency and fluency come as a result of participants’ tacit knowledge and through
               person-to-person or small group interactions. In contrast, a well-defined curriculum
               with explicit pedagogies for teaching research design, data collection, data
               modeling, programming, and data analysis (including but not limited to quantitative
               analysis) would help create pathways to entry that are currently hidden for or
               unavailable to many people. Overt teaching of methods, Underwood argues, allows
               facility with methods to be more equally distributed. Discussing data literacy openly
               and critically strikes me as a key component of the curricular and pedagogical
               intervention Underwood has described. 
            There are wide-ranging benefits to speaking and writing about data, openly and often,
               with implications from the practical to the profound. As part of this strategy, we
               should ask our students to read about the history of the word data, but
               to include how Euclid used the word dedoména, how Marinus described two
               different potential definitions for the word, and how natural philosophers of
               17th-century England, in particular, appropriated dedoména’s Latin alternative
                  data. We should ask them to discuss why such thinkers saw
               similarities between the Greek notion of data and how they were collecting and
               structuring information they observed and recorded. We should speak openly about
               crucial concepts related to data-driven inquiry, including practices aimed at
               contextualizing and situating data and datasets. We should press the idea that social
               constructions foreground and pervade what many think of as neutral or natural
               measures of reality, and we should openly question paradigms of thought that
               emphasize data as self-evident or unproblematically objective. In short, with a sense
               of pride and purpose, let us say and write data, all the while remaining humanists.
            
         
