Title:  Probing Through Iranian Architectural History Within
               the Framework of an Ontology Development Process
Volume:  015
Issue:  3
Date:  October 29, 2021
Abstract:  
            
            This paper presents a prototype ontology developed in the field of Iranian
               architectural history. The paper’s central arguments offer a response to questions
               regarding how to create an ontology in Iranian architectural history, what
               consideration must be addressed here, and how to resolve problematic issues in
               developing an ontology in a field such as Iranian architectural history, which lacks
               a formalized knowledge. The paper is organized into two parts. It primarily presents
               a discussion on the specific domain of architectural history and what it encompasses
               and moves on to examine why it is deemed complicated. After that, the process of
               creating Iranian architectural history ontology and the methodology applied to match
               the intended domain is explained. In the second part of the paper, the content of the
               developed ontology is discussed, which includes various parts of the ontology and
               what it implies to illustrate how the structure of ontology helps in logically
               representing the domain in a machine-readable format.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            To a great extent, what is known about architectural history stems from its practice,
               discussions in its various fields of study, and the accumulation of that information
               into knowledge. Such information has partly been expressed in an explicit form shared
               between different parties (from people to software agents). This mode of sharing
               calls for a mutual understanding of the content in the intended domain to unify the
               conception of different groups involved in the subject matter. The intended consensus
               also relies on interaction in a formal realm with a unified language. Therefore, in
               order to make such interaction possible in the field of architectural history, one
               needs to identify the domain and express the relevant knowledge in a clear and
               explicit manner. To do so, it seems viable to apply the tools designed specifically
               for the purpose. 
            Over the past few decades, in the field of computer science and artificial
               intelligence, a branch called ontology has developed, which provides the
               mentioned clarity in expressing the domain knowledge both by providing an inventory
               of key concepts and treating the relations between the concepts.
            With the progress of science and technology, human beings’ ability to create new and
               advanced tools accelerated to the point of surpassing mundane affairs. Such tools
               were born to replicate human functions. Richard Sennett offers an interesting
               categorization of human-made tools, which he places into two groups: the replicant
               and the robot. A replicant is a tool that mirrors humans by mimicking their actions.
               However, a robot is an ameliorated human; it is more robust, works faster, and never
               tires. Still, we make sense of its functions by referring to our own human measures
                  . The mentioned functions may range from automatically
               completing an order, saving things in its memory, finding and retrieving certain
               items in bulk, or other tasks. Such robot-like tools are established on a somewhat
               simple basis: mirroring the human mind. Unlike the human mind, computers by character
               lack the willpower to learn and recall information, and it is up to us to accumulate
               the knowledge into its memory and decide how information is recounted (described) for
               machines.
            In this paper, we aim to acknowledge the necessity of creating an intelligent
               robot-like system in the field of Iranian architectural history in the form of a
               semantic network; a system capable of functioning faster and more precise than humans
               and able to assist in completing certain tasks that are naturally too difficult,
               impossible, or subject to errors when done manually.
            In order to provide these functions, it is necessary to familiarize the desired
               system with the field of inquiry by describing what it encompasses. Henceforth, the
               system would ground its additional functions based on clearly defined descriptions.
               In other words, human knowledge needs to be presented to the machine. 
            All forms of knowledge representation, including ontologies, are both mediums of
               expression for human beings and ways to communicate with machines in order to tell
               them about the world . Therefore, engaging with sets of
               information related to the intended field, which needs to be categorized and
               described explicitly and logically, is a crucial act while developing an ontology. 
            Accordingly, this research mainly applies ontology to create a clear, explicit, and
               descriptive model of the semantic system in Iranian architectural history, taking
               into account various aspects of the field based on information provided by prominent
               scholars. In other words, here, the effort is focused on developing an ontology in
               the aforementioned field of knowledge, which is both explicit and readable for the
               machine, through capturing and representing the relevant entities in this field. What
               ensues this approach helps organize the views and provides consensus between
               different agents (people with each other or machines with people) on Iranian
               architectural history concepts.
         

            Ontology of Iranian architectural history: terminology
            This title of Ontology of Iranian architectural history
               consists of four terms: ontology,
               Iranian architecture, and history, each of which offers multifaceted
               denotation causing the original term to indicate different meanings. To clarify what
               this title covers in the course of this paper, an overview of the specialized
               terminology is explained below. 
            Ontology: In the terminology of Artificial Intelligence, the term Ontology may refer
               to both the act of describing intended concepts explicitly and the specific outcome
               that is constructed and saved in the form of an XML or UML file, which contains data
               on concepts and their descriptions. That is so that we may have ontology files with
               different purposes and save them on our computers or share them with others. It
               should be noted that description in an ontology means providing formal definitions of
               terms in the domain vocabulary and representing each concept’s information in a
               relational form. 
            Concepts in an ontology must be structured in a way that is usually referred to as
               linked data; that is, data interlinked with other data to make information readable
               for machines and make queries within large bulks of information possible. Such links
               represent relationships within an area of study, and the model that contains all
               those concepts and relationships is what we call an ontology. Although at the heart
               of each ontology there is hierarchical taxonomy, yet since an ontology allows more
               complex and non-hierarchal relationships to be defined, it can be used to represent
               the fluidity of the real world, where things can be related to each other in more
               complex ways than are represented by a hierarchical tree-like structure. In that
               sense, an ontology is more like a spider’s web .
            Iranian architecture: Iran in this paper refers to the Iranian world, which
               transcends modern Iran’s current political boundaries. Simultaneously, Iranian
               architecture covers all architectural works associated with Iran’s territory
               throughout its history.
            History: Michael Stanford distinguishes two meanings of the term history. History
                  may refer either to the course of events, what actually
                  happened. (history 1), or what is believed and written about those events (history
                  2). Sometimes they are distinguished as history-as-event and
                     history-as-account.
               .
            
               Iranian architectural history
               Based on Stanford’s distinction, Iranian architectural history can imply two
                  meanings, where architectural history may be considered as series of events,
                  actually occurred in the world (Iranian architectural history 1), and
                  architectural history as the act of studying and describing what has occurred in
                  the world (Iranian architectural history 2). Given that in developing ontologies,
                  we are appointed to capture how human beings characterize their concepts, rather
                  than actual events and whether or not they happened in a specific way, we need to
                  be associated with Iranian architectural history 2, as the scholarship of
                  architectural history is classified under it, and involves the study of
                  architectural history-as-event . 
               Therefore, the intended domain comprises a broad spectrum of studies on
                  architectural evidence and different sorts of human architectural activities. In
                  other words, we regard Iranian architectural history as a series of reports that
                  narrate certain historical events related to works of architecture, architects,
                  the act of building. 
            
         

            process of creating The IArchHist ontology To avoid verbosity, from this
                  point forward, we will refer to Iranian architectural history ontology by
                  its shortened form IArchHist ontology.
            
            Architecture and architectural history are among cultural matters related to human
               affairs that enfold all the changeability and historicity that such matters enjoy in
               any given culture, including the Iranian culture. Additionally, unlike western
               tradition, the historiography of Iranian architecture is not a longstanding practice.
               Contemporary attempts to write Iranian architectural history have been performed
               mainly by two groups of individuals: first, European travelers, archeologists, and
               architects that came to Iran during the 20th century and composed reports of their
               observations; second, Iranian specialists, such as archeologists, architects, and
               authors, who were mostly employed in institutions like Society for National Heritage
               (SNH) and were responsible for documenting historical buildings for the purpose of
               conservation. Both groups lacked academic training in historiography. In other words,
               the existing historiography of Iranian architecture has been developed by
               non-historians in its academic sense. Therefore, Iranian architectural history has
               yet to become an established academic discipline with formalized terminological and
               theoretical peripheries. The inconsistent quality of historiography in the sphere of
               Iranian architectural history has given rise to its close association with
               architectural works, their chronology, and the vocabulary and methods that were used
               to examine them throughout history.
            Developing ontologies is drawn on logical relationships, so in branches of the
               humanities, such as history, art, and architectural history, which are less concerned
               with positive knowledge, creating an ontology that requires data derived from reasons
               and logical observation poses some challenges. On top of that, even in the western
               scholarly world, architectural history is still highly dominated by the disciplines
               of art history and history of architecture and is advancing towards a distinct
               discipline. Accordingly, Iranian architectural history, in its current state, lacks a
               formalized terminology and is still undergoing its formation process.The first
                  academic program for training architectural historians was established in Iran in
                  2005 (A program called Iranian architectural studies
                  at the university of Shahid Beheshti, Tehran, Iran). For a detailed discussion on
                  the history of Iranian architectural historiography See reference 6. 
            Based on the facts explained about the field of Iranian architectural history,
               describing the terms through their relationships is also challenging since the terms
               have not been used uniformly in the context of writings from different scholars or
               even a single source. In other words, the field’s scholars lack a unified language
               when referring to concepts. 
            Since Iranian architectural history has yet to evolve as an academic field, its
               existing sources involve subjective reports of buildings that are influenced by
               personal feelings, tastes, or opinions of the narrator. This poses a challenge in
               machinizing Iranian architectural history knowledge, which requires objective and
               straightforward data.
            However, the very challenges provoked by the field’s nature simultaneously make it
               essential to undertake available tools (like ontologies) to organize its knowledge.
               In fields such as Iranian architectural history, developing an ontology contributes
               to identifying the field’s ambiguities and immaturities in a precise manner.
               Therefore, here, the ontology provides advantages related to overseeing the field in
               the course of its formation.
            
               Premise
               Usually, the first step for developing an ontology is to consider using the
                  existing models, or the least, an existing taxonomy. Over the past few decades,
                  several representational models have become available in the field of art,
                  architecture, and cultural heritage. These models include database schemata for
                  integrating heritage information, such as CIDOC CRM (CIDOC Conceptual Reference
                  Model) metadata for description of museum objects, such as Object ID, controlled
                  vocabularies of related fields like Getty art & architecture thesaurus (AAT). 
               Assuming that we were to use concepts represented in AAT, for instance, each
                  concept must be an exact equivalent in Persian and English, in terms of
                  definition, implication, and relations to other concepts; otherwise, the goal to
                  represent the reality of Iranian architectural history identities would not be
                  fulfilled. This level of correspondence simply does not exist. That is because the
                  Persian-speaking societies of art and architecture naturally do not match up with
                  the anglosphere one. Many of the identities discussed here are either only found
                  in Persian-speaking cultures, or even if found elsewhere, do not encompass the
                  exact same thing, mainly due to cultural differences that are often neglected in
                  universal attempts to develop comprehensive formal ontologies. Therefore, in most
                  cases, when observed carefully, concepts (that are embedded in words), albeit
                  close in meaning, are not identical in the Persian and anglosphere worlds. Based
                  on these considerations, the IArchHist ontology was developed as a unilingual
                  ontology in Persian. 
               The most basic premise held in developing the IArchHist ontology is that it is
                  possible to represent the knowledge of architectural history through its
                  identified concepts. Such concepts must be thoroughly defined in the course of
                  developing the ontology and be clarified to reach the processing level of the
                  machines.
               Here an issue arises: how to make relatively ambiguous concepts understandable for
                  machines. At this point, the second premise emerges, stating that concepts are
                  understood and defined through their association with other concepts. The human
                  mind identifies each concept’s meaning by placing it in an elaborate network of
                  its related concepts and recognizing how they are linked. The ontology replicates
                  the same process by representing existing relational links between concepts. As a
                  result, each concept is conceptualized within a specific structure, which is
                  processable for machines.
            
            
               The scope of the inventory
               As a discipline, Iranian architectural history involves certain concepts, which
                  are indefinite by nature, are not directly expressed, and therefore, cannot be
                  adequately described. For instance, there is the concept of principle in
                  Iranian historical buildings’ architectural design. Pirnia, a distinguished
                  Iranian architectural historian, proposes five principles of Iranian architecture
                  as follows: human scale, introversion, self-sufficiency, precluding futility,
                  structural soundness, and proportion . Although he
                  further describes these concepts in the course of his studies, because of their
                  propensity to diverse interpretations, it is hard or even impossible to catch a
                  clear and explicit, and more importantly, a consensual definition; hence, the
                  possibility of failure in representing these concepts through IArchHist ontology.
                  Therefore, it is essential to delimit the semantic boundary for the selection of
                  concepts in the relevant field.
               The fundamental criterion is that each IArchHist ontology entity requires a formal
                  description that is logical and certified, which would explain the concept it
                  represents. Therefore, all those concepts that are describable in logical phrases
                  clearly and explicitly are covered in the IArchHist ontology, while evaluative or
                  rhetoric concepts are avoided.The point is clarified with examples in
                     section 4 of the paper. Consequently, the project scope covers Iranian
                  architectural historians’ works who referred to both the material evidence (the
                  relics) and the textual evidence of Iranian architecture.
               The information used to build the IArchHist ontology was collected from
                  contemporary (written or published during the 80s and 90s in Iran) domain-specific
                     works.The following works were used: 
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                      The appointed references consist of
                  Iranian scholars’ works from four main fields of architectural history, historical
                  geography, archeology, and restoration, and include classes of objects, events,
                  processes, states of affairs, attributes of objects, parts of objects, segments of
                  processes. The selected scholars and their compositions are considered references
                  and major sources within Iranian architectural history.
            
            
               Methodology
               Noy & McGuinness (2001) proposed an outline for
                  developing ontologies, which involves the following seven steps: 1) Determine the
                  domain and scope of the ontology; 2) Consider reusing existing ontologies; 3)
                  Enumerate essential terms in the ontology; 4) Define the classes and the class
                  hierarchy; 5) Define the properties of classes — slots; 6) Define the facets of
                  the slots; 7) Create instances. In developing the IArchHist, the methodology
                  proposed by Noy & McGuinness is applied by simultaneously performing the
                  suggested steps and including additional measures when necessary. Following this
                  strategy, the methodology in building the IArchHist ontology is mapped out into
                  the following five stages: 
               
                  Steps 1 & 2: Determining the purpose and the scope;
                     selecting the key references;As mentioned before, due to the lack and
                        inadequacy of structured resources such as metadata standards, thesauruses,
                        and databases in the domain of Iranian architectural history, an inventory
                        of written references was chosen under consideration of a group of domain
                        experts to extract the data necessary for building IArchHist ontology.
                      choosing the appropriate ontology language and software.
                  Steps 3 & 4: A taxonomy is an orderly classification for
                     a defined domain. It comprises controlled vocabulary terms (generally only
                     preferred terms) organized into a hierarchical structure. Each term in a
                     taxonomy is in one or more parent/child (broader/ narrower) relationships to
                     other terms in the taxonomy . In order to create
                     the taxonomy for IArchHist ontology, two steps were necessary: 
                        1. Forming the inventory: cataloging key concepts from
                           information provided by references;
                        2. Categorization: grouping related concepts together,
                           organizing them in a hierarchical order, and defining upper-level
                           classes.
                     These steps are explained in detail in section 4.
                  Steps 5 & 6: In order to describe the internal structure
                     of the domain concepts outlined in the previous step, we must identify and draw
                     semantic relations between concepts, which have been suggested and specified by
                     domain scholars. Each link must connect at least two concepts producing
                     precise, unambiguous text definition for every pair of concepts that can be
                     expressed in short logical phrases.
                  Step 7: The defined concepts in the previous steps mainly
                     cover general entities indicating each concept’s types and genre. In order to
                     make the IArchHist ontology richer and more detailed, we must assign instances
                     to each general concept. Such instances inherit the relations previously
                     outlined between their prime concepts.
                  Visualization: As soon as the ontology is built, the
                     challenge of how to use it, how to explore it, and what data to recall arises.
                     Visualization is mainly based on mapping the information to a graphical
                     representation to facilitate data interpretation. It also provides ways to
                     limit the amount of data users receive while keeping them aware of the full information . The type
                     of visualization depends on the user’s intention; however, concerning IArchHist
                     ontology, direct 2D graphs was deemed the most acceptable since it is more
                     familiar and direct for users.
               
            
         

            IArchHist ontology
            
               The Taxonomy of IArchHist Ontology
               By implementing the conventional methods of building ontologies in the domain of
                  Iranian architectural history, a representative model of the domain was created,
                  which will be thoroughly described in the next section.
               The IArchHist ontology is an OWL 2 ontology created in Protégé 5 editor,
                  represents Iranian architectural concepts by taking into account different aspects
                  of the subject material. This ontology was developed in Persian. Capturing the
                  main concepts of the IArchHist ontology required building a large lexicon of
                  terms. Here, each term was significant because it referred to a concept of the
                  domain. Concepts, also called Class or Type, or Universal,
                  are fundamental building blocks of the IArchHist ontology, as any other. Each
                  class represents a set of instances (also known as individuals) that share one or
                  more common properties. These properties are identified according to the
                  information provided by key references. Whether physical or nonphysical, spatial
                  or temporal, each item within the domain has been thoroughly represented in the
                  ontology.
               For example, the class of masjid-i jāmiʿ (Friday mosque)As
                     demonstrated before, English equivelants and definitions of the Persian
                     architectural terms do not always encompass all their meaning. Therefore, in
                     this section, discussed terms are presented by transliteratation. However,
                     loosely translated English equivelants of terms are provided to make them
                     understandable for anglophone readers. Note that the original version of the
                     IArchHist ontology is entirely developed in Persian. includes all the
                  individuals that have the following properties: 
                     Is a type of masjid (mosque)
                     Is a place for duʿā (prayer)
                     Is a place for namāz-i Jumʿa (Friday prayer)
                     Has a part minbar (pulpit)
                   Therefore, individuals such as masjid-i jāmiʿ-i Isfahān (Friday mosque of
                  Isfahān, masjid-i jāmiʿ-i Yazd (Friday mosque of Yazd), masjid-i jāmiʿ-i ‎
                  Ardistān (Friday mosque of Ardistān) all belong to this class, and all share the
                  mentioned properties.
               To accurately record classes and their related properties, each phrase of the
                  mentioned texts containing related information was documented in a separate
                  datasheet. These phrases were labeled under entries named by the exact terms
                  utilized in the text in the original language.Importing exact terms used in
                     sources written by prominent scholars would simultaneously portray the
                     vocabulary of research in Iranian architectural history. The terms were
                  further employed as IArchHist ontology classes and subclasses. An example is shown
                  below (Table 1).To better understand the process, in the following examples,
                     texts are translated to English, however IArchHist ontology captures Persian
                     terms.
               
               
                  Example of information about sardar (portal)
                  
                     Text
                     Citation
                  
                  
                     A darāygāh (entrance) contains faḍā (space)s such as pīsh-utāq
                        (anteroom), sardar (portal), dargāh (doorway), hashtī (vestibule), keryās
                        (lobby), dehlīz (entrance hall), dālān (corridor).
                     
                  
                  
                     Physical parts of the masjid (mosque), shaped around a ḥayāṭ (courtyard)
                        and a dargāh (doorway), with a sardar (portal), and a pīshṭāq (arched
                        portal) are adequately linked together, creating the architecture of the
                        masjid (mosque).
                     
                  
                  
                     Each bāgh (garden) comprised a darāygāh (entrance); a building sometimes
                        called sardar (portal). This building was similar to bīrunī (the public or
                        male quarters of wealthy households) part of traditional khāna (house)s,
                        which was the place for padhīrāyī (receiving guests).
                     
                  
                  
                     In sangī (stone) kārvānsarā (caravanserai), sardar (portal)s were made
                        from ājur (brick).
                     
                  
                  
                     masjid-i jāmiʿ-i ʿAbbāsī (Abbasi Friday mosque) has a sardar (portal)
                        decorated with kāshī-yi tarāsh (mosaic tile)
                     
                  
               
               In Table 1, related information to the term sardar (portal) is shown.
                  A sardar (portal) is the main façade of some buildings in Iranian historical
                  architecture containing various elements used as a complex entrance system. Each
                  cited phrase contains related concepts to Sardar, which can be listed as follows
                  (Table 2):
               
                  Concepts related to sardar (portal)
                  
                     darāygāh (entrance)
                     ḥayāṭ (courtyard)
                  
                  
                     faḍā (space)
                     pīshṭāq (arched portal)
                  
                  
                     pīsh-utāq (anteroom)
                     bāgh (garden)
                  
                  
                     sardar (portal)
                     bīrūnī (the public or male quarters of wealthy households)
                  
                  
                     dargāh (doorway)
                     khāna (house)
                  
                  
                     hashtī (vestibule)
                     sang (stone)
                  
                  
                     keryās (lobby)
                     kārvānsarā (caravanserai)
                  
                  
                     dehlīz (entrance hall)
                     ājur (brick)
                  
                  
                     dālān (corridor)
                     masjid-i jāmiʿ-i ʿAbbāsī (Abbasi friday mosque)
                  
                  
                     masjid (mosque)
                     kāshī-yi tarāsh (mosaic tile)
                  
               
               These terms were imported to Protégé in a class-subclass order, which was
                  developed by employing a middle-out approach of classification.Middle-Out
                     approaches identify central concepts in each area/domain identified; core
                     concepts are identified and then generalized and specialized to complete the
                     ontology . The class hierarchy of sardar
                  (portal) is shown in Figure 1.
               
                  Class hierarchy of sardar (portal)
                  
               
            
            
               Interconnections of IArchHist ontology
               The main challenge of developing the IArchHist ontology was describing the
                  concepts via their interconnected relations. This process passes beyond a
                  taxonomic description, which only lays out the type of each entity by a
                  hierarchical relation to its upper (broader) class. The ontological model was
                  further enriched by the description of the internal structure of concepts, which
                  was accomplished by determining each concept's properties.
               According to OWL, properties may appear as data properties or
                     object properties. Data properties include all descriptive and
                  behavioral aspects that relate to the entities under consideration – such as their
                  geometrical, physical, and behavioral features – which are defined by specific
                  values associated with those attributes. Instead, the object properties represent
                  the connections that exist between each entity and the others, within and between
                  the involved knowledge domains .
               Since the key references provide information in natural language, to identify the
                  properties of each concept, we need to rewrite the information in logical phrases
                  so that the building units (concepts and relations) of each phrase can be inferred
                  and transferred into protégé. For example, in the case of sardar (portal), the
                  following statements are inferred:
               
                  sardar (portal) is one of the architectural elements of a darāygāh
                     (entrance).
                  Some masjid (mosque)s have a sardar (portal)
                  Some bāgh (garden)s have a sardar (portal)
                  Some khāna (house)s have a sardar (portal)
                  Some sardar (portal)s are made of ājur (brick)
                  Some sardar (portal)s are decorated with kāshī-yi tarāsh(mosaic tile)
               
               Relations in an ontology can be categorized into two groups: first, the general
                  relations (like hierarchy or whole-part), which are not specific to a particular
                  domain and can be found in any domain of knowledge. Second, are specific
                  relations, which are appointed to a particular domain. For example, Having
                     Material or Being Decorated By are two properties probably
                  only directed to the concepts found in the domain of Iranian architecture
                  history.
               The above list includes some properties that relate a certain concept to sardar
                  (portal) and specify how it is related to sardar (portal). That is how an entity
                  called sardar (portal) participates in connections to other concepts. One
                  instance is explained below:
               It has been said that in the masjid-i jāmiʿ-i ʿAbbāsī (Abbasi Friday mosque), the
                  sardar (portal) has been decorated with a type of tile (kāshī) called kāshī-yi
                  tarāsh (mosaic tile). According to this statement, a sardar (portal) (like the one
                  in Abbasi Friday mosque) can be decorated with kāshī-yi tarāsh. Therefore, to make
                  the intended connection, units of the statement can be separated: 
                     Concept 1: sardar (portal)
                     Concept 2: kāshī-yi tarāsh (mosaic tile)
                     Link (OWL object property): IsDecoratedWith
                   The representative model is shown in Figure 2. 
               
                  Representative model of the relation between sardar (portal) & kāshī-yi
                     tarāsh (mosaic tile)
                  
               
               Here, the property IsDecoratedWith describes a binary relationship between two
                  individuals of sardar and kāshī-yi tarāsh. Now consider all of the individuals
                  that have an IsDecoratedWith relationship to some other individual.
                  We can think of these individuals as belonging to the class of individuals with
                  some IsDecoratedWith relationship. What is noteworthy here is the
                  fact that relationships are also capable of defining a class of
                  individuals. In OWL, we can define such classes by using restrictions . Using restrictions signifies how each supposed
                  relationship applies to the instances of each concept. For example: 
                     Do all instances of sardar (portal) have this property? (Is this property
                        universal?)
                     Do specific instances of sardar (portal) have this property? (Is this an
                        existential property?)
                   OWL restrictions fall into three main categories: 
                     Quantifier Restrictions
                     Cardinality Restrictions
                     hasValue Restrictions
                   In IArchHist ontology, the quantifier restriction is the dominant mode of
                  control and can be further categorized into existential and universal
                  restrictions: 
                     An existential restriction describes a class of individuals with at least
                        one (some) relationship along with a specified property to an individual
                        that is a member of a specified class.
                     Universal restrictions describe the set of individuals that, for a given
                        property, only have relationships with other individuals that are members of
                        a specific class . 
                   In the above example, the property IsDecoratedWith was
                  assigned to the class sardar (portal) along with an existential
                  restriction, which describes the class of individuals that have at least one
                     IsDecoratedWith relationship to an individual that is a member of
                  the class kāshī-yi tarāsh, which means there exists at least one
                  instance of the class sardar (portal) that is decorated with kāshī-yi
                  tarāsh.
            
            
               Classes and Sub-classes in IArchHist ontology
               By following the mentioned strategies, the first draft of IArchHist ontology was
                  developed covering 1924 concepts, interconnected by 103 object properties. The
                  critical component of the ontological model, being the concepts and their semantic
                  relations, provided an overview of the knowledge in the field of Iranian
                  architectural history and an understanding of the branches of concepts in this
                  domain. 
               According to IArchHist ontology, two upper-classes were defined to capture the
                  concepts of the field: IArchHist concept and IArchHist related
                     concept where the former encompasses the central concept of Iranian
                  architectural history and the latter those such as rituals, beliefs, periods,
                  which act as intermediary concepts of the field. 
               The class IArchHist concept contains the following subclasses (Figure
                     3):Figures 3 to 7 are translated screenshots of IArchHist
                     ontology.
                  
                     IArchHist concept
                     
                  
                  
                     Relic: this class includes objective concepts, which
                           refer to the remained relics related to architecture. Each architectural
                           relic has been the result of an agent's work (a maker); it was
                           accomplished through specific actions and technologies; and has certain
                           characteristics such as form, measurement, material, and layout.
                           Architectural relics are categorized as follows (Figure 4):
                        
                           Architectural relics
                           
                        
                     

                     Characteristics: this class includes concepts that are
                           somehow assignable to relics. Such concepts are widely used when
                           describing certain architectural relics (Figure 5). The characteristics
                           are either physical (such as measurements) or nonphysical (like
                           functions).
                        
                           Characteristics
                           
                        
                     Agent: This class includes the agents that participate
                           in the development of an architectural relic. Agents are divided into two
                           categories: human agents and non-human agents (Figure 6).Human
                           agents can be further categorized regarding the state of their
                           interaction with the relics. Some agents have a role in erecting
                           buildings (including the architect, the contractor, the tile worker, the
                           carpenter, etc.). Some help in the maintenance of the relics (guards,
                           lightkeepers, etc.). Some are the user of relics (travelers, pilgrims,
                           etc.), and some have instigated the formation of a relic through the
                           needs or beliefs of the social group they belong to (like Christians,
                           Europeans). Additionally, some agents have affected the formation or
                           continuity of relics, despite their non-human origin (like gods or
                           goddesses).
                        
                           Agent
                           
                        
                     
                     Action: This class includes all the actions involved in
                           the creation or usage of a relic. It is further categorized into
                           interaction and creation (Figure 7).
                        
                           Action
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Resolving challenges in IArchHist ontology
               As we mentioned briefly in the Interconnections Section, The
                  main challenge in the development process of IArchHist ontology was representing
                  relations based on the data derived from sources. It is important to note that in
                  languages such as OWL, we are mainly able to draw binary relations (meaning we can
                  use properties that link only two individuals). However, in reality, the domain of
                  Iranian architectural history contains certain concepts that require in their
                  representation, a type of relationship that links an entity to more than just one
                  other entity or value. These relations are called n-ary relations . N-ary relations are more complex types of links, and
                  drawing them is usually quite tricky and often requires specific tactics.
               Consider the following examples: The ceiling of Friday mosque
                     of Fahraj is quite detailed but human-scaled. In this case, one might
                  view the relationship as a binary relation between the individual Friday mosque of
                  Fahraj and its ceiling and represent it as shown in Figure 8. However, here we see
                  additional aspects of that relationship, including its ornamental attribute (being
                  detailed) and the spatial quality it creates (being human-scaled) associated with
                  it.
               In most ontologies, especially in humanities, such instances of a relation cannot
                  be viewed as an instance of a binary relation with additional attributes attached
                  to it. Instead, it is an illustration of the individual Friday mosque of Fahraj
                  and the complex object representing various facts about its constituents.
               Following the general guidelines posed by Noy & Rector
                     (2006), in the IArchHist ontology, we represented such problematic
                  relationships by adding an intermediate class involving all sub-relations
                  associated with the broader relationship (Figure 9).
               
                  Representing the relationship between the Friday mosque of Fahraj and its
                     ceiling with a binary relation
                  
               
               
                  Representing the relationship between the Friday mosque of Fahraj and its
                     ceiling with N-ary relations
                  
               
            
         

            Iarchhist outcomes
            As we have shown in the course of this paper, the nature of some fields, such as
               architectural history, imposes somewhat theoretical regard to ontologies as knowledge
               representation tools rather than their typical goals involving the establishment of a
               shared understanding. The challenges faced when developing IArchHist, which for the
               most part was related to ambiguity and indefiniteness of concepts, gave rise to a
               strategy for outlining a methodology for developing the intended ontology, a
               methodology which, unlike other domains, is more simultaneous rather than a
               step-by-step procedure.
             The development of the IArchHist ontology prompted three outcomes that would
               significantly benefit scholars and researchers of Iranian architecture history. The
               first outcome is the data collected while developing the ontology. The lack of
               structured databases or other forms of organized data collections in the focused
               field was a problematic research challenge. All of the field's main sources are
               paper-based books and articles. The process of developing IArchHist ontology, as
               explained earlier, simultaneously led to collecting data in a structured manner,
               which included describing and representing various and, in some cases, several
               relationships between each pair of data.
            The second outcome is producing relatively precise descriptions and definitions for
               each concept in the scope of IArchHist ontology. Since drawing the relationships
               between concepts required uncovering each concept's nature and what it logically
               encompasses, a descriptive set of literal definitions was created during IArchHist
               ontology development. For example, when attempting to represent the concept of
               "mosque" and drawing its relations to the concept of "dome," a series of logical
               questions were raised: what is the nature of the relationship between mosques and
               domes? Must all mosques encompass a dome? Should a building necessarily include a
               dome in order to be called a mosque? If any building possesses a dome, can we then
               call it a mosque? Attempting to answer these questions and others along the same line
               resulted in uncovering the relations between the concepts, such as mosque and dome,
               and ultimately made it possible to acquire a comprehensive and exclusive definition
               for each concept.
            The third outcome is that by objectively relating our concepts, we are able to
               identify new patterns and pose new questions or find new explanations for formerly
               resolved issues. For instance, the concept of architect is among the sub-classes of
               agent in IArchHist ontology. Typically, vernacular architects are considered to be
               responsible for building design. However, in IArchHist ontology, the class architect
               is related to sub-classes of relic and characteristic through the following
               properties: 
                  Architect designs building
                  Architect erects vault
                  Architect renovates building complex
                  Architect calculates building geometry
                These properties show that there are cases of Iranian architects that were
               responsible for more than just building designs. They were individuals with knowledge
               of building construction, and in some cases, they were asked to propose renovation
               outlines for building complexes. Instances of all the mentioned roles are included in
               the IArchHist ontology. 
         

            Conclusion
            This paper presents an overview of developing an ontology in the field of Iranian
               architectural history named IArchHist ontology. The main challenge here was
               responding to the question of "how knowledge representation with ontologies helps
               organize data in a field consisting of a plethora of ambiguous and unstructured
               information scattered in resources. As explained in the course of this paper, an
               exclusive strategy was established, which was based on the development methodologies
               of conventional ontologies. The results of this research promote two key ideas: 
                  Methodological approach: In addition to resolving the fundamental issues of
                     the particular field, the process of IArchHist development provokes a new
                     practice of understanding and studying knowledge, which takes place while
                     describing ambiguous concepts and uncovering their logical relations.
                     Accomplishing such purposes demands revealing the complex semantic network that
                     draws the explicit or implicit connections between concepts.
                  Developed product: The outcome of this research is basically a bounded part
                     of Iranian architectural history ontology, which can be visualized and analyzed
                     thoroughly with different techniques and further refined under field experts.
                     That act of operating the different tasks, from describing to classifying and
                     linking data sets at the same time, makes the process of developing IArchHist
                     ontology much more valuable than the physical outcome. In order to reach an
                     agreeable description for each concept, a constant reciprocating strategy was
                     needed to improve the representative model of domain concepts
                     continuously.
               
            In conclusion, this research opens up new possibilities for further investigation
               into the use of ontology as a tool for organizing concepts in the field of Iranian
               architectural history by displaying their ambiguities and disorders. Furthermore, the
               suggested classification system could contribute to thinking more clearly within the
               focused field of knowledge through clear and unambiguous terms and concepts.
         

            Acknowledgements
            This research has been developed within the master thesis Project of Ontology of Iranian Architectural History: based on contemporary
                  scholarly publications in Shahid Beheshti University (2017) under the
               supervision of Dr. Niloofar Razavi and consultation of Dr. Mehrdad Qayyoomi Bidhendi.
               We would like to express our personal gratitude to all those who have helped in
               carrying out the research.
         
