Title:  Hierarchical or Non-hierarchical? A Philosophical Approach to
                    a Debate in Text Encoding
Volume:  015
Issue:  1
Date:  21 May 2021
Abstract:  
                Is hierarchical XML apt for the encoding of complex manuscript materials? Some
                    scholars have argued that texts are non-hierarchical entities and that XML
                    therefore is inadequate. This paper argues that the nature of text is such that
                    it supports both hierarchical and non-hierarchical representations. The paper
                    distinguishes (1) texts from documents and document carriers, (2) writing from
                    "texting", (3) actions that can be performed by one agent only from actions that
                    require at least two agents to come about (shared actions), (4) finite
                    actions from potentially infinitely ongoing actions. Texts are described as
                    potentially infinitely ongoing shared actions which are co-produced by author
                    and reader agents. This makes texts into entities that are more akin to events
                    than to objects or properties, and shows, moreover, that texts are dependent on
                    human understanding and thus mind-dependent entities. One consequence from this
                    is that text encoding needs to be recognized as an act participating in texting
                    which in turn makes hierarchical XML as apt a markup for text
                        representation, or rather: for texting, as non-hierarchical markup. The
                    encoding practices of the Bergen Wittgenstein Archives (WAB) serve as the main
                    touchstone for my discussion.
            
Full Body Text: 

                1. Introduction

                Amongst the many theoretical questions about text, there is a philosophical, or
                    more specifically, an ontological question. The most general form of this
                    question is perhaps ‘What is text?’. In Digital Humanities, the
                    issue has partly been focused around the question whether texts are hierarchical
                    or rather non-hierarchical structures. Examples of this discussion include the
                    statement that text is best represented as an ordered
                            hierarchy of content object (OHCO), because that is what text really
                            is
                        , or, in opposition to it, the
                    statement that humanists are trying to represent what
                            they all agree are non-hierarchical structures
                        . Conflicting lessons for text
                    encoding have been drawn from these two opposed approaches to the question. Some
                    have concluded that the hierarchical markup grammar XML can be regarded as
                    adequate for text encoding, because that is in their view what texts basically
                    are, viz., hierarchical entities. Others reject XML and embedded markup more
                    generally as inadequate, precisely on the basis of the view that texts have, or
                    at least can have, non-hierarchical structures. In this paper, I want to argue
                    that both conclusions have been drawn prematurely due to an erroneous approach
                    to the ontological question about text.
                I shall start with presenting a brief example of philosophical authorship from
                    the last century. A reflection on the editorial history of this example and
                    other writings from the same authorship will lead us to a view into editorial
                    philology and, in particular, digital editorial philology. It is in
                    this digital context that the question about the ontological nature of text and
                    its consequences for text encoding have most forcefully been asked. I shall
                    attempt to demonstrate that a philosophical reflection on the hermeneutical
                    nature of our text practices not only helps to understand better the question
                    about the ontology of texts, but also to dispel the idea that the nature of text
                    would as such, i.e. as independent from our text practices, dictate either
                    hierarchical or non-hierarchical markup.
            

                2. Writing


                In July 1931, a philosopher in Cambridge reads Augustine’s Confessiones. Augustine’s account of how he learned to speak as a
                    child makes a strong impression on him. Our philosopher reads the account at a
                    time when he is struggling with theoretical questions about language and
                    meaning. He therefore is very sensitive to anything that even remotely deals
                    with these things. Augustine’s description seems generally fair and
                    representative of how we think language acquisition works. But our philosopher
                    gets puzzled about a few sentences. Perhaps he draws a line in the margin of the
                    book, to highlight the passages that he finds perplexing. Later, then, he notes
                    down his thoughts in a notebook, recording what he believes was right and what
                    he believes was wrong with the account. Later still he returns to these notes,
                    and develops his ideas into a longer discussion. He develops an entire argument
                    around Augustine’s account. He regards his discussion of Augustine as a way of
                    becoming clearer about his own thought concerning linguistic meaning, and about
                    the role that humans play in establishing the relation between
                    words and objects. The exact intentions behind Augustine’s original account are
                    of less importance to him now. 
                He has the discussion of Augustine, together with many other notes and remarks,
                    typed. The resulting typescript he then cuts into paper slips. The slips are of
                    varying sizes: some contain one remark or even only part of a remark, others
                    contain series of remarks or also an entire page. He collects the slips together
                    with cuttings from other typescripts. Next, he reorganizes the contents of his
                    collection. He inserts additional sheets, with handwritten titles for chapters
                    and subchapters. Soon he has this new arrangement of his remarks typed again,
                    hereby producing a large new typescript. It contains more than
                    4,000 remarks — he calls them Bemerkungen. The Bemerkungen
                    are typically separated from each other by one or more blank lines. The
                    typescript looks much like an advanced book manuscript. But soon our philosopher
                    starts to make changes, namely adding, deleting, rearranging and revising
                    remarks and sentences in it. In many places, he adds alternative phrasings. Some
                    parts of the typescript he goes through more than once, making changes in
                    pencil, black ink and red ink. The amount of changes and revisions grows larger
                    and larger. The changes now begin to also extend into parallel notebooks and
                    other writing books. Entire new sections are added, some in the margins of the
                    typed pages, others on the typescript’s verso pages, and yet others in separate
                    notebooks. 
                About a year later he begins considering the idea of making his discussion of
                    Augustine the beginning of a new book in philosophy, to appear in a parallel
                    German-English edition. About fifteen years earlier he had published the Logisch-philosophische Abhandlung; this book had given
                    him some status. He now produces a concise summary of his argument about
                    Augustine, making it the beginning of a discussion about small and well-defined
                    samples of language use. These he calls language
                        games (Sprachspiele), and he intends to
                    make the idea of language games the backbone of his entire new book project.
                Eventually, after ten more years’ hard work of producing many new Bemerkungen and revising, rearranging, adding and
                    deleting, he has yet another typescript produced that looks ready for the press.
                    The typescript even includes a title (Philosophische
                        Untersuchungen), a motto and a preface. However, in the remaining
                    five years of his life, our philosopher can never bring himself to finish the
                    work for publication. Two years after his death, in 1953, his friends finally
                    edit and publish it with a parallel translation in English.
                        This is a very brief account of the story of the Austrian–British
                        philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein’s book Philosophical
                            Investigations
                        , with a focus on its first four paragraphs
                        where Augustine’s description (in Confessiones
                        I, 6 and 8 ) of how he learned to speak and
                        understand is discussed. The book was published posthumously in 1953 by
                        Wittgenstein’s heirs from his Nachlass. The
                        Wittgenstein Nachlass is described and
                        catalogued by G.H. von Wright in The Wittgenstein
                            Papers (, first published 1969). The
                        earliest preserved version of Philosophical
                            Investigations §§1–4  is from
                        July 1931 and can be found in Ms-111 (http://wittgensteinsource.org/Ms-111,15_f
                        ). For a concise and easily accessible
                        account of Wittgenstein’s way of working in the early 1930s see Joachim
                        Schulte on http://wittgensteinsource.org/Ms-111_m
                        .
            

                3. Scholarship

                So far I have done nothing but portray a real example of philosophical authorship
                    from the twentieth century. Note that I did not use the word text even
                    once. I could have used the word, but I need not have used it. In some places, I
                    could have said text instead of remark or, in others, instead of
                        discussion or argument or book or work. But in
                    all these cases it would have been replaceable. Our author may
                    sometimes have asked himself: Which text should I choose here? Will I ever
                    finish my text? Is my text good enough? Etc. However, again, the occurrences of
                    the expression text in such questions are replaceable with words such as
                        manuscript, book, phrasing, sequence or
                        version. Regarding the notion of text, our real case example did not
                    seem to pose any special theoretical difficulties. Most importantly, the
                        ontological question of what text is, clearly need
                    not have bothered our author. For the author the notion of text
                    need not be problematic at all. An author may just write, delete, rearrange,
                    rewrite, compose, and so on. Neither did I have to be bothered by
                    the notion when telling the story of the example. So, if there is a specific
                    philosophical, ontological issue about text, where does it come in?
                Considering the further development of our philosopher’s story may help to find
                    the answer to our question. Let us first try to locate, with the help of our
                    narrative, the points at which text can become a theoretical issue of
                        any sort. As this particular tale goes, before he dies, our
                    philosopher appoints three friends who are to manage the publication of his
                    writings. The three find themselves confronted with a huge mass of pages (which
                    they first have to collect from different places), some handwritten, some typed,
                    some bound in notebooks, some on loose sheets, some in orderly dossiers. This is
                    now standardly referred to as our philosopher’s Nachlass. For some of the
                    books and pieces that they decide to edit from this Nachlass, they are able to use neat enough typescripts — for most
                    of the publications, however, they have to make selections and combinations on
                    both large and small scales, and need to do some substantial editing. They have
                    to decide what to choose for publication; which version to use; how to arrange
                    it; how many and which of our author’s variant phrasings to include; whether to
                    use also variants added in other manuscripts; whether to obey all his
                    instructions or only those that they find conducive; whether always to omit what
                    our philosopher himself had deleted; whether to stick to at least some of his
                    idiosyncratic style and punctuation; whether, and how much, to expand on his
                    elliptic references to either his own ideas or also the ideas and works of
                    others; how much to bother the reader with information about the character of
                    the original Nachlass source; etc. etc. 
                If not for our author, text now seems to have become an issue at least for his
                    editors, or for any editors of a Nachlass such as
                    Wittgenstein’s. In the processes of editorial decision-making, such editors will
                    often refer to precisely this thing, the text, and find themselves confronted
                    with issues of so-called textual criticism. We can imagine
                    them discussing and debating these issues both amongst themselves and with the
                    users of their editions. Both the editors and their critics will argue for their
                    respective positions by reference to what they call the text; and this
                    invocation of the text, while the word itself often seems to refer to different
                    things for the different sides, always seems to lend their respective
                    standpoints and arguments strength and significance. Surely, for many of the
                    arising disputes, the expression text will again be replaceable by some
                    other words, e.g. source. In several cases, however, the expression
                    clearly carries something which is not contained in those other expressions,
                    something like the marker of a norm or standard, or of the right interpretation,
                    and the text is precisely the expression to be used.
                Let us complete the story with some perceptions and questions from the readers’
                    side. The Wittgenstein readers asked: Have we received all the text, or are
                    parts missing? Is the text displayed in the correct sequence? Does it contain
                    transcription errors? Does the edition maybe mislead me to adopt a wrong
                    interpretation? Have I been given the right text? Have I been given the text as
                    it was intended by the author? To what extent is the text authorized by its
                    author Ludwig Wittgenstein? Does the edited text correspond to the original? The
                        textual situation in the Wittgenstein Nachlass itself is often far from clear. The edited text could be
                    something that physically never existed before, or no longer existed — thus, was
                    something that had to be (re)constructed. Or, the editors came at different
                    times to different conclusions about what the text was referring to, and
                    for a few items different editions, as also different translations, were
                    produced. Readers would again ask: Which is the text / translation I should use
                    for my interpretation?
                Now, it is true that these questions and issues bring us closer to theoretical
                    discourse about text. But none of them necessarily brings us to the
                        ontological question about what text is. Moreover,
                    there are disciplines that not only treat these questions and issues, but also
                    provide answers and solutions to them. I think here in particular of editorial
                    philology, and, of course, especially digital editorial philology. In the
                    following, I will first stress that digital editorial philology provides
                    solutions to the above-mentioned issues and questions. But in this context we
                    will notice that the very same disciplines that provide the solutions, also in
                    fact seem to give rise to our ontological question about text. For an illustrative assessment of challenges and achievements
                        in the pre-digital era of editing Wittgenstein as well as the scholarly
                        reactions to the editions see .
            

                4. Digital scholarship

                Methods of textual criticism have been developed for many purposes, including for
                    finding solutions to exactly the kind of issues and questions brought up in the
                    previous section. Twentieth-century textual criticism has improved these methods
                    further through the application of digital techniques. For instance, while the
                    practice of producing editions comprising both facsimiles and transcriptions,
                    ranging from ultra-diplomatic to so-called students versions, has already
                    existed in the pre-digital age, the introduction of digital techniques has made
                    producing such editions easier, cheaper and more efficient. But the digital
                    medium has not only provided improved ways of implementing solutions that had
                    already existed before — it has furthermore brought new solutions
                    and possibilities. XML-based user-steered or interactive dynamic presentation
                         of online text
                    archives is entirely new, that is, a genuine achievement of digital
                    editorial philology, and it offers something that had not been possible
                    before.
                Many of the innovations are due to the discipline of text encoding (; ). Text encoding
                    enables us to deal with editorial challenges such as the issues from the
                    previous section by, first, separating representation or transcription matters
                    from presentation matters, and, second, serving the different interests we might
                    have in editing a source by explicitly addressing them through different groups
                    of codes (; ). For
                    example, while one group of codes may record a manuscript’s chronological
                    sequence, another one can take care of the physical sequence, and a third one of
                    a specific sequence in content. Subsequently, the three encodings can be invoked
                    independently of each other, or also in various combinations, just as required
                    by individual users’ research needs. While pre-digital book editing, if it had
                    not been for certain material restrictions, could have delivered some of the
                    same possibilities, it could never have delivered the same degree of
                        interaction and transparency which characterizes
                    digital editorial philology that is based on text encoding. In traditional
                    editing, the editor and publisher decide how the source is presented, while the
                    user mostly tends to remain in a purely passive role. The typical user of
                    traditional editions merely receives what experts have prepared for her and is
                    rarely in a position to adequately verify the edition received. In contrast to
                    this, with digital editing and publishing driven by text encoding, users are no
                    longer dependent, so-to-say purely on the basis of good faith, on the decisions
                    made by editors. Instead they are now able to check editorial decisions and,
                    moreover, with interactive dynamic presentation tools to also complement the
                    experts’ editing by producing alternative filterings and presentations of the
                    source materials. Editorial philology today can satisfactorily address most of
                    the issues about text brought up in the previous section. We can now make
                    available all versions of a work, all variants of alternative phrasings, all
                    editorial interpretations of a passage — in principle all options between which
                    editors before had to choose due to material restrictions. The user of the
                    editions will still have questions: Which of the many versions made available
                        to me is the one I shall use? But this was a question also for our
                    Cambridge author himself.
                These achievements of digital editorial philology have become possible through
                        text encoding. At the same time, it is also
                        precisely scholars of text encoding who have forcefully
                    embarked on the ontological question What is text?. 
            

                5. Philosophy

                
                    Hierarchical vs. non-hierarchical representation
                    It appears that it is exactly digital editorial philology with text encoding
                        at its heart which has motivated the emerging, or at least the notable
                        reinforcement, of what I have called the ontological question about text. It
                        is particularly the question whether hierarchical text encoding grammars
                        such as XML are adequate for the transcription of manuscript source
                        materials that has caused considerable controversy.
                            Examples include , , , , ,
                                , , , . Opponents of the view often justify
                        their position by invoking a non-hierarchical conception of the nature of
                        text: it is the belief that texts are non-hierarchical which leads them to
                        conclude that hierarchical encoding or markup cannot be the correct method.
                        Paradigmatic cases they appeal to include complex manuscript materials
                        which, so their view, are fundamentally characterized by non-hierarchy or at
                        least multiple structures which overlap with each other. Our philosopher’s
                            Nachlass could be regarded as such a case
                        in question. Against this kind of argument, in turn, proponents of
                        hierarchical markup grammars — though they grant that overlap and multiple
                        hierarchies exist — have argued in favour of adopting the precisely opposite
                        conception of the nature of text, namely a chiefly hierarchical one. Thus,
                        the fundamental issue is no longer one about Which is the right
                        text?, but concerns the ontological nature of text. 
                    But is the view that text is a hierarchical object  or, in opposition to it, the view that it is
                        a non-hierarchical object , justified? And if
                        either of the two is justified, does this lend argumentative support to a
                        hierarchical or a non-hierarchical approach in text encoding? In answering
                        this question more fully I would have to address at least the following two
                        sets of questions. First, can the general assumption according to which
                        texts are either hierarchical or non-hierarchical, put any demands on the
                        structure of any particular markup system? Does the fact that a particular
                        object of encoding is hierarchical, entail the demand that the encoding
                        itself be hierarchical or, if it is non-hierarchical, that the encoding be
                        non-hierarchical? Against the view that it does, one could argue that we
                        ordinarily accept that three-dimensional entities are represented in
                        two-dimensional structures. Similarly, we make use of hierarchical
                        taxonomies for domains that in fact can be regarded as non-hierarchical;
                        and, whilst being fully aware of the general vagueness, context-sensitivity,
                        ambiguity etc. of ordinary language, we nevertheless take advantage of exact
                        grammars, logics, strictly organized thesauri or computational ontologies
                        for their analysis and processing. What, then, is it that makes it
                        unacceptable to use hierarchical markup-languages for non-hierarchical
                        sources, or non-hierarchical markup-languages for hierarchical sources?
                        Secondly, are the assumptions that texts are either hierarchical or
                        non-hierarchical objects themselves justified? On what grounds, and in what
                        sense, can it be said that the nature of text is either of a hierarchical or
                        a non-hierarchical structure?
                

                
                    Document carriers — Documents — Texts

                    In this paper, I have a direct focus on the second set of questions, but will
                        provide at least a partial answer also to the first set of questions. Now,
                        to answer the question whether texts are hierarchical entities, we should
                        first try to find out what sort of entities texts could be on a
                            general level. This is after all also what Renear and
                        others wanted: To answer the question what text (really)  is.
                        But this ontological question, in turn, should first bring us back to the
                        issue of writing. What is writing? It seems a safe thing to say
                        that writing is an action, and as such it should be possible to describe it
                        in terms of action theory. This implies the application of concepts such as
                            agent, basic action, action result, and others. I
                        would like to suggest the following characteristics of writing:

                    
                        First: Writing is, at least in terms of its physical movements, a
                            basic action  and thus not caused
                            by other actions.
                        Second: Writing produces a finite action result, the written. The
                            written is writing’s intended result; we call it document. 
                        Third: Writing does not need more than one agent.
                    
                    It seems important to appreciate the fact that producing documents, writing,
                        is not the same as producing texts, and thus, to distinguish the action of
                        producing documents from the action of producing texts. One important
                        difference is that producing texts is producing documents with meaning, as
                        we normally do when we write, or also furnishing documents with meaning, as
                        we do when we read with understanding. Writing on the other hand does not
                            need to produce meaningful documents and can also be
                        performed by machines. Reading as such can equally be performed by machines
                        (namely reading machines), but not reading with
                            understanding. The distinction between
                            reading with and reading without understanding is also explicitly
                            commented upon by our philosopher . I would now like to introduce for the rest of
                        this paper the technical term texting for the action of producing
                        texts. Let us look at some more differences between writing and texting in
                        terms of action theory:
                    
                        First, texting is not a basic action but is co-caused by two other
                            actions, writing and reading. (Or: If you look at the matter as one of
                            spoken communication, the two actions that co-cause texting are speaking
                            and hearing.) 
                        Secondly (and consequently), while the action of writing can be
                            performed by only one agent, it seems then clear that
                            texting is performed by more than one agent. One agent is
                            the author, another is the understanding reader (naturally, the author
                            and the reader can coincide in one and the same person). Consequently,
                            texting is, unlike writing can be, not under the sole control of the
                            author alone. Rather, texting evolves through actions that are shared
                            among a multitude of agents. Therefore, when attempting to adequately
                            describe texting, it is vital to include not only the author agent, but
                            also the reader agent.
                        Third, while writing produces a finite and rather stable result
                            (namely documents), texting does not; rather it produces an instable and
                            potentially continuously ongoing, endless and open-ended result. Writing
                            has a clearly determinable beginning and end in time. Texting can have a
                            clearly determinable beginning in time, coinciding with the beginning of
                            the action of writing with understanding, but it does not have a clearly
                            determinable end. Now, ontologically speaking: What sort of entities
                            exactly are then the results of texting, namely
                            texts?
                    
                    If we start from a widely accepted tripartite division of what exists into
                        objects, properties and events, it seems to make perfect sense to think of
                        written documents, the products from writing, as objects.
                        Equally it seems to make perfect sense to conceive of the carriers of
                        written documents — paper, trees, stone, pergament etc. — as objects. More
                        specifically, documents and document carriers are concrete,
                            material objects. But does the same hold true of texts? Very
                        often the expression text is used to mean the same as
                        document. However, it is important to note that text often
                        also denotes something very different from a document, and that the
                        conditions of identity in the case of text in this sense are not the same as
                        the conditions of identity for documents. This applies for example when we
                        say The work exists in many drafts and different versions (one text,
                        many documents), or to any ambiguous sentence, e.g. John went to the
                            bank, as well as cases of homonymy and polysemy (one document, many
                        texts). Texts in this sense clearly cannot be concrete objects.Some may object that we frequently use text and
                                document interchangeably and that the distinction between
                                text in the sense of document and text in a sense in
                            which it is very different from documents and document carriers, is
                            counterintuitive and goes against standard usage of the expression.
                            However, not only is it generally accepted that words can have a variety
                            of different uses, and from a philosophical perspective defendable that
                            one distinguishes between the surface and the depth grammar of our
                            concepts and expressions, but also that there is a
                                categorial distinction between document and text is
                            moreover a view held by many digital humanists and scholars of textual
                            criticism (see for example Renear in  and
                                ). Some have suggested that texts
                        are abstract objects (e.g. Renear in ; ). But there are also some factors which
                        speak against this view, be text now conceived as an abstract object in the
                        sense of a type or as an abstract object in the sense of being
                        an immaterial object. Some of the
                            challenges that conceptions of text as abstract object have to face have
                            been addressed by philosophical critiques of the FRBR (Functional
                            Requirements for Bibliographic Records, )
                            ontology which conceives text works, expressions and
                                manifestations as types (see e.g. ). Other challenges to that conception
                            have to do with the fact that texts have a beginning in time and also
                            change with time and place, while abstract objects in a standard sense
                            do not. Consequently, though both document and text
                        are nouns, and many nouns denote objects, it may be that text does
                        not denote an object — or that, to speak with Wittgenstein, the surface
                            grammar of text misleads us into believing that it denotes an
                        object ). 
                    Some of the arguments which speak against the view that texts are some kind
                        of abstract object, are the same arguments which actually support the view
                        that texts may be events. To classify texts as events rather
                        than as abstract objects or a property will at first seem a strange thing to
                        say, but it is merely so because we are used to think of texts in analogy to
                        documents, or even document carriers: manuscripts, books,
                        sheets of paper, computer screens etc. which all belong to the domain of
                            objects rather than events. One of the aspects which speak
                        in favour of the event view is that a text at no single (non-durative) point
                        in time seems to be present in its entirety — which is a
                        characteristic of events . A
                        consequence from the event view of text is that the locus of a text is
                        temporally and spatially distributed: As any event’s locus is the locus of
                        its bearers, so must then also a text’s locus be the locus of
                        its bearers. The text bearers cannot however only be books or computer
                        screens; these, considered by themselves, are document rather than text
                        bearers. If the event view of text is correct, then not only the document
                        itself must be regarded a text bearer, but also the author and the
                        understanding reader. Thus, the text event will need to be seen
                        as taking place exactly in the geographically and chronologically dispersed
                        interplay between authors, documents and readers. This fits very well with
                        our observation above, namely that texts are shared among and coproduced by
                        authors and readers. One advantage from the event view of texts seems to be
                        that it does, ontologically speaking, not demand more than the following
                        ontologically rather uncontroversial entities: as bearers of the event the
                        concrete object document, the concrete object author, and the concrete
                        object reader, and as event proper the action of (understanding)
                        reading.
                    This implies that it not only makes sense to conceive of texts as events, but
                        indeed events of a special kind, namely actions. Thus, texts
                        not only seem to be produced by actions — they seem themselves to be
                        actions. Within the group of actions, texts can then further be
                        characterized by being actions which are co-produced by authors and readers,
                        thus shared actions.There is a long
                            tradition in twentieth century literary theory, poststructuralism,
                            phenomenology, hermeneutics, reader-response criticism, linguistic
                            pragmatics and speech act theory as well as semiotics to see an intimate
                            connection between text and event / action, or even to view texts as
                            some kind of event or action. However, one has to pay attention to the
                            fact that each of these schools come with their own specific
                            terminologies and conceptualizations which may not agree with each
                            other, or with the approach taken here. Here, the view that texts are
                            (shared) actions is, undertaken from the perspective of analytic
                            philosophy, more specifically analytic ontology and action theory,
                            although discussing these views in great detail is beyond the scope and
                            space of the current paper.
                    In the last couple of paragraphs I have proposed a way of looking at the
                        ontological nature of text which recognizes text as event rather than
                        object, and within the category of event as action, and within the category
                        of action, as shared action. But independent of whether the reader wants to
                        follow me in my proposal to conceive of texts as actions that are
                        co-produced by authors and readers, or rather wants to perceive of texts as
                        abstract objects, or as properties of some kind — the reader will still be
                        able to go along with me in the view that text is something which cannot
                        exist without being sustained by an act of reading with understanding. A
                        text that loses the understanding reader will fall back on pure document
                        level and cease to exist as a text. This aspect of the relation
                        between document and text can be compared to the relation between music
                        score and music: There is no music unless the music score is played (played
                        at least in one’s mind). Naturally, the document can continue to exist even
                        when the text ceases or pauses its existence. But the text is
                        for its existence mind-dependent on the reader agent. A paused text can
                        resume its existence as soon as the document is processed again in its
                        significatory potential — in short: read with understanding by a
                            reader. The point of mind-dependency is discussed by
                                 for artefacts in general, with a
                            particular focus on works of art. My view that texts do not exist if
                            they are not produced and maintained as such through understanding
                                reading, has stronger implications for their mind-dependency
                            than Kanzian’s position. Kanzian holds that artefacts are for their
                            subsistence mind-dependent only in the sense that they need a mind that
                                can, but does not actually need to recognize them as
                            such: Artefakte hängen hinsichtlich ihres
                                    Bestehens zu jedem Zeitpunkt davon ab, dass mindestens ein
                                    Bewusstsein in der Lage ist, sie als solche
                                    anzuerkennen.
                                 This position at
                        least, I hope, should not be controversial, at least if one agrees with the
                        principle that signs have meaning because they are furnished with meaning by
                        humans, and that reading with understanding is thus meaning and structure
                            constituting rather than merely meaning and structure
                        depicting — a principle that is treasured by hermeneutics .It is interesting to note
                            that Augustine himself (the very opponent criticized in
                            Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations
                            §1 ) in fact promoted the view that
                                includes the human as a sine qua non (e.g. De Dialectica V ) and that will inform Wittgenstein’s entire mature philosophy:
                            Nothing is a sign unless it is understood (and practiced) as a sign by a
                            human. However, the view that reading a document with
                        understanding is constitutive for the meaning of this document, has then
                        also consequences for our conception of what is going on in text
                        encoding.

                


                
                    Text encoding

                    Text encoding can record data about the document carrier, the document as
                        well as the text. Saying that the source is a notebook or a typescript or
                        that it is written in ink or pencil, pertains to the first; recording which
                        words it contains or which letters are deleted and which are added, pertains
                        to the second; talking about the document’s meaning and stating that there
                        are implicit references and allusions to a work by another author in the
                        document, pertains to the third. Also the term text
                                technology (cf. TEXT Technology: The Journal of Computer Text
                                Processing) can be applied on all three levels, thus
                            using text in a wide sense. Preservation methods, for example,
                            deal with the document carrier; OCR addresses the level of the document
                            itself; and semantic technologies again refer to the level of text in
                            the narrow sense. On whatever level text encoding moves, it will
                        always also record data about the encoder’s engagement with the source. This
                        becomes particularly clear where it aims at recording the text
                        and thus moves on the third level. However, already on the level of
                        recording data about the document carrier, the encoding attributes structure
                        to the source rather than simply depicting a pre-existing structure (D.R.
                        Raymond in ). In the
                        language of the above suggested event conception of text one could say that
                        the encoder becomes herself inevitably one of the bearers of
                        the text.
                    What are then the implications of our philosophical investigation for our
                        question whether hierarchical or rather non-hierarchical markup
                        is appropriate for the encoding of texts? I think the main implication is,
                        to make a long story short, that both are equally appropriate. For,
                        following the present argument, what we encode are as much our own
                        signifying text actions as the source (the source as such, as one is
                        tempted to say). Transcription is, with Sahle’s words, a protocol of perception, mapping and interpretation
                        . Whether the text itself will be hierarchical or
                        non-hierarchical will therefore depend on us as encoders.
                        Therefore, both the position holding that markup is to be hierarchical
                        because text itself is hierarchical and the opposed view, can be seen to be
                        in one sense correct, but wrong in another. Both seem to draw their
                        consequences for text encoding on an — at least ontologically — unfounded
                        basis. They are making it sound as though the question would be essentially
                        a matter of finding out which is the right representation of a pre-given
                        structure of text. But hierarchical or non-hierarchical
                        describe aspects of our active engagement with the source and therefore
                        concern the nature of our own actions rather than the nature of
                        independent entities. An ‘OHCO structure’
                                    is, as Dino Buzzetti says, not a model of the text,
                                    but a possible model of its expression
                            . The OHCO view of text
                        could thus be rephrased to: Text is a hierarchical ordering
                            of content objects. According to Desmond Schmidt, complex manuscript
                        variant structures pose overwhelming challenges for hierarchical markup, and
                        consequently form a primary case for the non-hierarchical
                        approach (as also for non-embedded markup). However, text variants are, on
                        the background of the argument proposed here, not independent entities that
                        put insurmountable constraints on our mapping acts either. What makes up a
                        text variant is namely already co-constituted by our reading and mapping of
                        the source. With Wittgenstein we could thus say that both sides
                        of the debate mix sign talk and symbol talk, and that the primary field of
                        text encoding belongs to the realm of symbols rather than that of signs. A
                        symbol is the sign with meaning: the sign as
                            symbolized
                        . Whether to encode a source in
                        hierarchical or non-hierarchical ways is a question of how to map —
                        symbolize — the signs of the source. 
                    What could, or rather: what should then bring us to encode
                        hierarchically rather than non-hierarchically, or the other way around? In
                        the end, it can only be our scholarly interests and needs. If we are
                        interested in encoding document structures, then it may be
                        important to record what we regard as overlapping structures, e.g.
                        overlapping structures at the cross points between sentence or paragraph
                        units on the one hand and page units on the other, through non-hierarchical
                        encoding, or even standoff markup. If we are interested in encoding the
                        sequence of (as such: genetically linear) writing acts, a
                        markup system permitting for recording the points where these writing acts’
                        manifestations cross, equally may be the thing to choose. But even in these
                        cases, practicing one of the TEI’s recommendations for handling overlap
                        through hierarchical XML may be equally in place.
                                The string The trees are green
                                    with
                                    white flowers can be seen to contain
                                overlap between the italics of are green with white and the
                                underlining of trees are green. A transcription such as this
                                one: The <underline>trees <italic>are
     green</underline> with white</italic>
     flowers. would not be well-formed in terms of XML, since it is non-hierarchical, that
                                is: the content of the italic-element is not fully embedded
                                in the content of the underline-element, but
                                    overlapping with it. However, the passage can also
                                be transcribed as well-formed XML text in the following
                                way, applying what is called fragmentation: The <underline>trees <italic part="I">are
     green</italic></underline><italic
     part="F"> with white</italic>
     flowers. On overlap see more in http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/NH.html.
                                It should be emphasized that TEI XML equally allows for stand-off
                                markup; see more in http://www.tei-c.org/Activities/Workgroups/SO/sow06.xml.
                        In any way, it seems problematic to hold that it is the text’s nature, as
                        something independent of us, which requires overlap markup. It is rather the
                        nature of our representation of the source which requires
                        hierarchical or non-hierarchical markup, thus something which is under our,
                        not the source’s control.
                    If this wasn’t true, and consequently: if it wasn’t true that we can
                        adequately transcribe complex primary sources in hierarchical XML, it would
                        be quite mysterious why so many projects manage to encode and edit intricate
                        and multifaceted, so-called overlapping and non-hierarchical handwritten
                        materials with hierarchical XML. They do so in an effective manner, living
                        up to the (still evolving) standards for digital scholarly editions. One
                        example is editorial work on the Wittgenstein Nachlass by the Wittgenstein Archives at the University of
                        Bergen (WAB). It is the ambition of WAB’s XML transcriptions to contain an
                        accurate graphemic record of each single letter that Wittgenstein wrote in
                        the Nachlass, and of the writing acts it was
                        produced by, or subjected to. This information is converted to
                            diplomatic version outputs in HTML which, in short, represent the
                        source on the level of its letters and the author’s writing acts. At the
                        same time, our XML transcriptions also permit to produce linearized
                        and normalized versions, and make yet other, strongly user-steered
                        outputs produced via interactive dynamic
                                presentation
                             in the spirit of
                        Web 2.0 possible. A characteristic of the twenty thousand pages Wittgenstein
                            Nachlass is the abundance of, partly rather
                        complicated, text variance. Each of the around 65,000 occurrences is at WAB
                            XML encoded not only on letter, but also on word level,
                        which again makes outputs in diplomatic, linearized, normalized and other
                        formats possible. It is XML that permits all this. However, at
                        least in my view there is nothing in the source which requires
                        us to choose the hierarchical XML over a non-hierarchical approach for
                        achieving all this, or a non-hierarchical approach over hierarchical
                            XML. A simple example from Wittgenstein Nachlass Ms-106 can be used to exemplify
                                the basic idea of distinguishing document and
                                    text levels through diplomatic and normalized
                                versions, respectively: 
                                    Wittgenstein Nachlass Ms-106,90 (http://wittgensteinsource.org/BFE/Ms-106,90_f).
                                        With the kind permission of © 2015 The Master and Fellows of
                                        Trinity College, Cambridge; The Österreichische
                                        Nationalbibliothek, Vienna; The University of Bergen,
                                        Bergen
                                    Figure 1: Wittgenstein Nachlass Ms-106,90
                                    
                                 In this passage, Wittgenstein did not
                                actually write out the two variants Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung
                                and Allgemeinheit, as he did with the two variants
                                    brauchen and verwenden. He wrote only
                                    Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung and subsequently deleted part
                                of it, yielding our reading of the passage as containing the two
                                variants Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung (being eventually
                                discarded) and Allgemeinheit. The diplomatic version can look
                                something like this: Dann
                                        aber scheint es mir als könneman die Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung — alle etc — 
                                        in der Mathematik überhaupt nicht brau-chen verwenden.
                                In the diplomatic version Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung is not spelled out to contain two
                                words (Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung and Allgemeinheit),
                                while in a normalized version it will of course be: Dann aber scheint es mir als
                                        könne man die Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung Allgemeinheit — alle
                                        etc. —  in der Mathematik überhaupt nicht 
                                        brauchen verwenden.
                                Both the diplomatic and the normalized presentation are produced
                                from one and the same transcription in XML: <s type="es">Dann aber scheint es mir als 
k&ouml;nne man die <choice type="em"><orig type="em1">Allgemeinheit 
<del type="d">sbezeichnung</del></orig><orig type="em2">
<choice type="dsl"><orig type="alt1">Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung</orig> 
<orig type="alt2">Allgemeinheit</orig></choice></orig></choice> &dash; 
alle <abbr type="abb">etc<corr type="tra">&p.abb;</corr>
</abbr> &dash; in der Mathematik &uuml;berhaupt nicht <choice type="dsl">
<orig type="alt1"><del type="d">brau<lb rend="shyphen"/>chen</del></orig> 
<orig type="alt2">verwenden</orig></choice>&p.es;</s>
                                        
                                
                                The same transcription can be converted also to other outputs, so — 
                                through interactive dynamic presentation — also by the
                                external user (see http://wittgensteinonline.no/). More WAB Wittgenstein
                                    Nachlass transcription samples in
                                XML are available from http://wab.uib.no/cost-a32_xml/.

                
            

                6. Conclusion

                The version of the comment on Augustine’s account of language acquisition that
                    our Cambridge philosopher, Ludwig Wittgenstein, eventually ended up with,
                    includes the following passage: In this picture of
                            language we find the roots of the following idea: Every word has a
                            meaning. This meaning is correlated with the word. It is the object for
                            which the word stands.
                         An analogous observation
                    can be made about the debate on hierarchical vs. non-hierarchical markup. The
                    way in which this debate is largely conducted suggests that the central issue
                    concerns the accurate representation of some mind- and action-independent
                    reality. It is assumed that, if texts are hierarchical, the correct depiction
                    must be hierarchical; if they are non-hierarchical, the correct depiction must
                    be non-hierarchical. According to this picture, text encoding is an act of
                    correlating codes with objects and structures in and of themselves.
                    But any text action including text encoding is a creative symbolizing action
                    and, thus, already in the realm of symbols. This is nothing out of the ordinary;
                    it is simply what meaningfully engaging with the world looks like on an everyday
                    basis; it is what each of us does all the time, without running into any
                    theoretical difficulties. Moreover, though one sometimes can hear that the need
                    to escape relativism and to produce encodings and editions that will benefit
                    others (including future generations) requires strict avoidance of
                    interpretation in the domain of encoding, it needs being said that the way of
                    looking at things proposed here does not entail any support to relativism.
                    Rather than worrying about relativism, we simply have to ensure — and all the
                    time work to ensure! — that there is sufficient agreement in our
                    interpretations. Successful communication is not dependent on there being
                    non-interpreted facts, but on there being shared interpretations (or rather,
                    more generally, shared understandings). The TEI substantially helps with
                    that.
                The issues from Section 3, as we are now in a position to appreciate, are not to
                    be regarded as pre-given. Rather, as much as they concern the sources to be
                    edited, studied, translated etc., they equally concern ourselves: as authors,
                    editors, readers and scholars, with our preferences, intentions, and the
                    purposes of our actions. A simple question such as Should the edition follow
                        the physical, chronological or content order of the written? is as much
                    about what we want to do with the source as about the source as
                        such. Questions of this kind ask for an engaged  action.
                    Through websites such as WAB’s Interactive Dynamic Presentation platform
                    this aspect is put to the fore, and the fact that actions are required, is, at
                    least exemplarily, made explicit. Users of the WAB site can utilize XML
                    transcriptions and XSLT tools as basis for creating text following their own
                    editorial choices. The resulting texts will be shared actions, co-produced by at
                    least the following agents: Ludwig Wittgenstein, WAB’s transcribers and editors,
                    the software authors, the interacting users. The ways in which we talk and argue
                    about text manifests that texts originate in and are carried by understanding
                    and acting human subjects. Texts are mappings of signs onto symbols. Thus, when
                    discussing which of the texts emerging from a rich and complex Nachlass to choose, or what to identify as a
                        work in it, etc., we are discussing, first, how to best map this
                        Nachlass’ significatory potential onto symbols
                    and, secondly, which of the symbolizations to give preference to. If it is true
                    that texts are actions, then it therefore lies in the nature of text-talk that
                    it can be evaluative and normative. For it lies in the nature of talk about
                    actions that it can be evaluative and normative. With the later Wittgenstein, we
                    might say that scholarly talk about text typically exhibits a
                        normative grammar. This explains why the editorial issues
                    described in Section 3 indeed are issues.
                In this paper, I have tried to show that the debate about hierarchical vs.
                    non-hierarchical markup can be resolved by a reflection on the depth grammar
                         or logical grammar
                         of text. This
                    grammar is, due to texts’ specific ontological nature, categorially different
                    from the grammar of document. Texts in the sense in which they are
                    different from documents are ontologically difficult entities and may, as I
                    tried to argue for here, not be objects. Writing alone does not produce texts,
                    but documents. It seems however a fact that texts are in their existence
                    dependent on human understanding, and that it is the meaning and structure
                    constituting aspects of document understanding which at the same time make texts
                    something under our command and responsibility. Therefore, text
                    encoding is no passive depiction but co-constitutes its subject: It never
                    records the mind-independent state of the source alone; rather, it always also
                    records its own actions of recording, its specific representation of the source.
                    Naturally, this goes also for WAB’s own XML transcriptions of the Wittgenstein
                        Nachlass: They are no understanding-free
                    depictions of the source, but already the results from precisely acts of
                    understanding. The point that texts, and also transcriptions, result from acts
                    of understanding, does however, as I have tried to explain, not need to involve
                    any sort of unwanted relativism. The fact that it is us as understanding
                    subjects that decide on the structure of texts explains in turn why XML can be
                    such a successful markup system also for the encoding of complex manuscript
                    materials as indeed it is — which it should not be if it were an independent
                    hierarchical or non-hierarchical structure of the source that decides on the
                    success or failure of our encoding. It is only when these central points are
                    neglected that the debate about hierarchical vs. non-hierarchical markup can
                    arise in the first place. I am indebted to many
                            colleagues for exchanges on the ideas appearing in this paper, including
                            D. Apollon, S. Bangu, R. Falch, N. Gangopadhyay, S. Gradmann, A. Greve,
                            S. Greve, C. Huitfeldt, C. Kanzian, J. Macha, S. Markewitz, G. Meggle
                            and A. Renear. I would also like to thank the organizers and
                            participants of GDDH 2016 (6.6.2016; see http://www.etrap.eu/activities/gddh-2016/) for giving me the
                            opportunity to present and discuss an earlier version of this paper, and
                            seminars in Bergen (8.9.2016) and Innsbruck (28.4.2017) for the
                            opportunity to discuss the philosophical ontology behind. Further I
                            would like to thank two anonymous reviewers from DHQ for helpful and
                            constructive comments.
            
