Title:  Imagining the Continuously Present Past:
                    Visualizing William Faulkner’s Narratives and 
Volume:  015
Issue:  2
Date:  15 June 2021
Abstract:  
                
                Hosted out of the University of Virginia and funded by the National Endowment for
                    the Humanities, Digital Yoknapatawpha is an
                    international and collaborative project composed of William Faulkner scholars
                    and technologists. Its goal is to create a comprehensive database of all the
                    locations, characters, and events in Faulkner’s Yoknapatawpha fictions with the
                    aim of visualizing the data through a series of deep
                        atlases and other displays. This paper traces the development
                    cycle of a supplementary narrative structure analysis dashboard that allows
                    users to explore the chronology, narrative status, and date range of all of the
                    texts set in his mythic county. In doing so, it bridges some of the significant
                    gaps between narratological theory and computational methods, opens up a
                    conversation about representing narrative data, and suggests some possible
                    avenues for research with the dashboard.
            
Full Body Text: 


                Introduction
                A story, simply put, is a sequence of events. This definition has been in place
                    at least as early as Aristotle’s Poetics. What is
                    much less simple to define is the constituent terms: sequence and events.
                    Accordingly, schools of narrative theory have conceptualized events and their
                    connection to sequentiality from radically divergent vantage points, ranging
                    from defining the varied shapes of the sequence, their value at a semantic
                    level, with regard to events’ salience to the overall plot, their relationship
                    with narrative point of view, and the interpretation of events by the reader,
                    just to name a few 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    .Of these, the classic work is Gérard Genette’s
                            Discourse du récit, which has been
                        productively mined by literary scholars and computer scientists for his
                        insights into narrative. For an overview of a semantic analysis see: . Blair Labatt uses event salience for a
                        narratological analysis specifically based on Faulkner’s work . Joseph Reed’s work is an early attempt at using
                        narrative theory to analyze Faulkner. It is somewhat idiosyncratic in its
                        outlook though . James Phelan and Peter J.
                        Rabinowitz’s critical introduction to narrative theory provides an excellent
                        overview of rhetorical, feminist, mind-oriented, and antimimetic approaches
                        with regard to time, plot, and progression .
                        Other definitions include Leitch, who sees plot as a function of the a
                        teleological principle . Indeed, as more
                    recent work on narrative shows, what narratives are and how they can be
                    decomposed is anything but a settled matter 
                    
                    
                    .
                Despite these definitional challenges, researchers have been productively using
                    narratological concepts to analyze texts since the early days of computing. In
                    his exhaustive and insightful overview of the state of the field, Computational Modelling of Narrative, Inderjeet Mani
                    covers the various approaches taken by computer scientists to decompose and
                    generate narratives, while introducing an innovative mark-up language of his
                    own: NarrativeML . With applications in language
                    domains far outside literary studies and poised to disrupt everything from
                    economics to medicine to forensics, work within the field of computational
                    narratology has continued at break-neck speed. One recent work even claims that
                    computational narrative generation has arrived at the moment of post-narratology
                        .
                Despite this substantial scholarly footprint and exciting advances, [t]he flow of influences has historically been from
                        narratolology to computation, as Mani already lamented in 2013 . He lists narratologists’ concern with discourse over
                    fabula, and the relatively rudimentary quality of narrative generation, as
                    causes of this one-way traffic. In addition to these, two large deterrents to
                    the more widespread adoption of methods in computational narratology are the
                    inter-related issues of scale and scalability. The first denotes the semantic
                    level at which events are parsed. To be insightful for narratology, texts need
                    to be broken down into meaningful narrative units that are more capacious than a
                    predicate and more precise than a summary. Relatedly, the process needs to be
                    scalable to a wide-range of texts to facilitate for insightful comparison. Up
                    until now, the challenging trade-off has been that solutions at a scale
                    appropriate for narratological analysis are not scalable because they require
                    laborious human intervention, and unsupervised solutions are scalable but not at
                    the right scale for narratological analysis. This is perhaps why projects that
                    try to innovate narratology through computational methods are often mired in the
                    proof-of-concept phase. Disappointingly, this has meant that the potential of
                    all this groundbreaking work remains untapped by the larger community of
                    literary scholars.
                One single-author study that has managed to scale by dint of years of laborious
                    coding, consistent revision, and substantial institutional support is the
                        Digital Yoknapatawpha project (hereafter DY).
                    Hosted out of the University of Virginia, DY was created through
                    the hard work of over thirty Faulkner scholars putting in thousands of hours to
                    code all of the locations, characters, and events in his Yoknapatawpha fictions
                    into a relational database. Nearly a decade in the making, the site enables
                    students, teachers, and scholars to explore fourteen novels and fifty-six short
                    stories through a series of deep atlases based on maps
                    Faulkner drew in 1936 and 1945 (http://faulkner.iath.virginia.edu/). The main interface is
                    supplemented by a wealth of materials including: manuscripts, archival audio,
                    historical photographs, textual commentaries, and other data visualizations.
                    Though the project will continue to grow, DY is now robust enough
                    to use as a scholarly tool, and several members of the team have already
                    leveraged it to highlight new aspects of Faulkner’s writing 
                    
                    .
                The large tranche of highly-curated narrative data made available through
                        DY offers an opportunity for computational narratologists to
                    generate hereunto unimagined visualizations of narrative. This paper has far
                    more modest ambitions. Instead, it contends that the most productive and
                    intuitive approach to visualizing the shape of narrative is one that displays
                    chronological order versus story order. This approach was actually devised by
                    the Russian Formalists at the beginning of the twentieth century, and has been
                    returned to time and again by digital humanists. By drawing on visualizations
                    created for Digital Yoknapatawpha (http://faulkner.iath.virginia.edu/narrativeanalysis.html) and other
                    adjacent digital work, I demonstrate the comparative power of such charts and
                    the scalability of the method across different types of fictional texts. As
                    such, the goal of this paper is to open up a larger conversation between digital
                    humanists and narrative theorists, and consider the best practices for
                    translating narratological concepts into encoded narrative data that can be
                    productively visualized. A principal part of this conversation is the necessity
                    of establishing a meaningful and shared visual language that clearly represents
                    fundamental narrative concepts to a broader audience. Much of this language has
                    already been in place for some time, but it has been scattered across different
                    knowledge domains.
            

                Bridging Humanities and Computational Narratology
                Historically, there have been two important observations about narrative. The
                    first, by Aristotle, is that a narrative has a beginning, middle, and an end,
                    and that these are usually connected through causality. The second, by the
                    Russian Formalists, is the separation of the fabula (story
                    material) from the syuzhet (the way the author shapes the
                    material), an insight mirrored concurrently by E.M. Forster who more strictly
                    defines the separation as one between story and plot 
                    
                    . As self-evident as these two distinctions are,
                    operationalizing them into a hermeneutic for textual analysis is fraught with
                    problems. As Gerald Prince aptly points out, Narrative
                        sequences…are semantic and not semiotic in nature
                    . That is to say, narrative sequences are not easily
                    broken down into constituent parts based on linguistic and logical properties.
                    The scope and length of individual narrative events are influenced by a whole
                    host of factors, including rhetorical devices, extra-textual and inter-textual
                    connections, figures, tropes, irony, narrative frequency, narrative speed,
                    narrative authority, and narrative reliability to name a few . In this, it is hard to ignore the lessons of
                    deconstruction and post-structuralist narratology . Any attempt to grab a single narrative thread tugs at the entire warp and
                    woof of a text’s intertextuality. Delimiting a text into discrete units always
                    imposes an artificial structure from without. This is to say nothing of the
                    problems that arise when decomposing narrative if the experience of the reader
                    is considered. After all, from a functionalist approach, narrative needs a
                    reader to (re)-constitute it, and, therefore, narrative sequence is not a type
                    of deep structure, but rather something that exists
                    in discourse. John Pier observes that for functionalists, sequence is assimilated into the broader question of intersequentiality and
                        the dynamic relations occurring between the telling/reading and the
                        told
                    . Which is to say, the sequencing of events in a text
                    does not exist external to a reader. Thus, while it might be self-evident that a
                    narrative sequence is a series of events, what constitutes those events and how
                    they are constituted is remarkably difficult to pin down.
                 Translating narratological insights into computational methods poses a
                    substantially different set of challenges. A major hurdle is computationally
                    reproducing the cognitive faculties that allow human readers to understand texts
                    with remarkable sophistication and accuracy. To decompose a narrative at any
                    level of competency, a computer has to perform a series of inter-related and
                    complex tasks including: natural language processing 
                    
                    , spatial organization [Tenen 2018], narrative parsing
                        
                    
                    
                    , and understanding character entities 
                    , to name but a few. Moreover, much of the work that
                    has been done on the computational understanding of narrative falls outside the
                    ambit of literary studies, and has focused largely on corpora within specific
                    and, often, bounded knowledge domains, including, among others, economics , law enforcement , medicine
                        , education ,
                    legal studies [Mahfouz et al. 2018], and reconstructing news narratives . This research is valuable for the insights it
                    offers, but is not directly applicable to literary studies, because so much of
                    literary production traverses multiple knowledge domains and deliberately
                    subverts anticipated text structures. More simply, it is more probable that the
                    language, style, and format of two fictional texts are more dissimilar than two
                    medical reports, legal briefs, or, even news reports. This dissimilarity makes
                    it challenging for an unsupervised computational approach to establish and
                    detect patterns that can be iterated across a large corpus with a high degree of
                    consistency.
                Still, there have been significant attempts to generate a functional model for
                    doing narrative analyses using digital methods. For example,
                        PlotVis was a tool developed by a team at the University of
                    British Columbia. It visualized narratives encoded in Extensible Mark-up
                    Language (XML) and could be “customized by the teachers and students in order to
                    accommodate various interpretations of a single piece of fiction” . Operational from 2013-2016, heureCLÉA
                    used human-annotation and machine learning techniques to produce a corpus of 21
                    annotated short stories, it was supplemented by the textual annotation and
                    analysis tool CATMA
                    . Using the data from heureCLÉA, another team designed
                        Narrelations, an application that visualizes multiple levels of
                    narrative . Meanwhile, Mark Finlayson created the
                        ProppLearner corpus by annotating fifteen folk tales. Once
                    annotated, the training data was used to analyze the morphology of different
                    folktales using Propp’s method. Yet, even here a significant amount of human
                    intervention was required to make sure that events were parsed properly . Indeed, as exciting as the results of the study
                    were, the data collection process was necessarily labor-intensive and costly
                        .Finlayson’s more recent related work is
                        extremely promising in its potential to parse sub-events from narratives
                            .
                Other recent investigations of narrative have relied more on natural language
                    processing or some form of machine learning to aid with the parsing of text.
                    Among these is the aptly named, Syuzhet package, developed
                    by Matthew Jockers and available on CRAN (Comprehensive R Archive Network). The
                    package allows users to draw on four different sentiment dictionaries to score
                    the overall sentiment of a text or to chart how positive
                        and negative sentiments are activated across the text
                    . The advantage of this approach is that text
                    analysis can be automated. While Jockers’s work has sparked a lot of interest,
                    it has also received some criticism . One issue is
                    that his use of the word plot has no bearing on the concept
                    of chronological order of events, but rather how different sentiment structures
                    are articulated across a text. An alternative approach taken by Koichi Takeuchi
                    uses a predicate-argument structure thesaurus to determine narrative states,
                    actions, and change-in-states. This allows for multi-dimensional relations between predicates with their arguments
                        containing relations between the change-of-state and its goal
                    . Though Takeuchi’s study is geared towards
                    automatic narrative generation, it can also be used to decompose a narrative.
                    Being able to detect a change-in-state in a predicate is useful for
                    understanding the syntactic building blocks of a narrative, but is too granular
                    for addressing narrative changes in a text for narratological analysis. Another
                    highly promising system under development is Yarn, which uses
                    Hierarchal Task Network (HTN) planning to generate visualizations of possible
                    storylines . Still, here too the plot composition is
                    presently too crude to be able to meaningfully differentiate between narratives
                    for the purposes of narratology.
                Finally, there has been a spate of projects that use film as a basis of narrative
                    analysis. As Eric Hoyt et al. explain, [o]f all narrative
                        forms, the motion picture screenplay may be the most perfectly pre-disposed
                        for computational analysis
                    . This is because the text is already semi-structured
                    with characters identified by dialogue and narrative units separated into
                    scenes. Since the process of narrative analysis of scripts lends itself to
                    automation, a number of analogous projects have emerged independent of one
                    another that generate a visualization of narrative progression over time. These
                    include work done by Sharma and Rajamanickam ,
                        ScripThreads
                    , and Story Curves
                    . The underlying assumption with all of these projects
                    is that the script scene sequence is consonant with the plot event sequence.
                    From a strict narratological perspective this need not always be the case.
                    Events can also be conveyed to the audience through diegetic and extradiegetic
                    elements, as, for example, when a character reveals his or her backstory through
                    dialogue with another character, or when there is a voice-over that relates past
                    or future events. Presumably, these events occur at a different date than the
                    chronological order of the scene. To account for this discrepancy in any
                    automated parsing method adds a substantial level of complication. While this by
                    no means invalidates such projects, it merely underscores that the question of
                    the appropriate scale of a narrative event is still unsettled.
                In sum, the twinned foundational challenges facing a more widespread adoption of
                    computational narrative analysis are those of scale and scalability. The
                    projects that rely on manual encoding are generally fine-grained enough to
                    provide consistent narratological insight, but the labor involved does not scale
                    well. Meanwhile, automated methods tend to be too course-grained to allow for
                    meaningful comparison between texts, or, conversely, they provide analysis at
                    the level of the predicate, which is not functional for narrative analysis. As
                    Prince points out, narratologists agree that narrative
                        sequences represent linked series of situations and events and fur¬ther
                        agree that these sequences can be expanded or summarized, that they can be
                        combined with other sequences in specifiable ways such as conjunc¬tion,
                        embedding, or alternation, and that they can be extracted from larger
                        sequences
                    . This type of narrative modularity can only be
                    achieved if event units contain more than predicate-level information, and
                    account for a unified ontology of space, time, and character within an event,
                    while at the same time being more specific than a summary of the text. While
                    there is no precise determination as to what this scale might be, the method
                    developed for DY provides a flexible and reproducible
                    framework.
            

                Punctuating the Long Sentence: Event-Driven Narrative Encoding in
                    Faulkner
                Faulkner Studies has always had a special relationship with narratology. Because
                    Faulkner’s texts are so narratively intricate, one consistent topic of
                    exploration has been dis-entangling his plot lines and understanding his use of
                    time, so much so that it is somewhat of a cottage industry 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    . With the advent of digital technologies this
                    exploration has continued unabated. John Padgett’s William
                        Faulkner on the Web still provides a rich resource for Faulkner
                    novices and experts alike [Padgett]. The Sound and the
                        Fury: a Hypertext Edition by Stoicheff, Muri, Deshaye, et al. was a
                    highly innovative project that tackled the problem of visualizing one of
                    Faulkner’s most challenging narratives as early as 2003 . Before DY, the most sophisticated visualization of a Faulkner
                    narrative was actually the 2003 Adobe Flash-based chronology of Absalom, Absalom! created by current DY director,
                    Stephen Railton .Unfortunately, neither
                        digital text currently functions. Due to copyright issues the full hypertext
                        created by Stoicheff, Muri, Deshaye, et al. is no longer available. Though
                        it is still a good resource for digital renderings of the text. In fact, a
                        graph created by Kathleen Murphy of narrative time in the Benjy section of
                            Sound and the Fury shares many similarities
                        with the chronology graphs this paper presents .
                        Likewise, the chronology of Absalom, Absalom!
                        created by Railton and Rourke no longer functions because it was coded in
                        Flash. Currently, attempts are being made to revive the chronology in a new
                        format.
                In its sheer openness and scale, DY supersedes these early
                    Faulknerian projects, while simultaneously being heavily indebted to them. The
                    data currently available represents nearly five-thousand character records, over
                    two thousand locations, and more than eight thousand events, each with their own
                    individual attributes. Aggregated, these data tables represent around a
                    quarter-million data points across several dozen different data fields.As
                        of this writing the exact numbers are 2,152 locations, 4,988 characters, and
                        8,435 events, though these are always subject to change. This data
                    drives the main interface, but can also be used to create alternative
                    visualizations. For example, Raphael Alvarado designed a platform to generate
                    force directed graphs that show the co-occurrence of characters and locations
                        .
                Included in this data set are also a number of variables that allow for the study
                    of Faulkner’s narrative: chronology, narrative status, and event dates. In order
                    to arrive at these more abstracted data points, all of Faulkner’s Yoknapatawpha
                    fictions had to be entered into a relational database containing the entities:
                        Text,
                    Locations,
                    Characters, and Events.
                    Texts contains the individual
                        Locations and Characters for that
                    text, and Events are the combination of a character or
                    characters at a location for a unified action.The database also contains a
                        location key that keeps track of all the locations being used across the
                        corpus, but this does not have any bearing on the research here. An
                    overview is provided in the entity relationship diagram below (see Figure 1): 
                        Entity Relationship Diagram Digital Yoknapatawpha DatabaseEntity
                            Relationship Diagram Digital Yoknapatawpha
                            Database
                        Chart showing relationship between entities.
                        
                     While entering all the locations and characters has been by no means
                    uncontentious, encoding events has presented some of the most difficult
                    theoretical and practical challenges. Since a database can only store discrete
                    information, delimiting events, which tend to be non-discrete, necessarily
                    requires interpretation because the boundaries that separate beginnings and
                    endings are unclear and subjective . In an ideal
                    scenario, events are entered at the same level of granularity with the same
                    consistency across the corpus. Impinging on this ideal are practical
                    considerations. Digital projects that require manual encoding quickly run into
                    limitations like data collection scope, the labor available, and the possibility
                    of introducing human error. The slightest change in the definition of event
                    boundaries can exponentially increase project completion time. An example is
                    instructive here. Faulkner’s Red Leaves, is a short
                    story about the ritualistic burial of Issetibbeha that requires a
                        hunt of his body-servant who is to be buried next to
                    him. In the following passage, the African American servant is returning to the
                    burial site and along the way he comes across one of the Chickasaw:
                        [A](1) In the middle of the afternoon he came face to
                            face with an Indian. (2) They were both on a footlog across a slough —
                            the Negro gaunt, lean, hard, tireless and desperate; the Indian thick,
                            soft-looking, the apparent embodiment of the ultimate and the supreme
                            reluctance and inertia. (3) The Indian made no move, no sound; he stood
                            on the log and (4) watched the Negro plunge into the slough and swim
                            ashore and crash away into the undergrowth. [B](5)Just before
                            sunset he lay behind a down log .
                         There are many ways to divide up the events in this text. The
                    first is to say that the entire paragraph and the following sentence constitute
                    an event because it starts in the middle of the afternoon and goes till sunset.
                    This is a period of several hours, and should therefore be considered one
                    extended event: the servant running away. The other option, [AB], uses the
                    paragraph division to split the passage in two and considers [A], the meeting
                    with the Indian, and [B], lying behind a log, as two
                    different moments. The last option would be to divide every individual action
                    and description into an event (1,2,3,4,5). This approach appears ideal from a
                    data perspective, because it gives the greatest amount of detail. The drawback
                    is that entering five different records is much more laborious than the first
                    approach. Since, each event record requires the entry of thirteen variables, the
                    difference is between entering thirteen or sixty-five data points. Scaled to the
                    level of the text, a story that might take thirty hours to encode suddenly takes
                    a hundred and fifty hours. As each story in the DY database is also
                    peer-reviewed and subsequently curated for additional data entry, changing the
                    scale also increases the labor required downstream in the production cycle.
                For DY, the scale of an event is defined as, 1 setting, 1
                        unbroken length of time, 1 main focus and 1 narrative style is 1 continuous
                        Event
                    . This definition has remained remarkably durable
                    throughout the production process. The narrative is capsulized into units that
                    are intelligible as self-sufficient ontologies. An event can therefore be
                    de-contextualized from the larger narrative, and still make sense as an action
                    performed by a character or characters at a particular place. Needless to say,
                    applying this definition consistently throughout the encoding process does not
                    happen without debate. Usually, the bone of contention is whether an event
                    remains one continuous action when a key character enters or exits a location,
                    and how to break up events where characters are travelling for an indeterminate
                    amount of time and space. Notably, DY’s definition of an event uses
                    page number as a proxy for discourse time (the amount of time it takes to read
                    the passage) and does not measure story time, (the duration of the event in the
                    text) . An event may span several pages and describe
                    an action that happens in an instant, or, conversely, may only be one sentence
                    and take years. Thus, it is possible to show the order of events, but not the
                    narrative pacing that dictates that order.
                Along with delimiting events, another challenge is ordering them. For the
                    purposes of the main visualization, the events need to be placed in
                    chronological order. There are few literary texts that adhere to a strict
                    chronological order, and Faulkner’s are certainly not among these. This makes
                    for great reading, but challenging encoding. Fortunately, while many of
                    Faulkner’s events are narrated out of order, they do follow an underlying total
                    order .
                This is not always the case though. There are occasionally
                        orphan events that cannot be unambiguously slotted into
                    a chronology. For example, in their meticulous chronological study of The Sound and the Fury, George Stewart and Joseph
                    Backus document three, relatively minor, orphan events. In their opinion, the matter is too minute to warrant further discussion
                    . Though this may certainly be true of their
                    research, it presents a significant database entry problem for DY.
                    These events must be entered somewhere so they can be sequenced in the
                    animation, and whatever position they are given changes the total order of the
                        chronology.This approach precludes the possibility of simultaneity,
                        something that other storyline visualizations are able to do.
                On occasion, computation was used to provide a rough sort of events, but, by and
                    large, the final chronologies for each text were ultimately the result of
                    textual scholarship. It should be noted that sorting events through computation
                    is possible, however; as Burg et al., have shown in their work using constraint
                    logic programming to infer the most probable order of events for A Rose for Emily
                    .Their findings are intriguing as a proof of
                        concept for constraint logic programming, though they readily admit that
                        perhaps to understand Emily, we must give up our
                            orderly sorting of experience. That is to say, that the
                            fuzzy dating of the text may not be a puzzle to be
                        solved but a confusion to be experienced. After all, it seems unlikely that
                        Faulkner hid within his story an obscure dating and chronological system
                        that he wanted to be discovered through an advanced programming language
                        seventy years later. Unfortunately, computational sorting cannot
                    account for any authorial irregularities in a plot. As Faulkner likely did not
                    anticipate that his fiction would be manually encoded by a group of scholars for
                    the purposes of visualization, he did not iron out plot timeline
                    inconsistencies. Perhaps the most famous example of this is his work on The Mansion. For the final drafts of the novel,
                    Faulkner was extremely reluctant to correct timeline discrepancies with his
                    previous novels and adjust misalignments with historical events . Any system that relies on causality and strict date
                    ordering would run into trouble sorting this text.
                Stepping back, it is clear that the DY data is the
                    result of interpretation, collaboration, and compromise. Nevertheless, part of
                    the success of the encoding process has been the intuitive ease of data entry
                    achieved by framing the data within fundamental narratological concepts.
                    Annotators with various levels of technical expertise could be onboarded and
                    taught to encode by working on a short-story that was then checked for
                    consistency. On average each text event coding went through seven passes. The
                    initial pass of hand-coding the events in the paper copy of the text,
                    transcription to a spreadsheet, sorting the events by chronology in a
                    spreadsheet, entry into the database, peer-review by a fellow database editor,
                    another review by the director or one of the associate directors, and another
                    final review for inconsistencies before being brought online. This very
                    intensive vetting process reduces the possibility of human error and
                    inconsistency, but, of course, cannot guarantee its elimination. Importantly,
                    one of the valuable lessons about the encoding process is that the data should
                    only go live once all errors have been removed. Once an erroneous entry makes
                    its way into the database it is very hard to discover and revise. Furthermore,
                    as all the encoders were Faulkner scholars, there was a continuous temptation by
                    editors to introduce ever more narrative features to capture the richness of
                    Faulkner’s writing. Needless to say, this would have meant continuously recoding
                    eight thousand different entries representing six thousand pages of narrative
                    text, significantly adding to the prospective workload. Such efforts were thus
                    held in abeyance until the completion of the initial encoding of all the texts.
                    Currently, the DY team is adding an additional level of nuance to
                    each event by labelling each event with keywords. This process has greatly
                    profited from the fact that the event structure is already in place.
                Taking the narrative data and turning it into visualizations presents its own
                    suite of challenges. There are no established conventions for representing
                    digitally encoded narratives. Without standard practices, it is hard to
                    interpret and compare different narrative data visualizations. In this regard,
                    Faulkner’s texts are particularly tricky to visualize because he experimented
                    with narrative structures throughout his career. Scholars have described his
                    complex narrative techniques as everything from the frozen
                        moment to enclosure of past, present, and future 
                    . Reflecting on his writing, Faulkner once famously
                    conceived of the past and present as one long sentence: 
                        There is no such thing really as was because the past
                            is. It is a part of every man, every woman, and every moment. All of his
                            and her ancestry, background, is all a part of himself and herself at
                            any moment. And so a man, a character in a story at any moment of action
                            is not just himself as he is then, he is all that made him, and the long
                            sentence is an attempt to get his past and possibly his future into the
                            instant in which he does something.
                     Faulkner’s theory of the long sentence and the continuously present past,
                    represents a fundamental complication for visualization. A faithful rendering of
                    his vision would have to project the narrative past and the narrative present on
                    top of one another, which would, at best, lead to an amorphous blob. On the
                    other hand, showing events as a discreet sequence does not do justice to the way
                    Faulkner weaves the past through the present in his work.
                A related challenge is that Faulkner’s idea of the past being eternally present
                    led him to experiment with time throughout his career; arguably each of the
                    novels is a reworking of the same theory in a different form. Ideally, a
                    visualization that captures Faulkner’s use of time has to be consistent across
                    all his works to provide a basis for comparison, but also flexible enough to
                    capture the idiosyncrasies of each text. For instance, the Sound and the Fury and Absalom,
                        Absalom! are both about the past, but [o]ne is
                        a drama about knowing events, the other a drama of events defused and
                        disconnected
                    . These differences in the way time is constructed
                    are compounded when expressed across the entire corpus. Any visualization of his
                    narrative, including the ones provided by the narrative structure analysis
                    dashboard, can only provide a provisional and limited insight into the
                    texts.
                One final hurdle to visualizing narrative in Faulkner is that the unique
                    narrative problems his texts present may not necessarily be useful for creating
                    a shared visual language with other, non-Faulkner texts. This is an obstacle
                    that narrative theory is particularly adept at surmounting. After all, there are
                    certain generalizable textual aspects based on narrative theory that can
                    elucidate cross-author comparison.
            

                Matchless Times: Visualizing Faulkner’s Plots
                At first blush, it would appear that there is no accepted standard for
                    visualizing narrative data. This is only because the common means of doing this
                    have been scattered across different knowledge domains. In fact, a number of
                    different projects have proposed analogous models, even if they were not
                    necessarily aware of one another. The most consistently used model relies on
                    graphing the chronological order in relation to story time. This technique was
                    already anticipated by Vladimir Propp, and he hints at versions of the models in
                    the appendix of Morphology of the Folktale in 1928
                        . Earlier work by Faulkner scholars has also
                    adopted the same technique of contrasting plot with story 
                    . The storyline models created by Randall Munroe on
                    xkcd.com have inspired much productive subsequent research 
                    
                    
                    , and are similar to Propp’s initial insights,
                    even if he is not mentioned. Thus, when Kim et al. claim that their project
                    Story Curve is the first scientific investigation and
                        systematic exploration of this visualization technique, it is
                    perhaps somewhat overstated . The deep parallels between
                    current work and that of Propp nearly a century earlier should not be seen as
                    evidence of stagnation within in the field, but rather as a testament to the
                    intuitive power of this type of visualization design.
                Respecting this observation, I used the plotly.js graphing library and vanilla JS
                    to design a data dashboard that would allow users ranging from first-time
                    readers of Faulkner to seasoned scholars to compare his texts with one another
                    on the basis of plot shape. As DY caters to the
                    broadest possible audience, users have different levels of technical
                    proficiency, and the usability of the charts needed to be immediate and
                    intuitive. The design goal was therefore to create something that required very
                    little input from the user, and generated insights that would be familiar and
                    meaningful to literary scholars. The resulting interface allows users to compare
                    up to four charts, and toggle between chronological order and date range. The
                    charts also have some functionality that is native to plotly.js that enables a
                    more scoped view of the data, and the ability to download the chart. Along with
                    the main narrative structure chart, there are also charts showing the percentage
                    of different forms of narration; the ratio of flashbacks, flashforwards, and
                    linear event sequences; and a frequency diagram of events across the dates of
                    the story. The various tools all work together to allow users to compare the
                    narrative structure of fourteen novels and fifty-six short stories.
                
                    Understanding Chronology through Plot Shape
                    The step charts below represent the progression of the story relative to the
                        order in which it is told. They are meant to showcase the plot structure of
                        a text in one, easy to compare, view. Each line segment represents one
                        event. Events that comprised less than a page come across as a dot, while
                        events that amounted to multiple pages are line segments, though for novels
                        most line segments appear as dots due to scaling. The length of events only
                        captures their discourse time, and does not correspond to their significance
                        or textual duration. These segments are plotted by page number on the x-axis
                        and chronological order on the y-axis.The reason for choosing page
                            number, which is dependent on edition, versus word count, which is
                            independent of layout and more precise, was a practical one. Only in
                            some cases was there a clean digital version available. In the future,
                            this data will eventually have to be linked to word count as well as
                            page number. When events happen earlier, they are lower down.
                        Conversely, events that happen later in the chronology are higher up on the
                        chart. If the story and the plot coincide, and events are told in the order
                        that they happen, the slope is forty-five degrees. This is rarely the case
                        for Faulkner, or any author. Instead, there are usually troughs or peaks in
                        the line. These are indications of analepsis (flashback) or prolepsis
                        (flashforward), respectively.Nonlinear sequencing is not always a sign
                            of prolepsis or analepsis can also be a sign of event parallelism. Since
                            the events have to be entered in rank order, events that happen at the
                            same time are forced into a linear sequence. Borrowing from an
                        example by David Herman, if story and plot coincide, the order of events
                        plotted out as a line segment is ABC (see Figure 2). If Faulkner tells the
                        story in a different order and uses a flashback, the order is BAC. Visually,
                        line segment A will come sequentially after B on the x-axis, but appear
                        lower down on the y-axis (see Figure 3). In that same vein, if there were a
                        flashforward the story would be told ACB and segment C would precede B on
                        the x-axis, but be higher up on the y-axis (see Figure 4) .
                    
                        Story and Chronology
                        Events plotted as a line segment.
                        
                    
                    
                        Flashback
                        Events plotted as if there is a flashback.
                        
                    
                    
                        Flashforward
                        Events plotted if there is a flashforward.
                        
                    
                    Along with chronological data, DY also identifies the narrative
                        status of an event. Narrative status answers the question: Who/what is responsible as the source of this
                            Event?
                        . This concept does not map neatly onto any
                        language available in narrative theory, and using any adjacent definition
                        likely leads to more confusion than clarity. Be that as it may, each event
                        is identified as having one of five narrative statuses: 1)
                            Narrated by a first or third person narrator; 2)
                            Told by a character in the story; 3)
                            Remembered through a character’s consciousness; 4)
                            Hypothesized when something might have happened; 5)
                            Narrated+consciousness when Faulkner combines
                        narration with stream of consciousness. The last case was created
                        specifically for Light in August, though
                        examples appear sporadically throughout other texts. Using these categories,
                        the chronological data can be subsetted according to narrative status.
                        Encoding narrative status for a text is not a necessary compotent for
                        creating storyline charts, and the applicability of the narrative categories
                        beyond Faulkner remains to be seen. It would be challenging, for example, to
                        encode James Joyce’s Ulysses with purely these
                        type of narrative status classifiers. Nonetheless, the resulting
                        visualization shows events as both a change in location or character, and as
                        a change in narrative status (Figure 5).
                    
                        Events in The Sound and the Fury by
                            chronological order and page number.
                        Plot of narrative status in The Sound and the
                                Fury.
                        
                    
                    The above visualization compresses a lot of complex information. On the
                        y-axis is the rank order of chronological events, and on the x-axis are the
                        page and event number. The plotly.js library allows users several ways to
                        drill down and manipulate the data. The legend is interactive and users can
                        hide and show the various traces. Users can also hover over points to reveal
                        specific information like rank, page and event number accompanied by the
                        first 6-8 words of the event.
                    In this particular view of the Sound and the
                            Fury several salient features of the text are visible. First,
                        Benjy’s chapter is the first in the novel, but is actually meant to be third
                        sequentially. This is clear visually because the first series of yellow dots
                        up until page 74 can be slotted into the space on the y-axis between 264 and
                        265. This is not particularly revelatory since the chapter titles are dated,
                        but it does confirm that the sequence is in the right order. Second, many of
                        the details in the narrative present are actually quite regular in their
                        sequence, it is the past that appears confused and is frequently nonlinear.
                        Upon closer inspection, even here there are patterns in the sequence. In
                        terms of narrative status, it is interesting to note just how much of the
                            Sound and the Fury is told through memory.
                        The first two chapters are recounted to a large extent to through the
                        memories Benjy and Quentin have. Meanwhile, in the last two chapters the
                        event sequence is far more linear, and the narrative status is more
                        consistently narrated than the previous two sections. The novel appears to
                        move from chaos and disorder to order and stability, and it is perhaps all
                        the more poetic that the novel ends with each in its
                            ordered place
                        .
                
                
                    Interpreting Temporal Positioning through Date Range
                    Along with chronology and narrative status, the date range during which
                        events occur is another insightful way to visualize these stories. What is
                        particularly revealing about the date information is how Faulkner structured
                        the past in his narratives. At times, this is very precisely defined, as
                        with the date titles of the chapters in The Sound and
                            the Fury. In other instances, time is very vaguely indicated.
                        The DY team enters an exact date whenever possible, but resorts
                        to a date range when there is insufficient information for a specific date.
                        Sometimes the range is a week, a month, or even a couple of years. In order
                        to identify and delimit date ranges as much as possible, textual references
                        to real historical events, such as the Louisiana Purchase or the Battle of
                        First Manassas, are used as anchors to which other relative dates are
                        tethered. Even this is not always possible, since relative time indications
                        like earlier and later have no
                        specific value. In such cases, it is indicated that the date range is
                        indeterminate.
                    The aforementioned challenges with establishing the dates for events
                        notwithstanding, it is still possible to visualize them in a productive
                        manner. The graph below shows the latest possible date for each event
                        indicated by a red line and the earliest possible date with a blue line (see
                        Figure 6). The area in between represents the range of dates possible. As
                        opposed to the chronological graphs, these have a continuous line because it
                        provides more visual clarity than a segmented line, even if it might give
                        the false impression that there is a smooth transition between past and
                        present.
                    
                        Events in Absalom, Absalom! by date range
                            and page number.
                        Plot depicting possible dates for events.
                        
                    
                    To a certain extent, the date range graphs parallel the chronology graphs,
                        because both order the events relative to page number. The key distinction
                        is that the date range charts demonstrate the difference in time between
                        events. The chronological graphs are insightful with regard to the
                        sequencing of time; the date range graphs give a better sense of how
                        Faulkner is using historical time.
                    In the chart of Absalom, Absalom! this use of
                        the past is particularly powerful. Even though the narrative present is
                        1909-1910, many of the events take place at an earlier date. Looking across
                        the graph, it is possible to see that the past predominates the beginning of
                        the novel, but over the course of the text the past and present grow
                        together, until, finally, they almost intertwine at the end. The chart
                        demonstrates just how closely interknit past and present are in Faulkner’s
                        imagining.
                
            

                Conclusion
                 While it is tempting to make inferences about Faulkner’s work using the
                    narrative structure analysis dashboard, those conclusions have been deliberately
                    forestalled here. Instead, the goal of DY is to provide a platform
                    for other scholars to use the data for their own work. It makes little sense to
                    create a dynamic user-driven visualization if it is only meant to lead to
                    predetermined answers. That being said, there are a number of fruitful areas of
                    investigation that the dashboard makes possible. The first of these is to see if
                    there is a pattern in the way Faulkner structures the plots of his texts. One of
                    Faulkner’s central concerns is how the past inhabits the present, but it is
                    unclear if he does so in continuously new ways or if there is a signature
                        Faulknerian style with which he works and reworks this
                    material. A related issue is the change or consistency in his use of chronology,
                    narrative status, and date ranges throughout his career. In Faulkner studies,
                    there is a generally accepted arc of Faulkner’s development that divides his
                    literary output into several distinct periods. It would be interesting to see if
                    this structured division of his writing is visible in the visualizations or if
                    these tell a different story.
                Beyond Faulkner, the visual language used in this paper and the accompanying
                    dashboard are prompts for a larger discussion about representing and
                    interpreting digitally encoded narratives. The framework for narrative analysis
                    provided by DY is precise enough to highlight meaningful
                    differences, while being broad enough not to be limited to Faulkner. The visual
                    language used for the dashboard is similar to projects within disparate
                    knowledge domains, suggesting their intelligibility. A broader adoption of
                    plot/story charts would usher in the ability to start comparing different
                    authors on reasonably equal narratological footing. One obvious point of
                    contrast for Faulkner is a contemporaneous author like Ernest Hemingway, many of
                    whose short stories take place almost entirely in the narrative present. Yet,
                    the trauma of the past is always lurking just under the surface about to
                    explode. Similarly, it would be interesting to compare Faulkner’s writing to
                    that of realist authors like Kate Chopin, who more strictly adheres to the
                    conventions of chronological unity. 
                Whatever path researchers might strike out, narrative theory still provides an
                    indispensable map for conceptualizing, and encoding narrative data. No doubt,
                    this encoding is an artificial construct that does not reveal any type of
                    fundamental truth about a text, as early structuralist narrative theorists might
                    have imagined. Nevertheless, these rasters for interpretation slice up texts in
                    unexpected ways, providing new insights yet to be imagined, much less
                    visualized.
            
