Title:  LdoD Visual - A
					Visual Reader for Fernando Pessoa’s 
Volume:  015
Issue:  3
Date:  October 15, 2021
Abstract:  
				
				 There is an increasing use of information visualization techniques in Digital
					Humanities to support the analysis of literary works. On the other hand, the rise of
					digital reading on the web as well as the development of dedicated e-book readers has
					triggered a variety of hardware and software solutions to provide new reading
					environments and new material engagements with textual forms. In this paper, we
					propose a new metaphor, In-Out-In metaphor, to support the reading of literary works
					in a digital medium. Our model integrates information visualization techniques with
					plain text reading into the reading flow. This approach differs from the well-known
					dichotomy between close and distant reading because its emphasis is not on supporting
					the analysis of the texts being read, but on providing a smooth flow between focus
					and digression, which naturally occurs during a reading experience. We present a
					solution to read and explore the Book of Disquiet by
					Fernando Pessoa, an unfinished book composed of a set of modular texts that have been
					edited in different sequences and which can be read multi-sequentially. The research
					and design decisions for the visual reader of the Book of
						Disquiet are meant to provide an appealing, rich and interactive online
					reading experience through a web-based application, LdoD Visual. The implemented
					features apply information visualization techniques with an emphasis on exploring the
					modular nature of the book. Since this is a fragmentary literary work, its reading
					can be fragmentary as well, but providing a smooth multiple flow reading experience. 

			
Full Body Text: 

				1. Introduction
				The Book of Disquiet (LdoD, from Livro do Desassossego, in Portuguese) by Fernando Pessoa is a
					fragmentary literary work that was left unedited and unpublished by the author. In
					1982, forty seven years after Pessoa’s death (1935), its first edition was published
						Pessoa’s c. 28,000 unpublished papers remained in the possession of his
						family until the late 1970s when they were acquired by the National Library of
						Portugal. After this, the systematic cataloguing, editing, and publication of
						his works became possible. Although several books had been in circulation
						between the 1940s and the 1970s, namely those including the poetry of his major
						heteronyms (Alberto Caeiro, Álvaro de Campos, and Ricardo Reis), it was only in
						the 1980s that the critical editing of his manuscripts, typescripts, and
						published works started. The Book of Disquiet was
						published in two volumes in 1982. The Critical Edition of the Works of Fernando
						Pessoa, launched in 1984 by the Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda (general editor,
						Ivo Castro), is still in progress. Twenty-two volumes have been published since
						then.. Since then, three additional critical editions of the book have
					appeared, showcasing significant disparities of interpretation about how the book
					should be organized. Between 2012 and 2017, a team led by two co-authors of this
					article (Manuel Portela and António Rito Silva) created the LdoD
						Archive: A Collaborative Digital Archive of the Book of Disquiet
					. The LdoD Archive can be
					described as a hypermedia interactive engine that has realized the vision of an
					endlessly reconfigurable book. It is both a scholarly digital edition and
					meta-edition that enables users to compare each version of the Book of Disquiet with all of the versions encoded in the archive, and a
					virtual editing space designed with game-like principles for enabling different types
					of users (experts, students, general readers) to make their own editions and
					collections of the Book of Disquiet. The stated aim of
					this evolving archive is to experiment with computational forms of editing, reading,
					and writing in ways that go beyond the bibliographic imagination . The LdoD Visual – a web application integrated into the LdoD Archive – explores the reading flow within this
					complex digital environment.
				The modularity of The Book of Disquiet is, in fact, the
					contingent result of material and historical features that tend to reinforce each
					other: on one hand, each text is a self-contained unit that has no necessary
					narrative continuity with other texts; on the other hand, there is no defined
					ordering of the entire corpus of circa 600 pieces. Autograph textual units are also
					in various stages of revision: first draft manuscripts, typescripts with manuscript
					emendations, clean typescripts, twelve published texts. Pessoa only defined a few
					textual clusters, and even those suffered changes over time during the two stages of
					composition (1913-1920; 1928-1934). Given this contingent modular nature of the book,
					its fragments can be read regardless of any particular order, offering the
					opportunity for a fragmentary reading of the book, that is, a practice of reading
					that fosters divergent reading paths that can be built by the actual reader, instead
					of following a typical sequential reading that is bound to happen in a rigidly
					defined story sequence.
				In the LdoD Visual, we used the particular structure and
					characteristics of the Book of Disquiet to explore, and
					smoothly integrate, two current research trends in Digital Humanities: information
					visualization techniques applied to texts, including the possibility of moving
					between close and distant reading scales , with the
					design of web interfaces for accessing complex literary archives and the emergence of
					e-books as a reading medium . We propose a new reading
					metaphor, the In-Out-In metaphor, which integrates information visualization
					techniques with the plain reading of the text, to support the focus-digress flow that
					structures the embodied activity of the reader. By focus-digress flow we
					mean that during the focus stage the reader is in the story, while the digress stage
					corresponds to moments of self-consciousness of textual form, structure and
					navigation, as well as associative thought processes, both of which interrupt
					immersive reading.
				We have designed and implemented a web-based application to read the LdoD whose main objective is to give the reader a sense of
					choice and an active role while reading and browsing through the book’s multiple
					textual fragments, in what should be a pleasurable and immersive user experience for
					both humanities researchers or just interested readers. The entire rationale of the
						LdoD Archive has been to offer a multi-layered
					access to the text, mediated through specific interfaces for each major function.
					Interfaces should be meaningfully navigated by interactors with very different levels
					of knowledge of the text – from the novice to the learner to the expert – and with
					distinct aims in mind, including leisure reading, study and analysis, advanced
					research, and literary creation .
				To achieve this goal at the level of the reading interface, we integrate a set of
					meta-information about the Book of Disquiet with
					information visualization techniques. Information visualization is a broad field that
					can be applied to a large domain of different areas, providing insight based on input
					data with different perspectives, summarizing relationships, identifying and
					comparing patterns, trends, outliers, finding correlations, among other tasks . In this project, visualization has been conceived as a
					humanistic interface for integrating different reading strategies and proving readers
					with a perception of reading as the traversal of a semiotic space that is both
					topological and semantic, and which is responsive to the readers’ agency .
				In order to integrate the existing meta-information with information visualization
					techniques we developed a tool, the LdoD Visual, which
					supports the exploration and pleasurable reading of the Book of
						Disquiet. The implemented solution provides new contributions for the
					reading and exploration of this work, in particular, and to the concept of reading
					flow in Digital Humanities, in general. This tool is built on top of the Collaborative Digital Archive of the Book of Disquiet, as
					mentioned. So the visual reader should be understood as a second-degree interactive
					representation – i.e., an additional interface – for providing a rewarding reading
					experience of a highly complex corpus of 600 texts. Its conception brings together a
					metaphoric model of the reading process, on one hand, and an algorithmic and
					graphical modelling of that process, on the other.
				Besides describing the technical and graphical details of the LdoD
						Visual as a reading interface, this article makes three related claims.
					We argue that our computational model of reading interactions is adequate for
					representing the multiplicity of reading traversals inherent in the Book of Disquiet as a modular and open network of textual
					sequences. We also claim that our model of the reading flow as a recurrent process of
					immersion-emersion can be equated with the networked digital medium itself, insofar
					as the continuous focus on strings of text required for immersion can be smoothly
					integrated with the macrotextual logic of the visualizations facilitating textual
					overviews, hypertextual connections, and frame jumps. Finally, we argue that the ways
					for moving into, moving within, and moving out of the text provide a satisfactory
					balance involving two scales of textual representation that could be useful for other
					digital humanities projects of highly complex textual corpora. We believe the
					ergonomic solution embodied in our reading interface explicitly integrates close
					reading, hyper-reading, and machine reading , and thus
					contributes to the design of new reading interfaces.
			

				2. Related Work
				In this section we present some background concepts regarding the LdoD Archive, Visualization in Digital Humanities, and Classification
					in Digital Humanities, the three conceptual and technical contexts in which this work
					was developed.
			

				2.1. The LdoD Archive
				The LdoD Archive provides every reader with the
					possibility of reading the Book of Disquiet according
						to four expert editions: the first critical
					edition, edited by Jacinto do Prado Coelho , which was
					published in 1982, as well as three critical versions that have been edited by Teresa
					Sobral Cunha (1990-91 [2008] ), Richard Zenith (1998
					[2012] ) and Jerónimo Pizarro (2010) 
					The dates between brackets correspond to the editions used in the archive,
						while the first date corresponds to the date of the first
						edition.The LdoD Archive has
						transcribed what was the latest version of each critical edition when the
						encoding started in 2012. Since then slightly updated and revised editions by
						Cunha, Zenith and Pizarro have been published. The project benefited from the
						support and collaboration of the editors. The copyright notice in the archive
						reads: All items in the LdoD Archive may be shared in
							accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial
								4.0 International license (CC BY-NC 4.0). This license does
							not extend to the four experts’ editions (Prado Coelho-1982; Sobral
							Cunha-2008; Zenith-2012; and Pizarro-2010), which can only be used within
							the LdoD Archive infrastructure. Their redistribution or republication on
							other terms, in any medium, requires express written consent from the
							editors or their legal representatives.
						https://ldod.uc.pt/about/copyright. Each edition is composed
					of the total number of fragments and their relative order varies from edition to
					edition. In the LdoD Archive, the user can read each fragment while comparing its
					respective position across these expert editions, and they can also have access to
					additional information, which may also vary according to the edition, such as date
					and heteronym attribution.
				In the LdoD Archive, users can also create their own
					virtual editions of the LdoD by selecting fragments from
					each of the 4 expert editions, sorting, annotating and tagging them. This virtual
					edition creation can be produced in a collaborative manner, in which case several
					users are involved, and users can play the roles of editors and managers of a virtual
					edition. The tagging of a fragment, which can apply to the fragment as a whole, or to
					just a segment of the fragment, is done by means of a set of categories that is
					associated with the virtual edition. This set of categories is designated as the
					virtual edition’s taxonomy.
				Each fragment has different properties, such as its title, text, date and the edition
					and categories to which it belongs. There are many more features and possibilities
					that can be explored in the archive, such as additional reading tools, original
					documents, comparisons between textual transcriptions, fragment search, multiplayer
					classification games, and the writing of variations based on the existing
					fragments.
			

				 2.2. Literary Reading on the Web
				Whereas hypertext structures in print books are generally subordinated to the
					sequential flow of textual strings on the page (they gravitate around the text, as
					table of contents, footnotes, references, etc.), hypertext structures in digital
					media alter the dynamics between self-contained and associative reading, as they can
					place any textual string in direct relation to a multiplicity of other texts, thus
					increasing the ratio of textual interruption. Links among disparate strings of text
					become much more frequent, and readers follow networks of association in interrupted
					and labyrinthine traversals. With the emergence of the World Wide Web as a hypermedia
					environment in the 1990s and early 2000s, the integration of verbal text into
					multimodal genres of communication continued to transform our media for symbolic
					production and exchange. More recently, mobile social media and the development of
					smartphones as multifunctional devices further extended this general transformation
					of digital literacy. 
				Even if visionary engineers imagined the future interface of computational devices as a
					sort of augmented book (as is clear from Alan Kay’s 1972 Dynabook prototype), and
					even if current electronic tablets somehow attempt to emulate the ergonomics of the
					portable book, the electronic writing and reading space reconfigures and reforms the
					set of relations inherited from bibliographic structures. The redesign of information
					spaces of legacy print forms for the networked screens of programmable media has been
					a source of continuous reflection and engineering experimentation in many areas –
					from scholarly editing to commercial publishing to educational tools, particularly
					since the late 1990s. These transformations have also been studied extensively, from
					human-computer interaction to studies of literacy to cognitive science .
					Studies seem to concur on the significance of changes to the ecology of reading
					practices, and on cognitive differences in terms of orientation and comprehension.
					Complex hypermedia literary archives, such as The William Blake
						Archive
					 The editors of The William Blake Archive
						 have redesigned its graphical user interface in December 2016,
						distinguishing between a Gallery Mode and a Reading Mode. This structure
						reflects both the pictorial and literary character of Blake’s work and the
						intermedia nature of digital environments as a remediation of multiple analogue
						materialities. It also highlights the deep modularization of Blake’s work that
						resulted from establishing the planographic digital facsimile of the printed
						page as its universal unit of representation. Because of their hypermedia
						complexity, digital archives of this type remain a challenge for all types of
						reader. Cf. http://www.blakearchive.org/ (under development for almost
					three decades), have had to adapt to this changing ecology of the web. In those
					scholarly editing projects combination of search functions, navigation structure and
					reading interface has undergone several redesigns from highly hierarchical networks
					of links – typical of the early hypertext remediation of bibliographic structures –
					to current on-the-fly aggregations based on specific XML-encoding conventions. 
				Interviewed by Werner Herzog, in Lo and Behold: Reveries of the
						Connected World (2016), Ted Nelson recalls a childhood episode when he
					was with his grandparents in a row boat, and, trailing his hand in the water, he
					notices the water flowing around his fingers in intricate patterns of connection.
					This epiphanic moment gives him awareness of the connectedness of everything which he
					associates to his future vision of hypertext as a powerful open-ended
					multidirectional changing system of relations among all texts and all media.
					Non-sequential hyperlinked literature as an evolving network of transclusions
					challenges reading practices based on linear forms of writing .
					Although not as flexible and unconstrained as imagined by Nelson, the current
					mediascape of reading was radically transformed by hypermedia and algorithmic textual
					production and analysis. Despite the early apology for the liberating, dynamic and
					heterarchical potential of hypertext by literary theorists and digital writers ,
					research into hypertext software had always recognized the disorienting effect of
					link and node structures as both a design and cognitive problem , to which alternative
					representational and navigational forms, such as spatial hypertext, have been
					proposed . 
				Almost three decades after the first literary experiments with hypermedia, Stuart
					Moulthrop and Dene Grigar (2017) have asked four
					hypertext writers (Judy Malloy, John McDaid, Shelley Jackson, and William Bly) to
					revisit their early work of the late 1980s and 1990s in order to recover the writing,
					programming, and reading mechanics involved in their exploratory uses of specific
					machines and programs, including the emerging conventions of the hyperlink as a
					resource for poetic and narrative expression. Moulthrop and Grigar’s deep reading of
					the works of those authors engages the multilayered nature of digital textuality,
					including the ways in which hypertext and algorithmic processes affect our reading
					expectations of texts as holistic self-limited entities. The elusiveness of the
					textual whole is inherent in the intricate topologies created not just by
					hyper-reading as an unbounded and labyrinthine traversal, but also by the factorial
					virtualization of text as a responsive permutation of language bits.
				Many of the same cognitive challenges of early digital genres continue to be addressed
					in the design of dedicated e-book readers and in current attempts to create a
					satisfactory balance between competing reading modes in digital media. Several
					analyses have been done on the hardware and software features for reading in
					electronic environments  that highlight the differences
					between linear sequential reading and multicursal interactive reading, which are
					particularly relevant in the context of academic research or education. This tension
					between continuity and discontinuity pervades all solutions, in which there is a
					tradeoff between the smooth flow of reading and the possibility of analysis and
					inquiry about what is being read. If we think of Digital Humanities as the coming
					together of digitized artifacts, digitized methods for modelling and analyzing those
					artifacts, and digitized interfaces for representing those artifacts and those
					analyses, then the development of reading interfaces remains an important component
					in the invention of rhetorical conventions and modes of communication in networked
					programmable media.
			

				2.2.1. Reading in the LdoD Archive
				Prior to this work, the LdoD Archive provided two reading
					user interfaces: one that emphasizes comparison between editions and another that emphasizes the sequence of
						reading (Figures 1 and 2). 

				
					Reading interface for comparing editions and transcriptions
					Screenshot of reading interface for comparing editions and
						transcriptions
					
				




				In the comparison user interface, it is possible to have a detailed highlighting of the
					differences between the authorial sources and the editorial transcriptions, and also
					across the editorial transcriptions themselves. It is also possible to annotate
					particular texts (or textual passages) with comments and tags when specific texts are
					used in the creation of a virtual edition.
				The differences between transcriptions among the different expert editions, and
					authorial sources, are highlighted by placing the fragments side by side, and using
					colors to identify which parts differ. This user interface also allows the comparison
					of meta-information assigned by the expert editors, such as title, date of
					publication, heteronym attribution, page number, which can differ according to the
					edition. Additionally, this interface also allows users to compare the transcription
					with the original document sources, by presenting the documents’ facsimiles and
					providing a diplomatic transcription, which includes deletions, insertions and
					substitutions. 
				On the other hand, and since the LdoD Archive also
					supports the definition of virtual editions, it is possible, through the comparison
					user interface, to compare the differences between the fragments, in terms of the
					assigned tags and annotations done. It is through the comparison interface that
					authenticated users can annotate and tag the fragments.


				
					Reading interface for following multiple reading sequences.
					Screenshot of multiple reading sequence interfaces
					
				

				Due to the focus of the comparison user interface on the analysis aspects, another user
					interface was defined, in order to provide a smother reading experience, although
					still emphasizing the comparison between the different sequences of reading the
						LdoD. This interface has a look and feel closer to
					the printed typography of the period the LdoD was
					written, and intends to provide reading sequences according to each one of the four
					expert editions. Besides, it provides a recommendation interface that suggests the
					next fragment to read, given the fragment being read and a set of criteria, such as,
					for instance, text similarity between fragments.
				We could say that the reading interface for comparing editions is aimed at scholarly
					engagements with the text, whereas the reading interface for showing divergent
					reading sequences is meant for general readers. In the latter interface readers have
					the option of reading vertically within a particular sequence or horizontally across
					the entire corpus, thus redefining their textual traversal according to the
					multicursal logic of the medium which, in turn, is critically used to explore the
					modular structure of the work itself. On the other hand, the aim of the new visual
					reader is to abstract textual units and their meta-information and present them
					visually in ways that enhance movements within and across the text. The hypertextual
					and textual dynamics of the LdoD Visual embodies an
					ergonomic and cognitive model of the reading process in the design of the
					interactions.
			

				2.3. Visualization in Digital Humanities
				Jänicke et al. (2015, 2017) address visual text analysis in Digital Humanities and categorize
					each of these techniques as distant reading techniques, which aim to generate an
					abstract view of textual content, and as close reading techniques, which rely mainly
					on annotations and the use of different colors and underlining styles to lead to a
					deep comprehension and thorough interpretation of textual passages. They analyze how
					close and distant reading techniques can be combined in ways that could bridge these
					two perspectives so that the user can switch between close and distant reading. This
					is mainly achieved by side-by-side visualizations of the text being read and its
					meta-information, which make it possible to switch from a close reading of a
					particular fragment to some kind of overview associated with specific metadata. On
					the other hand, it is possible to access a particular text from the distant reading
					view where the text is represented because it has properties that are analyzed in
					that distant reading mode . This integration between close
					and distant reading is similar to our goal but our emphasis is on providing a reading
					experience, while the integration of close and distant reading is concerned with the
					analysis and understanding of the texts, such that close reading is frequently
					related with the annotation and generation of meta-information while the user is
					reading a text.
			


				2.3.1. Visualization Techniques for LdoD
				Given the specific characteristics of the LdoD we can
					analyze which visualization technique can be applied in its representation. These
					techniques belong to different areas and types of tasks, such as reading guidance,
					user navigation, global view, and exploratory analysis.
				Reading guidance features consist of giving important information for the user
					regarding a specific fragment or even a collection or category of fragments, where
					the focus is on the fragment that is currently being read. User navigation features
					provide the user with an interface to navigate between different parts of the LdoD, in which the focus is on the relationship between
					the fragment being currently read and the remaining fragments of the book. Global
					view features have the objective of giving the user a summarized presentation or
					zoomed-out view of content from the LdoD, thus directing
					the focus to the edition that is being read. Exploratory analysis features present
					the user with information that is more focused on exploring relationships in the
						LdoD without necessarily converging to the task of
					reading.
				Word clouds  can be used to provide global views and reading
					guidance. Word clouds can be associated with the taxonomy categories of a virtual
					edition. After being presented with a word cloud of the available categories, and
					clicking on one of them, the user would be redirected to a list of fragments that
					corresponds to the selected category.
				Also by exploring the categories associated with the virtual editions, it is possible
					to provide a global view of the edition, using colors to identify those fragments
					associated with a particular category. This feature would provide a global view of
					the fragments tagged with that category and the navigation to another fragment that
					is associated to the same category. This visualization technique, is, for instance,
					used in the Diggersdiaries web site .
				Besides the categories criterion, other criteria are supported by the LdoD Archive, such as text and heteronym, and they can be
					used to define a distance value between fragments. In this case, when reading a given
					fragment, the user could browse through similar fragments according to the selected
					criteria, and this relation can be visually represented using a network graph to show
					how close certain fragments are in relation to others. This would provide reading
					guidance. Alexander and Gleicher (2016) make use
					of network graphs to visualize text similarity between different work by William
					Shakespeare.
				By highlighting some of the fragments’ words according to their relevance in the
					context of the entire book it is possible to provide a guidance while reading a
					fragment. The weight of this highlighting could be made resorting to a metric like
					Term Frequency – Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF)
						In information retrieval, tf–idf or TFIDF, short for term
							frequency–inverse document frequency, is a numerical statistic that is
							intended to reflect how important a word is to a document in a collection
							or corpus. It is often used as a weighting factor in searches of
							information retrieval, text mining, and user modeling. The tf–idf value
							increases proportionally to the number of times a word appears in the
							document and is offset by the number of documents in the corpus that
							contain the word, which helps to adjust for the fact that some words appear
							more frequently in general.
						Wikipedia, accessed 17 November 2020.https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tf-idf. Text Skimming  is a technique used in knowledge
					maps and to support reading and it can also be applied in this context.
				There are some differences between the experience of reading a book on a browser or
					other portable virtual book readers and the actual physical book. In an attempt to
					close this gap, it would be interesting to provide the user with a graphical
					representation that makes the awareness of where the actual reading fragment is
					placed in the current edition. This type of feature belongs to the global view
					area.
			

				2.4. Text Classification
				The visualization techniques are built on top of the information to be presented plus
					some meta-information. In the context of the LdoD
						Archive, the information is the fragment transcription and its position
					in an edition, and the meta-information is the date, heteronym and categories
					assigned to a fragment. Additionally, some meta-information is generated from the
					fragment through the TF-IDF associated with it, by considering each fragment as a
					document and the words in the fragment its set of terms.
			

				2.4.1.Distance Measures in the LdoD Archive
				The LdoD Archive implements a set of measures to calculate
					the distance between two fragments belonging to the same edition according to four
					types of meta-information: date, heteronym, categories, and TF-IDF. The distance
					between two fragments is calculated using the cosine similarity , according to which a vector is defined for each of the
					fragments to be compared.
						Cosine similarity is a measure of similarity between two
							non-zero vectors of an inner product space. It is defined to equal the
							cosine of the angle between them, which is also the same as the inner
							product of the same vectors normalized to both have length 1. The cosine of
							0° is 1, and it is less than 1 for any angle in the interval [0, π]
							radians. It is thus a judgment of orientation and not magnitude: two
							vectors with the same orientation have a cosine similarity of 1, two
							vectors oriented at 90° relative to each other have a similarity of 0, and
							two vectors diametrically opposed have a similarity of -1, independent of
							their magnitude. The cosine similarity is particularly used in positive
							space, where the outcome is neatly bounded in [0,1]., accessed 17
						November 2020. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosine_similarity
				Associated with the heteronym, a vector of two cells is defined, one for each
					heteronym, Vicente Guedes and Bernardo Soares, in which the value 1.0 is assigned to
					the cell of the heteronym if the fragment is assigned by the editors to it. 
				For the date, a vector is defined with the number of cells equal to 1934-1913+1, which
					corresponds to the period when the fragments were written. For the cell corresponding
					to the year when a fragment was written, the value 1.0 is assigned and for the other
					cells a decay of MAX(0.0, 1.0 - N x 0.1) is applied where N is the distance between
					the year associated with the cell and the closest cell with value 1.0.
				For the text, the set of the first 100 TF-IDF terms associated with each one of the
					fragments that we intend to compare is calculated. Note that this set is between 100,
					in which the two fragments have the same first TF-IDF 100 terms, and 200, in which
					all terms are different. Then, for each fragment, a vector whose size equals the
					number of terms in the set is defined, and to the cell associated with a term the
					value 1.0 is assigned if the term belongs to the first 100 TF-IDF terms of the
					fragment, and 0.0 otherwise.
				To calculate the distance between two fragments using the set of categories assigned to
					them a vector whose size is equal to the number of categories associated with the
					virtual edition taxonomy is defined. Then, for each fragment, its respective vector
					is filled with 1.0 for the cells corresponding to the categories the fragment has,
					and 0.0 for the other cells.
				Note that the archive also uses a topic modelling algorithm, through the Mallet
						software MALLET is the acronym for MAchine Learning for LanguagE
							Toolkit, developed at the University of Massachusetts Amherst:
							MALLET is a Java-based package for statistical natural
							language processing, document classification, clustering, topic modeling,
							information extraction, and other machine learning applications to
							text.http://mallet.cs.umass.edu In the LdoD
							Archive we have used MALLET’s topic modelling toolkit, which
						contains implementations of Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), Pachinko
						Allocation, and Hierarchical LDA. One of our virtual editions of the Book of Disquiet (LdoD
							Mallet) was automatically generated by MALLET’s topic modelling
						software. Cf. https://ldod.uc.pt/edition/acronym/LdoD-Mallet, which allows
					the virtual editions to be automatically classified using the set of generated
					topics.
			

				3. The In-Out-In Metaphor
				Reading a book is a task in which the reader constantly switches between two states of
					focus. The reader is either completely engaged in the reading task or briefly
					disengages out of the act for various reasons. These moments of disengagement can be
					triggered, for example, by recalling what happened in previous chapters, picturing a
					description of a character or scenario, remembering a similar personal experience in
					relation to what has been read, linking a new event to what has happened in the past
					or even trying to make a prediction out of it, among other possibilities. Immersion
					can also be interrupted by the readers’ self- awareness of form, structure and
					navigation. The in-moment represents the state of being inside the textual world,
					absorbed by its signifying chain. The out-moment points to the liminal state of being
					outside the text, a liminality that is a function of the text itself and the ways in
					which it draws attention to its materiality or generates mental processes of
					association and reflection.
				Part of our solution model revolves around this phenomenon, as it is intended to
					materialize and direct this constant in and out that happens while emerging out of
					and submerging into the source text. It is important to highlight that, in comparison
					to a typical book where we have a rigidly defined story sequence, the LdoD is a fragmentary literary work. This means that these
					moments of disengagement can turn into a chance for the user to reposition herself in
					another part of the book. This nuance leads to a reading path and global mental
					picture of the world created by the book that can greatly vary from reader to reader,
					opening up space for providing the user with an immersive experience in which she can
					have a sense of choice and an active role while reading the LdoD. If we consider that genre is an emergent property that results
					from specific arrangements of textual units, readers of the Book
						of Disquiet - mediated by this in-out-in visual reader – may even
					experience the oscillation between fictional autobiography and fragmentary narrative
					as an effect of their traversals. The emergence of a variable textual whole becomes a
					function of their reading acts. Self-contained textual units, when traversed as
					reading text, correspond to the in-movement, but when navigated as visual
					representations correspond to the out-movement. 
			

				4. The LdoD Visual
				The solution’s interface is composed of a group of different main menus: edition
					selection, reading, current user activity, new user activity, and reading history
					menus. Before describing each menu in detail, it is important to explain the concepts
					that will be used throughout this solution proposal.
			

				4.1. Core Concepts
				An information visualization technique, among other descriptions in
					previous sections, is a visual representation or metaphor that can provide insight
					and different perspectives about almost any type of input data, as we saw above from
					the multiple examples given in the related work applied to the context of the Book of Disquiet.
				Semantic criteria is the set of attributes that can be encoded in the
					information visualization techniques in the context of the Book
						of Disquiet, namely word frequency, word relevance (TF-IDF),
					chronological order, heteronyms, fragment categories, and taxonomies. Text similarity
					is another semantic criterion that can be derived from word frequency and word
					relevance.
				A user activity is an activity that can be selected by the user while
					reading a fragment from the Book of Disquiet, consisting
					of making use of an information visualization technique to encode
					different semantic criteria. An example of a user activity is Find similar fragments by text similarity to find
					fragments that are similar to the fragment that is currently being accessed, using a
					network graph as the information visualization technique that encodes text similarity
					- the semantic criterion that is chosen by the user while selecting the new user
					activity. To achieve an intuitive and easy-to-use solution, independently of the user
					activity's information visualization technique and encoded semantic criteria, the
					user selects a user activity by clicking on a button with a high-level description of
					what the user activity was designed to achieve, e.g. Find
						similar fragments by text similarity. 
				A reading flow is a sequence of accesses, done by a single user, such that
					the user progresses in the sequence of fragments through in-in, in-out-in and
						in-out-out-in subflows. An in-in subflow corresponds
					to a situation when the user is accessing a fragment and accesses another fragment,
					for instance, by switching to the previous page. This switch is done according to the
						semantic criteria the user chose for accessing the fragment,
					defined by the current user activity. For instance, if the semantic criteria
					correspond to the set of fragments of a given category, the reader will access
					another fragment belonging to the same category. An in-out-in subflow
					corresponds to a situation in which the user is accessing a fragment, moves to the
					current user activity menu (to be described in the next subsections) in which the
					reader has a complete view of the fragments according to the same semantic criteria
					used to access the fragment being read. For instance, if we consider the previous
					example, the complete view may show all fragments that have the same category in the
					context of all fragments. An in-out-out-in subflow corresponds to a
					situation when the reader stops reading, according to the current user activity, and
					chooses a new user activity in which she continues to read.
				Overall, the reading flow corresponds to the implementation of the in-out
					metaphor, where the level of disruption is minimal in in-in subflows,
					and maximal in in-out-out-in subflows. Note that to reduce the
					disruption of the reading flow, all changes can be done using shortcuts, pressing a
					single key, and most menu elements fade-out in the reading interface when the reader
					does not use the mouse so that the screen only contains the text of the fragment.
			

				4.2. User Interface Structure: Menus and Navigation
				In the context of an edition, the LdoD Visual has three
					main types of elements: selection menus, reading view, and global views.
			

				4.2.1. User Activity Selection Menu
				Once a context of an edition and one of its fragments is chosen, the main selection
					menu allows users to choose between the available user activities, given the context,
					and access the corresponding global view. The user activities are ordered by semantic
					criteria: edition order, chronological order, text similarity, categories/taxonomy,
					and heteronym.
				
					User activities that can be chosen in the context of a specific fragment, for
						an edition that does not assign heteronyms to the fragments (the last user
						activity is not available).
					Image of the user activities that can be chosen
					
				

				As shown in Figure 3, each user activity is represented by a card with a title, a
					button with the corresponding keyboard shortcut between straight parentheses that
					will take the user to the activity, and an image that represents the information
					visualization technique for that user activity, which can also be clicked to access
					the user activity. 
				The image and button will be greyed out if the activity is unavailable - for example,
					if the currently selected edition has no taxonomy, user activities that use this
					semantic criteria category will not be available, displaying a message explaining why
					it is not available in the title and its selection button is also unavailable.
				The same semantic criteria can be used with different information visualization
					techniques. In Figure 3, we can observe that the top 2nd
					and bottom 1st cards use different information
					visualization techniques for chronological order, respectively, custom square map and
					timeline; the top 3rd, bottom 3rd and 4th cards use the semantic criteria
					associated with the taxonomies, where top and bottom 3rd
					use the same information visualization technique, word cloud, the former in the
					context of the selected edition, and the latter in the context of the selected
					fragment; while the bottom 4th uses a different
					visualization technique, network graph.
			

				4.2.2. Reading View
				In this view, the focus is on reading the text of a selected fragment, as represented
					in Figure 4, where the fragment title and text are presented with a reading progress
					bar. Since the text will be read on a screen, the used text font is a sans serif
					font. The fragment title font and text font are the same ones used in one of the
						LdoD Archive reading interfaces.
				
					Plain reading view of a fragment, in which it is possible to navigate to the
						next and previous fragments using the keyboard arrow keys and in which there is
						a progress reading bar at the bottom.
					Plain reading view of a fragment
					
				

				Besides the progress reading bar, the reading view features some elements of
					established browser book readers (see Figure 5). There are previous/next fragment
					arrow buttons that retreat/advance through the selected edition fragments depending
					on the currently selected edition. It also allows users to navigate between fragments
					according to the user selected category or heteronym, using the yellow arrows. There
					are some detail features, such as smooth animation between fragment change and smooth
					page scroll back to the top for the same matter. This smooth page scroll can also be
					triggered by clicking on its matching button or pressing T on
					the keyboard.
				
					Reading view of a fragment, in which the menu is visible, the most relevant
						words are highlighted, and it is possible to navigate to the next/previous
						fragment in the edition, using the black arrows, and to the next/previous
						fragment according to the selected user category or heteronym, using the yellow
						arrows.
					Menu for the plain reading view
					
				

				When the user stays inactive for more than 3 seconds, everything in this menu
					disappears with the exception of the reading progress bar and the fragment's title
					and text, as shown in Figure 4. Inactivity is timed when the user is not interacting
					with any button, progress bar or previous/next fragment arrow buttons. It is then
					possible to trigger everything to appear again by doing a mouse hover on any of these
					elements of the menu. When the user scrolls down the page and the top buttons overlap
					the text, there is also a transparency trigger. These features are activated as an
					effort to maximize the user focus on reading the text and are another extra step
					towards achieving our metaphor implementation. 
				In this menu, there is a user activity "under the hood" in the sense that it resembles
					a user activity that does not break the reading flow: by clicking on the matching
					button (Highlight the most relevant words), left button on top
					(shortcut [R]), the 4 most relevant words are highlighted in blue, as presented in
					Figure 5. This number was decided after extensive experimentation and fine tuning,
					trying to find a balance between actual relevant content highlighting and not
					highlighting too many words to the point it becomes irrelevant to do so. This option
					makes use of an information visualization technique - text skimming - to encode a
					semantic criterion - word relevance (more specifically, TF-IDF) -, even though it is
					not described as a user activity in the sense that it can be applied independently of
					what is the current user’s activity.
				The reader can also see his/her own history of reading by pressing the button on the
					right in the group of three buttons on top (shortcut [H]), as presented in Figure
					6.
				
					Reading history view of an edition in which the reader as accessed one fragment
						(De resto eu não sonho) in the context of a different type of user
						activity.
					Image of the reading history view for one fragment
					
				

				In this view, the reader is presented with an interactive timeline that displays the
					fragments that have been read for the currently selected edition. Each history entry
					is a fragment, displaying its title and a thumbnail that represents the information
					visualization technique of the user activity through which that fragment was reached.
					Besides, having a similar interaction to the user activity that makes use of the
					timeline in the global view, the user can navigate back to a given fragment that was
					previously read by clicking on its entry.
				The buttons on top right, Figure 5, allow the user to see the instructions for this
					menu and select another edition. The two first buttons in the group of three buttons
					allow the user to access the global view associated with the currently selected user
					activity (shortcut [A]) and to navigate to the new user activity selection menu
					(shortcut [N]).
			

				4.2.3. Global Views
				The global views correspond to the out phase of the metaphor and are a
					combination of semantic criteria with an information visualization technique. In the
					following subsections we show how the global views are presented in the LdoD Visual in the context of the various information
					visualization techniques.
			

				4.2.3.1. Network Graph
				This information visualization technique consists of a network graph with hidden edges,
					as shown in Figure 7. Each node is a circle that represents a fragment from the
					currently selected edition. If the user clicks on a circle, she will be taken back to
					the Reading Menu with the corresponding fragment of that
					circle open to be read.
				When accessing the view, the central orange circle represents the fragment in whose
					context the user activity was started, and the purple circle represents the fragment
					being currently read. This strategy was adopted so that the reading occurring during
					a user activity is contextualized by the initially read fragment. The blue circles
					represent the other fragments from the edition, and their relative distance to the
					central circle expresses the encoded semantic criterion.
				
						Global View using a Network Graph for the semantic criteria of text
							similarity. The closest circle will always be in the same position, be it
							5% or 100% similar, to allow a sparser representation, note that, for
							instance, when considering text similarity, the most similar fragments are
							less than 20% similar. Color encodes the similarity in percentage. There is
							a blue color range - a 100% similar fragment will have its corresponding
							circle colored in light blue, while a 0% similar fragment will have its
							corresponding circle colored in dark blue.
						Image of a global view using a network graph
						
					

				The user can put the mouse cursor over the circle so that a label is displayed,
					showcasing the title and the value of similarity in percentage. Besides being able to
					drag and zoom the network graph using the mouse pointer and mouse wheel, the user can
					also use the green navigation buttons to drag, re-size, zoom in and out of the
					network graph. This information visualization technique is used to encode similarity
					by text and taxonomy, which in the case of Figure 7 is by text.
			

				4.2.3.2. Word Cloud
				Word clouds are used to encode semantic criteria associated with the categories of a
					certain fragment or taxonomy (group of categories) of the selected edition, as shown
					in Figure 8. It displays each category using different colors and the font size
					varies according to the number of fragments that belong to that category.
				
					Global view using a Word Cloud for the categories of the taxonomy of the
						selected edition.
					Global view using a Word Cloud
					
				

				The Word Cloud, and its semantic criteria, can be applied in two cases: (1) the set of
					categories of the taxonomy of an edition, which corresponds to the case presented in
					Figure 8; (2) the categories of the current fragment. In both cases, by selecting one
					of the categories, the user is redirected to a custom squares map that highlights the
					fragments of the select category, as described in the next subsection.
				Heimerl et al. (2014) developed a system that uses
					word clouds as its central visualization method for interactive text analysis. Its
					results showed that even though word clouds are aesthetically pleasing with its words
					disposed in different angles, users do not find them very functional and easy to use.
					Thus, results showed that participants preferred sequential layouts, where words are
					placed horizontally without any kind of inclination or angles for aesthetic purposes.
					For this reason, we decided to follow the same layout in the LdoD Visual.
			

				4.2.3.3. Custom Squares Map
				This information visualization technique consists of squares linked by arrows, as shown
					in Figure 9. It is similar to the network graph if we picture the squares as nodes
					and the arrows as edges. Likewise, each square represents a fragment from the
					currently selected edition. This group of squares linked by arrows offers a global
					view of the currently selected edition, and suggests a certain order derived from the
					arrows. This order depends on the encoded criterion. Each square's color and
					highlighting also depends on the encoded criterion. Similarly to network graphs,
					there is a special color highlighting for each square. The orange square corresponds
					to the fragment where the user activity was initiated, and the purple square to the
					fragment currently being read.
				
					Global View using a Custom Square Map to show the fragments associated with the
						category “Quotidiano da Cidade” in the context of the edition fragments.
					Global view using a Custom Square Map
					
				

				This information visualization technique is used to encode the following semantic
					criteria:
				
					Edition order. Fragment squares are sorted by order of the
						currently selected edition. If the user places the mouse cursor over a square,
						it will display a label with the fragment title and its position in the edition,
						almost as if it were a page number. This global view allows users to explore the
						order of the fragments in the edition.
					Chronological order. Fragment squares are sorted by the date in
						which they were written. Each square displays a two-digit number that represents
						the year from that date - for example, a fragment from 1927 will have its
						corresponding square with the number 27. Fragments without date have their
						corresponding squares greyed out. If the user places the mouse cursor over a
						square, a label will be displayed containing the fragment title and its date.
						This global view allows users to explore the edition ordered by date.
					Categories/taxonomy. Fragments are displayed exactly as if the
						semantic criterion was the edition's order, with the addition of highlighting in
						yellow the squares of the fragments from the selected category. If the user
						places the mouse cursor over a square, a label will be displayed with the
						fragment title and the categories to which it belongs, as shown in Figure 9. As
						previously described, smaller yellow previous/next fragment arrow buttons will
						appear under the black previous/next buttons in the reading menu.
					Heteronym. It has the same behaviour as the categories/taxonomy
						semantic criteria, but it highlights in yellow the squares of the fragments that
						were assigned to a specific heteronym. The yellow arrow buttons are used to move
						exclusively to the previous/next fragment belonging to the selected heteronym.
						The global view allows users to explore the fragments assigned to a particular
						heteronym.
				
			

				4.2.3.4. Timeline
				This information visualization technique consists of an interactive timeline, in which
					the user is presented with the timeline centered on the time window around the
					currently selected fragment, as shown in Figure 10.
				
					Global View using a Timeline to represent the chronological order assigned to
						the fragments.
					Global View using a Timeline
					
				

				There is only one global view that uses this information visualization technique to
					encode the chronological order as the semantic criterion, in order to explore the
					fragments around the date of the current fragment. Each timeline entry represents a
					fragment from the currently selected edition. Being consistent with the color scheme
					for other visualizations, an entry will be orange if it represents the fragment that
					was initially selected in the context of the user activity, and purple if it is the
					fragment currently being read. The user can navigate to a certain fragment by
					clicking on its entry.
			

				5. Results and Discussion
				The evaluation of the LdoD Visual was done by two types of
					tests: usability tests, which assess the system’s usability, independently of the its
					particular purpose; and, utility tests, which assess the quality of the system,
					considering its purpose as a reading tool for the Book of
						Disquiet.
			

				5.1. Usability Tests
				To assess how usable, efficient and satisfying the interaction with the LdoD Visual is, we have performed tests with 11 volunteer
					users who have no expert knowledge on the LdoD Archive
					and on the Book of Disquiet. The results of this type of
					test are objective and quantitative.
				Each usability test consisted of 4 stages:
				
					Introduce the user to the LdoD Visual's concepts
						and briefly demonstrate the system in about 5 minutes;
					Let the user explore the system freely for about 5 minutes;
					Ask the user to execute 10 tasks;
					Ask the user to fill and submit a SUS (system usability scale)
						questionnaire.
				
				In the third stage, for each task, we counted the number of errors and time taken to
					complete the task. The tasks assess the usability and intuition of the user
					activities' interaction with the information visualization techniques in order to
					explore and navigate through the fragments from the selected editions. For instance,
					to select any fragment from an edition, select the user activity that makes use of
					the squares map encoding the edition's order, choose the first fragment, highlight
					the most relevant words and say out loud what are the most relevant words of the
					selected fragment, which was, actually, task 9.
				These tasks were always executed in the same order for each user, exactly from the same
					menus.
				
					Table 1 - Time to perform each task in seconds and respective number of
						errors.
					Table of time needed to perform each task
					
				

				Figure 11 presents the results from which we conclude that, on average, every task was
					completed without exceeding the expected time and with basically no errors, with the
					exception of the last task, which was more difficult. Task 10 was conceived to
					confirm if users understood why a user activity was not available for certain
					fragments and what they should do in order to select other fragments that supported
					that previously unavailable user activity. This was the most complex task, which
					explains why it took the most time out of all tasks, even though most users ended up
					figuring out what they had to do.
				For the fourth stage, the users filled and submitted a SUS (system usability scale)
					questionnaire. This is a quick questionnaire that is commonly used to figure out if
					any aspect was not considered by the tests. This questionnaire involved 10 statements
					for the user to answer how much he would agree with each one of them in a scale from
					1 (completely disagree) to 5 (completely agree):
				
					I think I would like to use the LdoD Visual
						regularly.
					I think the LdoD Visual was unnecessarily
						complex.
					I think the LdoD Visual was easy to use.
					I think I would need help from a person with technical knowledge to use the
							LdoD Visual.
					I think that all of the LdoD Visual features were
						well integrated.
					I think the LdoD Visual shows a lot of
						inconsistency.
					I think people will learn how to use the LdoD
							Visual easily.
					I think the LdoD Visual was very confusing to
						use.
					I felt confident while using the LdoD
						Visual
					I needed to learn a lot of new things before I could use LdoD Visual.
				
				The score of the SUS questionnaire is obtained by transforming the 1 to 5 scale in a 0
					to 4 scale, and converting the values to be consistent, e.g., the odd-number
					questions express a positive opinion and even-number questions express a negative
					opinion. Figure 12 presents the results, where the questions' answer values are as
					given by the subjects, and the sums, averages and SUS final scores are calculated on
					the converted values.
				
					Table 2 - SUS (system usability scale) questionnaire results
					Table of system usability scale questionnaire results
					
				

				Analyzing the SUS score, we can observe that the lowest scoring answer is number 4,
						I think I would need help from a person with technical knowledge to use
						LdoD Visual. This makes sense as the LdoD
						Visual is relatively complex to users that have no experience with the
						Book of Disquiet and the LdoD
						Archive, which is the case of the participants. Regarding the final
					score, when a system scores a SUS score of 80.3 or more, it is considered to be in
					the top 10% of scores and the testing users are more likely to recommend it to
					others. This means that if we are considering a SUS scale, the LdoD Visual is a system with good usability, having a SUS score of
					88.41.
				Besides these 10 SUS questions, we also added questions in order to know about the
					users. In terms of the characterization of the usability test participants: 9.1%
					where younger than 18, 36.4% between 18-24, 45.5% between 25-34, and 9.1% between
					45-54; and 9,1% have secondary education, 45.5% have a bachelor degree, and 45.5% a
					master degree. Most users had already used other software to read books in the past
					and most users had not read the Book of Disquiet. It is
					also possible to observe that most users strongly agreed that they would have a good
					reading experience using the LdoD Visual.

			

				5.2. Utility Tests
				The purpose of the utility tests is to obtain information about the utility and quality
					of the experience while using the system. These tests are important in the sense they
					allow us to assess subjective and qualitative aspects of the LdoD Visual, which are difficult to be measured quantitatively.
				The tests were done with 3 users that have expert knowledge about the Book of Disquiet and the LdoD
						Archive. The user of the first case study is a postdoctoral researcher
					with a PhD thesis on the Book of Disquiet. This user has
					also worked, between 2012 and 2015, with the XML encoding of the fragments for the
						LdoD Archive. The user of the second case study is
					a PhD student from the PhD Program in Materialities of Literature, which is a
					doctoral program that addresses the material and technological mediations of literary
					practices. One of its research fields is digital humanities. This user has a BA and
					an MA in graphic design. The user of the third case study is another PhD student from
					the same PhD Program, who has a BA in graphic design, and an MA in Semiotics. This
					user is interested in the aspects of usability of the LdoD
						Archive since her PhD project involves creative practices through the
					situated use of the archive. She is one of LdoD
					Archive's most regular users and has been organizing a plan of activities to
					teach LdoD Archive's users how to use it and fully
					explore its various functionalities, including the creation of virtual editions.
				The protocol for this type of testing is more flexible in comparison to the usability
					tests' protocol. The users were contacted by email, introduced to the LdoD Visual metaphor, and encouraged to explore the system
					before we had our actual meeting to do the case study.
				During the case study the users were encouraged to use the LdoD
						Visual while thinking out loud. We asked them
					several questions regarding the real utility, potential and reading experience that
					they thought the LdoD Visual provides. We also asked
					them about the differences they felt as more important, in comparison to other tools
					and electronic readers available, as well as comparing the reading experience of the
						LdoD Visual to the other reading features available
					in the LdoD Archive.
				Considering the feedback received from these case studies, we can conclude that the
					reception of the LdoD Visual is positive, both in terms
					of concept, execution and utility. The users liked the approach on how to read a
					book. They thought that it is a good match for the fragmentary nature of the Book of Disquiet. The attempt to output a visual
					representation of the editions and fragments brings a new perspective on how to read
					and explore the Book of Disquiet and use the LdoD Archive, highlighting its relevance for the field of
					digital humanities.
				The second user also described her experience with user activities in a way that
					suggested that the LdoD Visual's metaphor is
					successfully implemented. She stated: The real reading
						customization strength comes from the activities around the currently selected
						fragment. If the reader stops and tries, for example, to continue her reading
						path with a user activity that is related with reading similar fragments by text
						to the currently selected fragment, there is already a reflexive question that
						is specific to the reader and the navigation method centered around the selected
						fragment becomes the medium for the user to be able to read around an idea that
						is interesting to her. In LdoD Visual, the reader
						is able to navigate through the fragments according to what is desired, having a
						visual reference of the type of navigation and exploration that is being
						performed in the Book of Disquiet.
				The users also suggested that the LdoD Visual is
					relatively complex and that there should exist more ways of welcoming non-expert
					users who are not aware of the problem and structure of the Book
						of Disquiet and the the LdoD Archive, such
					as "selling the concept" both as a ludic and research tool, and showcasing the
					different uses and possibilities in videos scattered around the application. The
					users also acknowledged the potential of the LdoD Visual
					concepts such that they could be developed and expanded to explore other alternatives
					of interaction with the Book of Disquiet. We could
					observe that each user spent time with different parts and user activities of the
						LdoD Visual. Our analysis on this is that the
						LdoD Visual seems to provide different affordances
					for different users, and that the objective of customizing the exploration and
					reading experience of theBook of Disquiet was met.
				We can also conclude that the LdoD Visual is a tool that
					mainly scripts two different reading behaviours: the possibility of navigating
					through the Book of Disquiet with a focus on the
					pleasurable assisted user-driven reading experience, geared towards a continuous and
					immersive flow; and the possibility of navigating with a humanities researcher
					mindset, finding patterns, correlations and textual data insights, according to a
					discontinuous and interruptive logic. Both of these reading practices are possible
					resorting to the same mechanisms and representational strategies, i.e., the user
					activities' information visualization techniques, even though the first type of
					reading practice is the main focus of the LdoD
					Visual.
			

				6. Conclusion
				The Book of Disquiet by Fernando Pessoa is an unfinished
					book that can be read in any order. The modular nature of this fragmentary literary
					work brings endless possibilities on how it can be traversed.The goal of this work
					was to design and implement a web-based application to read The
						Book of Disquiet, giving the reader an active role while reading and
					browsing through the book's different fragments, defining user activities that make
					use of information visualization techniques to encode different semantic
					criteria.
				In order to achieve this, we researched on the use of information visualization
					techniques applied to textual data and literature, and on the concept and tools for
					e-books and web-based reading. Afterwards, we defined the in-out-in
					metaphor that was used as the guiding concept for whether or not a certain
					architecture or feature choice met the objectives and served the overall purpose of
					this work.
				According to this metaphor, we defined the user activity concept, which establishes a
					perspective on how to read the book. A user activity is a combination of an
					information visualization technique with a semantic criterion, where the latter is
					used to classify the fragments and the former to visualize them according to the
					classification. The solution architecture considers three types of user interfaces: a
					user interface in which the user activity is selected; a global view in which the
					fragments are visualized according to the chosen user activity; and a reading view to
					support the reading and navigation between fragments, according to the chosen
					semantic criteria.
				The final system was tested for usability and utility, and it got positive feedback
					from both non-expert and expert users of the Book of Disquiet
					and the LdoD Archive. The usability tests have
					shown that it is possible to complete the defined tasks in the expected time and
					without errors, and the utility tests also confirmed that the proposed metaphor meets
					the experts’ vision of the book and how to explore its multiple paths of reading.
				As a web-based application for exploring the process of reading, the LdoD Visual contains several features that correspond to
					what the LdoD Archive describes as the
						simulation principle, that is, the ability to provide interactors
					with a reflexive engagement with the textual environment . Through a recursive process of going into the text and coming out of the text,
					readers are able to explore the Book of Disquiet as a
					particular kind of reading experience and they are also able to see how their acts of
					engaging with the text become registered in the visualizations. The implemented
					visualization techniques thus bring together the modularization of the text and the
					modularization of the reading of the text.
				The LdoD Visual is a tool that has the potential to grow
					and become an improved version of what it already accomplishes. One major improvement
					would be the possibility of saving the reading history state to a user account,
					preferably in the LdoD Archive. This would be a logical
					extension since the process of reading a book can take days, weeks or months. Another
					improvement would be developing a feature to generate new virtual editions according
					to specific reading paths. This would explore the LdoD
						Archive goal of fostering the construction of new virtual editions of
					the Book of Disquiet. In its reflexive graphical
					representation of reading activities, this visual reader contributes to the
					experimental textual rationale of the LdoD Archive.
				We believe the In-Out-In metaphor adopted in this project can also be used as a
					conceptual design tool for modelling reading processes in digital media. The design
					of interfaces for complex archives of literary materials based on this model would
					have twofold benefits: limiting hypertextual disorientation, on one hand, and
					supporting a meaningful transition between human and machine reading processes, on
					the other, for both general and expert readers. In this light, the model of the
					reading flow embodied in the LdoD Visual could also be
					seen as a prototype of a specifically digital paratextual apparatus for the smooth
					and optimal integration of close reading and distant reading modes through multiple
					visualization techniques. 
				NOTE: In order to keep track of the project’s evolution, the source code is publicly
					available in a GitHub repository https://github.com/socialsoftware/edition.
				Acknowledgements
				The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers of this article for their invaluable
					comments and suggestions.
				This work was supported by national funds through FCT, Fundação para a Ciência e a
					Tecnologia, under projects UIDB/50021/2020 and UIDB/00759/2020.
			
