Title:  Review: Katherine Bode's 
Volume:  015
Issue:  3
Date:  August 8, 2021
Abstract:  
                
                Katherine Bode theorizes a new approach to data rich
                    literary history, in which the researcher constructs a a
                        scholarly edition of a literary system pairing annotated data with a
                    critical apparatus. Bode challenges the rhetoric around distant
                        reading, arguing it recapitulates the historical oversights of
                    New Criticism. A World of Fiction comprises a book
                    and paired database which apply this framework to the fiction published in
                    nineteenth-century Australian newspapers. Bode's investigation advances new
                    ideas about the gender of Australian fiction authors, the networks of influence
                    among provincial and metropolitan newspapers, and the national character of
                    fiction in the period. A World of Fiction is an
                    important intervention in conversations about computational literary-historical
                    analysis, as well as around the construction and use of digitized historical
                    archives.
            
Full Body Text: 


                
                Scholarship in digital textual studies often vacillates between two poles: the
                    species of computational text analysis, sometimes called distant
                        reading, occupy one pole, while text encoding and digital edition
                    building, as might be characterized by the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI),
                    occupy the other. For decades there have been calls for research that moves
                    between these poles — for scalable or zoomable
                        reading
                    
                     — as well as research that locates itself
                    emphatically in the continuum, such as Alison Booth's
                        mid-range reading . In a 2013
                    conference dialogue, Julia Flanders and Matthew Jockers dreamed of methods that
                    would mak[e] it possible to see both scale and detail
                        simultaneously because micro and macro
                        approaches are really two faces of the same thing.
                     We might even claim near-consensus
                    among digital literary scholars that our research should bridge
                    scales, and that the distant reading versus text encoding dichotomy is both
                    intellectually and rhetorically impoverished. Nevertheless, in these repeated
                    calls for a middle way we might also mark a lingering anxiety in the field that,
                    however much we might wish for research that moves easily among analyses at
                    different scales, in practice such movement is rare. Both practical obstacles of
                    time and labor, as well as conceptual obstacles of commensurability, result in
                    most projects unfolding largely at one scale or another.
                In welcome contrast, Katherine Bode's A World of Fiction:
                        Digital Collections and the Future of Literary History not only
                    models how scholars might stage meaningful dialogue between scales of textual
                    analysis, but also makes a forceful argument for the necessity of such work. The
                    book ranges over a number of prominent computational methods, from quantitative
                    data analysis to topic modeling to network analysis. Its heart, however, is the
                    construction of a scholarly edition of a literary
                        system which pairs a curated and annotated dataset of Australian
                    newspaper fiction with a critical apparatus that elaborates
                        the complex relationships between the historical context explored, the
                        disciplinary infrastructure employed in investigating that context, the
                        decisions and selections implicated in creating and remediating the
                        collection or collections, and the transformations wrought by the editor's
                        extraction, construction, and analysis of that data
                    . In this vein, A World
                        of Fiction comprises both a monograph exploring her findings about
                    Australian newspaper fiction and an extensive curated
                        dataset available for download or exploration at http://cdhrdatasys.anu.edu.au/tobecontinued/.
                Like printed critical editions, Bode argues, a scholarly edition of a literary
                    system presents an argument about the existence of literary
                        works in the past based on the editor's interpretation of the multiple
                        transactions by which documentary evidence of the past is transmitted to the
                        present
                    . Bode's edition, for instance, seeks to
                    capture the shifting elements of fiction as it moved through the Australian
                    press, such as changing titles and varying authorship attributions so that
                    relationships among witnesses are visible and available for analysis . In theorizing her computational work in
                    book historical and bibliographic terms, Bode accomplishes something both
                    transformative and refreshingly modest, demonstrating how computational or
                    algorithmic models relate to the hypotheses underlying the work of all edition
                    building, digital or not. The resulting book states its arguments and
                    interventions plainly, while exposing its underlying evidence in an accessible
                    interface, so that other scholars can verify, extend, or challenge Bode's
                    findings. Though A World of Fiction declares its
                    ambition to advance a noncanonical, data-rich, and
                        transnational history of the literary, publishing, and reading cultures of
                        nineteenth-century Australia
                     it is modest insofar as it refuses the
                    rhetorical excesses that can attend other data-rich humanities projects,
                    insisting instead on the createdness of its data and the situatedness of its
                    findings.
                Bode establishes the urgency of her approach in A World of
                        Fiction's first chapter, which critiques the work of previous
                    cornerstone books in computational text analysis: Franco Moretti's Distant Reading and Graphs, Maps,
                        Trees and Jockers's Macroanalysis. Bode
                    rejects the idea that the methods labeled distant reading
                    or macroanalysis should be understood as opposites to close
                    reading. Instead, she argues that both distant and close reading are united by a common neglect of textual scholarship,
                    and cannot benefit from the historical insights presented
                        by editorial and bibliographic productions. By conceiving data and computation as providing direct access to the
                        literary-historical record such scholarship ends up offer[ing] ahistorical arguments about the existence and
                        interconnections of literary works in the past
                    .
                Bode analyzes such oversights in detail, but in brief overview, she critiques the
                    way such studies discuss the composition of their corpora (what they include
                    and, most importantly, what they do not); the ways in which metadata can mislead
                    (a single publication date, for instance, often obscures a more complex
                    production history); or the ways such datasets elide broader publication
                    contexts (the older books still on the market in a given moment, for instance,
                    or parallel periodical publications). Bode takes particular issue with the
                    assumption underlying many distant reading analyses that the date of work's
                    first publication provides the most meaningful datapoint for modeling literary
                    influence in a chronologically discrete manner, regardless
                        of the actual conduits of literary influence, which require availability to
                        readers who buy, borrow, and sometimes write literary works
                    . In arguing that distant and close reading
                    are similarly ahistorical in orientation, Bode begins A
                        World of Fiction with a striking and important claim. Taking that
                    claim seriously would require practitioners of computational text analysis to
                    pay more than lip service to the work of archive and collection construction,
                    which Bode attempts to model in the following chapters.
            

                Fact and Fiction in News Archives
                In chapter 3, Bode establishes the centrality of newspapers to the publication
                    and circulation of fiction in nineteenth-century colonial Australia; it was not
                    one medium for fiction, but the predominant medium. Thus A
                        World of Fiction asserts that its claims about newspaper fiction can
                    be understood as claims about fiction in the region more broadly, more so than
                    would be the case in a discussion of Britain or America in the same period. By
                    relying on newspapers, Bode demonstrates her commitment to grounding A World of Fiction not only in the messy historical
                    medium in which readers would have encountered these fictional works, but also
                    in the histories of collection, preservation, and eventually digitization that
                    make that newspaper fiction available for computational analysis, a process she
                    outlines in detail in chapter 3, which details the social and technical
                    structures of the Trove collections from which she draws her newspaper corpus.
                    Importantly, Bode also notes the comprehensiveness of Trove's collections in
                    contrast to similar digital newspaper archives in the US, such as Chronicling
                    America, which lends even more force to the book's claims.
                Part II of A World of Fiction transitions from
                    laying theoretical groundwork to applying its theories to specific case studies,
                    analyzing what the book's scholarly edition of a literary system indicates about
                    authorship, anonymity, and reception of fiction in nineteenth-century Australian
                    newspapers (chapter 4); what network analysis might show about circulation and
                    the influence of syndication networks (chapter 5); and how topic models might
                    reveal shifting regional and national literary traditions over the study's time
                    period (chapter 6). At this point, I must confess one limitation in my own
                    perspective. While I work extensively with digitized historical newspapers, my
                    focus is on American (and more recently transatlantic) newspaper literature.
                    Thus I feel most qualified to comment on Bode's methodological interventions in
                        A World of Fiction. I am not expert in
                    nineteenth-century Australian literary history, and so must take Bode's claims
                    of intervention in this domain as read, assuming her characterization of the
                    existing scholarship is made in good faith and that her findings challenge them
                    in the ways she outlines. I will refer to these claims primarily as examples of
                    how A World of Fiction moves between data and
                    literary history, a move this book makes with particular alacrity. In reading, I
                    learned a good deal about how nineteenth-century Australian newspaper fiction
                    differed from American newspaper fiction, and in fact one additional merit of
                        A World of Fiction is that it brings into focus
                    a literary domain that is largely neglected in American literary study.
                    Nevertheless, I must acknowledge that an expert in Australian literature might
                    review some of Bode's claims differently.
                In chapter 4, Bode works with the metadata she has assembled about the authors of
                    Australian newspaper fiction to explore their demographics and reception in
                    metropolitan and provincial newspapers. In some cases, A
                        World of Fiction confirms previous scholarship, finding for example
                    a trend away from anonymous authorship as the nineteenth-century progressed,
                    though this trend is less definitive than prior narratives have claimed. From
                    here, however, A World of Fiction advances a number
                    of novel interpretations of authorship in the period. First, Bode finds that
                    named authorship is far less important than attributed nationality. She writes,
                        47 percent of titles were inscribed with an authorial
                        gender and 79 percent with a nationality. This relatively low rate of gender
                        inscription…emphasizes the point already made: that the author was not the
                        primary framework through which colonial readers interpreted fiction
                    . Digging into gender further, Bode finds
                    that, in contrast to much scholarship on nineteenth-century periodical
                    literature, colonial Australian literature was more often written by men than
                    women, and more likely to be local than is typically understood. Tracing trends
                    across the century, Bode finds that prestige shifts over time: in urban
                    newspapers, at least, local writing is valued more earlier in the century, when
                    it is ascribed mostly to men, and loses prestige later in the century, when more
                    women are contributing fiction to Australian newspapers. These are only a few of
                    the trends Bode traces in this chapter, which demonstrates clearly how the data
                    she collects and annotates can be used to elucidate the complex social and
                    demographic situation of newspaper fiction in the period.
            

                Revelatory Networks
                In A World of Fiction's next chapter, Bode explores
                    the effects of syndication networks on the distribution and circulation of
                    fiction in nineteenth-century Australian newspapers. She begins, however, with a
                    strong caution of network analysis as it is typically implemented in data-rich
                    literary history. In particular, Bode warns that The
                        probability measures needed to model systems based on highly incomplete
                        datasets are at odds with the centrality of documentary evidence to
                        historical argumentation. While I am not entirely convinced by the
                    definitive claim that Literary historians focus on what
                        occurred and why, not what might have taken place based on assumptions and
                        probabilities
                    , Bode's overall skepticism about network
                    graphs constructed from mostly incomplete and partial datasets is well taken, as
                    is her critique of analysis focused on network visualizations rather than their
                    underlying metrics. In the ensuing chapter, Bode uses network analysis primarily
                    to explore her data rather than to make quantitative claims about it, and she
                    does not employ network visualizations at all, instead charting the proportions
                    of serialized and reprinted fiction across a number of categories: e.g.
                    Australian vs. British, or metropolitan vs. provincial. Her findings demonstrate
                    the importance of provincial networks to the publication and circulation of
                    Australian fiction in the period, acting as a counterforce to dominant
                    metropolitan syndicates that imported British and American fiction into the
                    colony.
                In its final content chapter, A World of Fiction
                    uses a combination of topic modeling and decision trees in order to determine
                        whether, and if so what, characteristics distinguished
                        the American, Australian, and British fiction in colonial
                        newspapers. As in her exploration of gender in chapter 4, here Bode
                    finds that topics hew more closely to author's national identity than to their
                    gender. The Australian literary voice is characterized most strongly by topics
                    drawn from prominent descriptions of nonmetropolitan
                        colonial settings, characters, and activities, but also by more
                        prominently depicting Aboriginal characters
                    than previous scholarship has acknowledged .
                    This latter claim requires exposition, and while Bode finds a much greater
                    presence of Aboriginal characters than expected based on previous theorizations
                    of colonial literature, she outlines how these depictions rely on negative
                    stereotypes, such that the presence of Aboriginal people actually serves to
                    justify the colonial project in most of these works. Bode notes that In identity politics and literary criticism…oppression and
                        emancipation are equated with nonrepresentation and representation,
                        respectively while she finds the opposite in the Australian
                    newspaper fiction of the nineteenth century, which asserted
                        colonial ownership by prominently and consistently depicting [Aboriginal
                        characters], sometimes in highly unsettling ways
                    . Throughout this chapter, Bode moves deftly
                    between the statistical relationships between words in her study's topic model,
                    to the probabilities these topics would be associated with particular categories
                    of author, to literary-historical interpretation that sometimes confirms, but
                    often nuances or challenges existing scholarship.
                In her conclusion, Bode overviews the interventions of A
                        World of Fiction while opening up her discussion in a few pressing
                    directions. First, she turns to the many questions the book did not answer,
                    whether due to time or disciplinary expertise, and invites other scholars to
                    engage with her scholarly edition of a literary system — in other words, with
                    the curated and annotated datasets available as both downloads and in the
                    interface linked to above — to engage those questions or formulate their own.
                    Bode writes that the scale of fiction encompassed by this
                        scholarly edition and its international breadth make me confident that
                        almost any historian of nineteenth-century literature will find something to
                        extend their knowledge and enrich their research in this representation of a
                        literary system
                    , a claim which seems sure to bear out as
                    more scholars engage this work. Bode closes the book in a brief but urgent
                    discussion of funding for resources such as Trove that are invaluable to the
                    next generation of literary historical work but are in constant danger of
                    defunding and loss of public support. Here Bode addresses the final but
                    essential node in the literary system, the one which makes these kinds of
                    analyses possible.
                In all, A World of Fiction is an important work of
                    scholarship that should be read, at the least, by scholars in digital
                    humanities, nineteenth-century studies, book history, periodical studies, and
                    library science. The book should certainly become a standard reference point in
                    courses on humanities data analysis, cultural analytics, distant reading, and
                    related methods. Bode brings the two poles of digital textual studies together
                    compellingly, demonstrating how computational analyses might bring nuance and
                    complexity to our readings of digitized archives of historical texts, and how
                    the contours of those archives — the circumstances of their collection,
                    selection, and digitization practices — might shape the framing of data-rich
                    analyses. Her computational work is founded on and helps build a critical
                    edition; the two activities are mutually imbricated rather than unfolding as
                    distinct projects. Rather than restricting the work, Bode's firm disciplinary
                    perspective ensures that the book's claims will resonate with area scholars:
                    that the interpretive consequences of her computational work are clear. Bode's
                    book productively challenges the dominant paradigms of distant
                        reading, offering a more nuanced path forward for practitioners
                    while inviting a much wider range of scholars to the data discussion.
            
