Title:  Developing Research through Podcasts: Circulating
               Spaces, A Case Study
Volume:  015
Issue:  3
Date:  October 15, 2021
Abstract:  
            
            In this article, we contend that the podcast serves as an alternative method of
               conducting and pursuing academic research in an increasingly collaborative,
               increasingly global era. Circulating Spaces: Literary and Language Worlds in a Global
               Age, a podcast series created, produced, and published by the authors, acts as our
               case study. The podcast models a complex network of relations by highlighting topics
               and featuring guests who co-exist within academic and public (often understood as
               non-academic) spaces. These networks help to reshape our understanding of the
               publics of academia by breaking down the binary between the public and academic.
               They point toward ways in which more nuanced networks of affinity between the academy
               and the public may be constructed and negotiated by embracing the digital and the
               open. Finally, we locate our work within the fields of digital scholarship and the
               Digital Humanities more specifically in order to understand the work accomplished by
               non-traditional forms of scholarship.A note on author attribution: Christian
                  Howard-Sukhil and Samantha Wallace originally drafted and equally contributed to
                  the ideas expressed in this article. Ankita Chakrabarti, who joined the project
                  team a year after the initial collaboration, was instrumental in ensuring that
                  these ideas coalesced, especially given the new presentation of materials in
                  Season 2 of Circulating Spaces. Christian
                  Howard-Sukhil and Samantha Wallace were co-hosts and co-producers for Season 1 of
                     Circulating Spaces; Christian Howard-Sukhil and
                  Ankita Chakrabarti were co-hosts and co-producers for Season 2 of Circulating Spaces.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Because of the digital revolution... all kinds of things are
                  happening [in humanities research], and [Circulating
                     Spaces] is one example... [Circulating
                     Spaces and its] ecosystem of literary worlds are creating new
                  mechanisms for both doing and disseminating research and having conversations
                  about it that didn’t exist when I was a graduate student. So [Circulating Spaces — and podcasts like it – are] the wave of the
                  future.Susan Stanford Friedman, Circulating
                     Spaces Episode 6, 38:35-39:08
         
Highlighting the renewed impetus for the kind of collaborative humanities research made
            possible by Digital Humanities initiatives, Susan Stanford Friedman describes how the
               ecosystem of literary worlds — including the attendant
            technologies or media that make the production of literature possible — is
            revolutionizing the academic mechanisms for both doing and
               disseminating research. Digital Humanities scholarship poses foundational
            questions regarding how new forms of digital media can inform, challenge, and change the
            ways we do scholarship in the academy.See, for instance, N. Katherine Hayle’s How We Think; Ted Underwood’s Why Literary Periods
                     Mattered; Matthew Kirschenbaum’s
                     The .txtual Condition: Digital Humanities, Born Digital
                     Archives, and the Future Literary; Alix
                  Keener’s The Arrival Fallacy: Collaborative Research
                     Relationships in the Digital Humanities; Tom Schofield, Mitchell Whitelaw, and David Kirk’s Research through Design and Digital Humanities in
                     Practice; and Matt Erlin’s Digital Humanities Masterplots. In this
            article, we consider how the podcast, as an emerging form of scholarship and research in
            the academy, engages with these central inquiries of the Digital Humanities. We offer
            our own experiences in creating, producing, and publishing the podcast series, Circulating Spaces: Literary and Language Worlds in a Global
               Age, as a case study, and we reflect on how the podcast has amended our
            practices as researchers, editors, and scholars. Specifically, we leveraged theories
            developing in the field of world literature with the affordances of the podcast as a
            medium to create a series of podcast episodes that attempts to deconstruct the existing
            binary between the public and the academy within academic thought. Circulating Spaces models a complex network of relations by highlighting
            topics and featuring guests who co-exist within these spaces. In turn, precisely because
            it allows us to consider (and serve as engaged participants in) the more complex lives
            of the actors involved within the multiple ecosystems of literary worlds, we contend
            that the podcast serves as an alternative method of conducting and pursuing academic
            research in an increasingly collaborative, increasingly global era.In this way,
               podcasts participate in other forms of emerging digital scholarship - such as TEDx
               Talks, blogs, and Twitter - which enable academic conversations to reach the broader
               public.
         
We begin by looking at the development of the podcast as a distinct form of media that
            emphasizes consistency in presentation style and theme in order to develop an audience,
            within the academy as well as beyond it. We then turn to discussing Circulating Spaces as a case study that intervenes within
            discourses around public humanities: it helps to reshape the publics of academia
            by breaking down the binary between the public and academic; and to point toward ways in
            which more nuanced networks of affinity between the academy and the public may be
            constructed and negotiated by embracing the digital and the open. Finally, we locate our
            work within the fields of digital scholarship and the Digital Humanities more
            specifically in order to understand the work accomplished by non-traditional forms of
            scholarship. 

            Part 1: Podcasts as Media
            
               A.   Characterizing the Podcast’s Form and Affordances
               The term podcast is an amalgam of the words iPod and broadcast, and
                  technically speaking, the podcast is simply a digital audio file that people can
                  download from the Internet. But in recent years, the podcast has developed into a
                  distinct form with its own set of rules. The most essential rule of successful
                  podcast production is to make the show interesting enough to keep an audience’s
                  attention. Charli Prangley writes, Building an audience is
                     all about consistency. Consistency in the topics you talk about. Consistency in
                     the style of photographs on your blog. Consistency in the frequency of when
                     you'll post new content. And for podcasts, consistency in your show
                     format
                  . As Prangley notes, most podcasts are serial, and
                  each podcast series tends to explore or develop a topic or theme from different
                  angles (similar to a TV series, which features the same characters often engaging
                  in similar activities or facing similar tasks).
               There are currently three primary podcast forms: the solo podcast, the
                  storytelling podcast (both fiction and non-fiction), and the conversational podcast
                  (featuring at least one host and one or more guests).There are two other
                     accepted forms, the hybrid (which combines aspects of the various other
                     forms), and repurposed content from other kinds of media productions.
                     For more information, see Mark Leonard’s The Seven Most
                        Common Podcast Formats. While there are thus several
                  different styles of podcasts, each of these has developed into a recognizable form
                  that has its own set of rules or conventions. The solo podcast may seem similar to
                  the standard academic lecture. Yet the need to keep an audience engaged across
                  multiple broadcasts without listening aids (such as an accompanying PowerPoint or
                  other video supplements) has resulted in a change to the strategy of delivery:
                  hosts of solo podcasts often use the platform to speak to their audience in a much
                  more informal yet sustained way. Rachel Corbett of PodSchool has emphasized the need for solo podcasters to continuously
                  vamp up the energy of their shows, stating that a solo podcast is a very intimate way to get to know your audience because you
                     are...talking directly to your audience...[The audience] need[s] to feel like
                     they know you and that they can trust you (Different Types of Podcast 8:09-8:25,
                     11:17-11:24). But this style of podcast can be
                     tough to create because it can be difficult to get
                     that energy and to get that conversational style happening (Different Types of Podcast
                     11:27-11:36). This presentation style differs markedly from that of the
                  academic lecture, which often features a live audience that can see and respond to
                  the presenter’s gestures, facial expressions, and any supplementary visual
                  aids.
               The storytelling podcast includes both non-fiction storytelling (such as the
                  investigative journalism of This American Life or
                     Serial) and fictional storytelling. Both of these
                  formats differ from audiobooks in that they incorporate a variety of sound effects
                  and voices rather than relying upon a single narrator. Corbett explains that
                  storytelling podcasts include the added element of sound
                     design, such as grabs of interviews, ambient sound, phone
                  conversations, and more (Different
                        Types of Podcast 20:38-20:42). Specifically referring to
                  fiction storytelling podcasts, Corbett states: [These
                     podcasts necessitate] more than just somebody reading the story into a
                     microphone. It’s got to be audio storytelling. ...You need someone who’s going
                     to do a voiceover and really in some ways act out the story rather than just
                     reading it (Different Types
                        of Podcast 22:32-22:43, 22:51-22:57).  
               Circulating Spaces is an example of the last type,
                  the conversational podcast. The conversational podcast has several different
                  formats, including the interview show and the panel discussion, but each of these
                  generally involves some combination of hosts and guests who dialogue about a topic
                  or event. In the conversational form of the podcast, the host(s) tend to remain
                  fairly constant throughout a podcast series; guests, on the other hand, generally
                  change from episode to episode. The goal of the conversational podcast is to
                  generate discussions new and interesting enough to retain the audience.
            
            
               B. Podcasts in the Academy
               A number of studies have outlined the usefulness and efficacy of podcasts as
                  pedagogical tools. Khe Foon Hew identifies the most common use of the podcast in
                  the academy as a method for distributing course content. Instructors can share
                     podcast recordings of lectures or supplementary materials
                     for students to review subject material at their own time and place
                  . As one might expect with this use of podcasts,
                  Simon Fietze has argued that because students can listen to podcasts multiple
                  times, podcasts can help students assimilate the contents of
                     lectures better and more efficiently
                  . These conclusions certainly stand to
                  reason. However, scholarly analyses of podcasts have largely been limited to
                  understanding how the podcast — which has been strictly considered as a means of
                  communicating information — impacts students’ retention of that information. In so
                  limiting the purpose of podcasts within higher education, these analyses often
                  relegate podcasts to mere recordings of lectures or information that can then be
                  used to assist in content retention and distance
                     learning
                  . 
               Yet more recently, there have been shifts toward scholarly analyses of the podcast
                  beyond its uses within a pedagogical context. Podcasting: New
                     Aural Cultures and Digital Media (2018), an edited collection of
                  interdisciplinary essays, and Podcasting: The Audio Media
                     Revolution (2019) are two recent academic works responding to what is
                  being termed as the golden age of podcasting. The former is among the first
                  such collections to critically examine the podcast within the context of digital
                  media and cultural studies. The latter work studies several prominent podcast
                  series in order to probe the distinctive characteristics of the podcast form. Both
                  volumes argue for the uniqueness of the podcast as a creative medium and its
                  consequent potential for influencing the way knowledge is produced and
                  communicated; they also explore the specific meaning-making frameworks employed by
                  the medium. 
               This shift in direction of inquiry is important, since podcasts encompass a
                  diverse range of production strategies. Some of the most popular literary
                  podcasts, for instance, include The New Yorker’s
                  Fiction Podcast series, which is hosted by Deborah Treisman and regularly features
                  a reading by and discussion with a contemporary author; Dear
                     Book Nerd (2014-2016), which was hosted by librarian Rita Meade and
                  brought in guests to answer listeners’ questions about reading, writing, and
                  publishing practices; and TinHouse and KBOO’s Between the
                     Covers which is hosted by David Naimon and features in-depth interviews
                  with contemporary American writers. Thus, given the changing face of the podcast
                  and its increasing use to promote and disseminate scholarly content, it has become
                  necessary to reassess the role and affordances of the podcast within the
                  academy.
               In the last ten years, academic podcasts such as the University of Oxford Podcasts: World Literature series (2012-2016)
                  have begun to extend the function of the podcast out beyond the walls of the
                  academy. An example of an early form of the academic podcast, this series was
                  simply a collection of recorded guest lectures, and the character of these
                  lectures is explicitly academic. The series focused on different kinds of world
                  literature, such as world literature and the Pan-Asian Empire and the
                     status of African literature. Yet even though it reproduced live
                  lectures in recorded form, the University of Oxford Podcasts:
                     World Literature series differs from that of other recorded lectures in
                  that its aim was not to aid in student course-material retention, but
                  rather to disseminate these lectures by well-known academics to a larger audience
                  beyond the University of Oxford community. The series also capitalized on the easy
                  (and free) circulation of the podcast as a medium to increase these lectures’
                  circulation. In doing so, the creators used the digital affordances of the podcast
                  to expand the usefulness of the podcast beyond the university classroom. The
                  podcast thus fulfilled an aim of what we might consider public humanities, the
                  engagement of a broader and more diverse set of publics.
               Public Work, a podcast series at Brown University
                  produced and hosted by Jim McGrath and Amelia Golcheski, offers an alternative
                  conception of the purpose of the podcast by focusing explicitly on public
                  humanities engagement. By doing public humanities outreach, Public Work revolves around education, research,
                     and public engagement initiatives that connect individuals and communities to
                     art, history, and culture. Rather than either recording or
                  disseminating university lectures, this podcast series attempts to engage public
                  communities in conversation on both local and regional levels by broadening the
                  scope of educational research and the range of focal institutions. In doing so, it
                  also brings the community into the academy. 
               As podcasts like Public Work evidence, the podcast is
                  now a tool used widely by both academic and non-academic institutions; as such,
                  the podcast has intimate ties to the field of public humanities, particularly
                  given the fact that it can be circulated easily and without much cost to
                  subscribers (if its producers so choose). Given both this changing understanding
                  of the podcast as a distinct medium with its own set of rules and the podcast’s
                  unique role in connecting the academy and the wider public, we launched Circulating Spaces to consider questions of longstanding,
                  but increasingly vital, significance: As academics, to whom is our research
                  useful? In other words, who are we in conversation with? How can we involve
                  non-academics in our research? In the production of the podcast, we observed the
                  mutually reinforcing confluence of three fields — public humanities, world
                  literature, and the Digital Humanities (DH) — which together offer a vision for
                  altering the future of humanities scholarship by encouraging more collaborative
                  work and research methods. 
            
         

            Part 2: Circulating Spaces as Case Study
            Circulating Spaces (2017-2019) was hosted, recorded, and
               produced by the authors of this essay, Christian Howard-Sukhil (née Howard), Samantha
               Wallace, and Ankita Chakrabarty. The podcast ran for two seasons and has twelve
               episodes. Season one (episodes one through seven) was co-hosted by Christian
               Howard-Sukhil and Samantha Wallace. Season two (episodes eight through twelve) was
               co-hosted by Christian Howard-Sukhil and Ankita Chakrabarty. The episodes continue to
               be freely accessible on iTunes and the project website.Circulating Spaces is licensed under the Creative Commons
                  Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0) license, which gives users
                  the right to freely share or redistribute the podcasts with proper attribution, as
                  well as to adapt the material (as long as the adaptations are distributed under
                  the same license). For more information, please visit the Creative Commons CC-By
                  page (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/). We have also worked to
                  ensure the long-term preservation and sustainability of the Circulating Spaces podcast episodes and website. About such long-term
                  preservation needs, Claire Carlin writes: Besides archiving
                     in multiple repositories, long-term curation requires preservation not only of
                     static data such as XML files but also of the experience of using a given web
                     application and its associated tools
                  . We have accordingly stored the podcast
                  episodes in multiple locations and ensured their accessibility through several
                  platforms. For instance, the podcasts are stored through the University of
                  Virginia’s Mandala Collections (see https://mandala.shanti.virginia.edu/) and through a private Amazon Web
                  Services (AWS) account. The podcasts can also be accessed and downloaded through
                  the project website (www.circulatingspaces.com) and through iTunes (https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/circulating-spaces/id1334697425?mt=2).
                  The look and feel of the website are being preserved through two different
                  archiving sources: the Internet Archive (see https://web.archive.org/web/2019*/https://pages.shanti.virginia.edu/Circulating_Spaces/)
                  and the University of Victoria’s private research computing server (the Circulating Spaces website was downloaded to the UVic
                  server in June 2019 by Matt Huculak as part of the Digital Humanities Summer
                  Institute course on Project Endings). 
            
            Each episode features a new guest (or guests) who is asked to speak about her
               relationship to the field of world literature, her background within various
               disciplines, how her work intersects with conceptions of the public, and (one
               author’s favorite section) about new literature she recommends. Our guests have
               included Erin Bartnett, then a literary agent, now an editor for Electric Literature; Brandon Butler, the University of Virginia’s
               Director of Information Policy and an attorney whose expertise includes copyright and
               fair use; A.D. Carson, a hip-hop artist and Professor of Hip-Hop and the Global South
               at the University of Virginia; Lã Linh Chi, a Vietnamese-English teacher and
               translator; Amitav Ghosh, an award-winning English-language writer; Susan Stanford
               Friedman, Professor of English and Women and Gender Studies at the University of
               Wisconsin-Madison; Favianna Rodriguez, a transdisciplinary artist and social justice
               advocate; and Nathan Rostron, editor and marketing director of the publishing
               company, Restless Books. Because the technology required to host a recorded interview
               — a working microphone, some sort of transition technology (such as Skype or Zoom), a
               computer, and recording software — were relatively accessible, we were able to
               interview a wider range of guests than we would have been able to had we been
               restricted to in-person interviews; such accessibility allowed us to connect to a
               wider network of people and practitioners around the globe.
            In each episode, we aimed to produce an atmosphere of casual conversation with each
               of our guests. We hoped our interactions felt intimate, off-the-cuff, and unrevised,
               as if we were over coffee and in-person discussing issues important to us. This tone
               is immediately evident in the podcast episodes: where a transcript might not, the
               audio recording picks up our pauses and hesitations, fluctuations of laughter,
               collisions of speech, the vagaries of sound traveling across several different mics
               and recording devices, and verbal ticks, in addition to the content of our comments.
               Guests changed their minds or revised mid-speech. Some of their ideas were, in this
               way, very clearly works-in-progress. Furthermore, in editing the episodes after each
               recording, we strove to retain the verisimilitude of our conversations by leaving in
               any awkward pauses and verbal ticks, as well as our guests’ unscripted responses. We
               did so in order to reproduce the effect of a casual conversation, but also to
               co-construct a work that differs in kind and in style from the more manicured prose
               of, say, an academic essay. These conversations gain from retaining their
                  unrevised style in that this stylistic messiness comments on the
               (often unmarked and therefore invisible) number of revisions that go into a work of
               scholarship. Our unrevised conversations thus allowed us to embark on work that felt
               more spontaneous and less polished than our written academic work.
            Circulating Spaces was produced as a part of the
               Graduate Student Public Humanities Lab at the Institute of the Humanities and Global
               Cultures at the University of Virginia. The Graduate Student Public Humanities Lab
               was founded in 2017 to address the gap we saw dividing our scholarly work from the
               broader public. The Lab aims to develop collaboration among departments; to address
               the issues dividing the University of Virginia from the city of Charlottesville
               through working groups dedicated to specific projects in the community; and to
               provide a common space for scholars and the wider community to generate lively
               discussion, research, and advocacy initiatives.In August, 2017, Charlottesville
                  and the University of Virginia, the home institution of the podcast’s principle
                  investigators, became host to alt-right, men’s rights, and white supremacist
                  groups, protesting the removal of a statue of Robert E. Lee, commander of the
                  Confederate States Army. For the principle investigators of Circulating Spaces, this event highlighted the pressing need to think
                  through radical division all the more strenuously, and to theorize more nuanced
                  networks of affinity and difference based on a more complex understanding of
                     public. In doing so, the Lab sought to interrogate the way the
                  public is perceived as separate from the academy and often simplified within
               this binary through a lack of nuance by examining this term as a construct: What is
               the public? How is it separate from the academy? In what ways do the
               public and the academy inform one another? In what circumstances is this opposition a
               false binary, and in what circumstances is it an important distinction to make? 
            Posing questions about the perceived gap between the public and the academy links our
               inquiry with the work of public humanities. The aim, as Sheila Brennan points out in
                  Public, First is to place
                  communities, or other public audiences, at their core. A field that arose
               within the last fifty years, public humanities is most commonly understood to have
               developed in response to conservative critiques of the
                  obscurantism and leftism of the academy
               . Public humanities, initially at least, [aspired] to democratize humanistic knowledge by transforming the
                  capacities of academic humanists and their work in and out of the
                  university
               . While in its earliest stages it was used to convince
               academics to write for an audience broader than other academics, by the late 1990s,
               it was academics who were leveraging the phrase to advocate for alternative methods of engagement against reigning paradigms of humanistic
                  inquiry
               . What this meant was engaging in more research with
                  practical applications. As Robyn Schroeder writes, academics moved, quickly, to learn from the methods of social scientistic
                  ethnographers, oral historians, and journalists, as well as from curators, museum
                  educators, genealogists and documentary film makers, and to aggregate those
                  knowledges together under the public humanities tent
               .
             The rationale for public humanities is still alive and well. In the twenty-first
               century, public humanities has itself become a formal field of academic study, with a
               home within elite institutions such as Yale and Brown, and in which students can
               receive advanced degrees. Additionally, it continues to inflect arguments around the
               role of the humanities within society. In her recent book Generous Thinking, Kathleen Fitzpatrick in invokes the spirit of public
               humanities as a way of repairing the perceived current divide between the academy and
               the public, a divide that she characterizes as rampant with anti-intellectualism:
                     In public scholarship, members of our chosen
                     communities enter into our projects not just as readers but as participants, as
                     stakeholders, and as partners. Public scholarship allows the venues for
                     engaging with those communities to expand beyond the monograph or the journal
                     article to include a range of forms in which the publics with / whom we work
                     can engage directly with the materials of our fields.
                   Fitzpatrick lists alternative
                  spaces of scholarly engagement beyond the traditional modes of academic
               publications to include museum and gallery exhibitions, interactive web archives and
               other community-oriented publication models that are currently being developed, and
               notes that the inclusion of such spaces diversify the possibilities of building
               connections and networks. Thus, as contested as it is ambiguous a term, public
                  humanities continues to depend on — as it interrogates — a perceived dialogue
               between the academy and the public — the circulation of humanistic knowledges
               between grounds and people. 
            Circulating Spaces reassesses and expands the concept of
                  public by exploring what it means to engage with literature as a
               global-scale community. We were interested early on in illuminating the complicated
               network of the academy and its counterparts that our podcast guests chart. It is not
               only literature, but also people who circulate in, out, and around
               institutions adjacent to the academy, as many of our guests on the show articulate when
               describing their career trajectories. The podcast’s self-conscious positioning at the
               intersection of public humanities and world literature provided Circulating Spaces with both its raison d’être and its conceptual
               framework: the former provided the goal of expanding the concept of what constitutes
               a public by developing a more complicated theory of the public through
               recent developments in the field of world literature.
            Circulating Spaces not only uses the affordances of the
               form of the podcast to inform its content. It engages with the conceptual and
               theoretical paradigms developed recently in the field of world literature — focusing
               on circulation, motion, and (trans)nationalism — in order to reconfigure the form and
               function of the podcast within the academy. According to the Warwick Research
               Collective, Global/world literature in its
                     pre-eminent contemporary formulation pushes intrinsically in the directions of
                     commerce and commonality, linkage and connection, articulation and integration,
                     network and system. It thereby distances itself, explicitly or implicitly, from
                     the antecedent lexicon of post-theory, which had been disposed to
                     emphasize not comparison but incommensurability, not commonality but
                     difference, not system but untotalizable fragment.
                   Similarly, Alexander Beecroft, through
               his concept of ecologies of world literature, sees most scholars of world
               literature not as articulating competing models for
                  understanding how literature circulates, but rather [as articulating] different
                  concrete answers, emerging in specific contexts, to the same set of problems about
                  the interactions between literatures and their environments
               . In short, by reinterpreting the scope of the
               public humanities through conceptions developed in world literature, Circulating Spaces not only bridges the divide between
               academic podcasts (such as the University of Oxford Podcasts:
                  World Literature series) and public humanities podcasts (such as Public Works), but it actively connects the dots between
               academic institutions and those of us who work within and circulate around them. 
            Guided by this world literature model, Circulating
                  Spaces likewise attempts to point toward ways in which networks of
               affinity between the academy and the public may be constructed and negotiated. All
               too often, the public humanities model creates a hierarchical relationship in
               which the academy intervenes in public spaces in order to share research or offer
               their insights on an issue. We oppose this hierarchical model and instead advocate
               for a more connected and fluid understanding of the ways in which individuals
               circulate around various institutions linked with the academy. Circulating Spaces presents a model of the academy that is not unilateral
               (as if the academy were one, static space), but that instead highlights the
               ways individuals circulate around various institutions connected to the academy. For
               instance, we saw how Sarah Rodriguez moved from the University of Virginia to an
               elementary school classroom; how Erin Barnett transitioned to a literary agency; and
               how Brandon Butler went from law school to a university library. As we traced a
               rhizomatic network of connections between guests, ideas, and world literature texts
               made possible through the technology of the podcast, it became ever clearer to us
               that the divide between the academy and the public was not only a false divide, but
               one that is not intellectually productive or even necessarily accurate. For example,
               despite moving out of academia, many of our guests, such as Erin Bartnett, Sarah
               Rodriguez, and Brandon Butler, have careers that intersect with the academy. Their
               circulation — and the ideas they take with them — belies the strict divide between
               the academy and the public. People, ideas, and spaces, as world
               literature theory has argued, are much more fluid. 
         

            Part 3: Toward a New Vision of Scholarship
            While the public humanities and developments in world literature have informed the
               purpose and scope of Circulating Spaces, the Digital
               Humanities (DH) provide us with a useful model for how to frame the kind of
               scholarship that podcasts like Circulating Spaces can
               accomplish. At first glance, it might appear that discussions about the podcast — an
               innately digital medium — belong more broadly to the field of digital scholarship
               rather than the Digital Humanities. After all, at many institutions, DH is subsumed
               under the larger initiative of digital scholarship. Loyola Marymount University, for
               instance, describes the relationship between digital scholarship and the Digital
               Humanities thus: Digital scholarship (DS) and Digital
                     Humanities (DH) are scholarly activities that involve the extensive use of
                     digital methods and tools to conduct research, analyze data, and present
                     scholarship. ...Digital humanities may be seen as falling under the umbrella of
                     digital scholarship. It involves using digital tools and methods to analyze,
                     synthesize, present and teach humanities scholarship.
                   According to definitions such as this, DH is a
               subset of — and differentiated from — digital scholarship more broadly simply on the
               basis of its focus on humanities subjects. Circulating
                  Spaces, which broadly considers issues related to global literary
               circulation, would thus only be a DH project because the production strategy is
               digital even as the subject matter of the podcast is humanities-based. 
            But there is an additional element of DH scholarship that expands the function of
               this field. That is, more than simply using technology to focus on or address
               humanities-based questions, DH has a charge to reflect critically upon how digital information technologies influence perspectives in and
                  on research in the humanities
               . Alan Liu puts this imperative in slightly different
               terms by highlighting the need of Digital Humanities work to both assist mainstream humanities critique and to use technology self-reflexively as part of the very condition, and
                  not just facility, of critically knowing and acting on culture today
               . Thus, while Circulating Spaces
               may participate in DH and be classified as a DH project simply in reference to its
               method of production and entanglement with humanities-related questions, Circulating Spaces is more explicitly enmeshed in the work
               of DH through its questioning of how the podcast as a tool helps us reevaluate
               scholarly processes and the production of humanities scholarship. 
            In fact, DH scholars have long discussed the need to expand what
               constitutes scholarship, especially when it comes to tenure and promotion
                  review.See, for instance, the special issue of Journal
                     of Digital Humanities, Closing the Evaluation
                     Gap, that deals with this topic (Fall 2012, Issue 1.4); the American
                  Historical Association’s Guidelines on the Evaluation of
                     Digital Scholarship; the College Art Association and the Society of
                  Architectural Historians’ Guidelines for the Evaluation of
                     Digital Scholarship in Art and Architectural History; Joseph Raben’s
                     Tenure, Promotion, and Digital Publication; the
                  Modern Language Association’s Guidelines for Evaluating Work
                     in Digital Humanities and Digital Media; and Cathy Davidson’s How Can a Digital Humanist Get Tenure? In Episode 3: Public and Digital Spaces, Brandon Walsh, the
               Head of Student Programs in the University of Virginia’s Scholars’ Lab, discusses how
               digital technology is changing how we conceive of humanities scholarship.Walsh
                  defines the digital humanities as research or teaching that
                     engages with technology in some way
                  . Digital humanities work is not only
                     the use of technology in the pursuit of humanities
                     questions — it is also humanities-based
                     interrogation of technology
                  . As Walsh puts it, DH scholarship not only gives you a different means of
                  disseminating things, but it also requires that you...think in a different way
               . For Walsh, this means specifically
               that he thinks more publicly. He explains more fully: Over the past several years that I’ve been working in Digital Humanities,
                     probably the most profound shift in how I work is that it’s all public all the
                     time. So whenever I teach or am working and thinking through a problem, I try
                     and think about how I might reframe that for a public audience, like either in
                     a blog or gathering my materials together so that other people can see them.
                     And that’s not something that I was necessarily thinking about during the rest
                     of my time as a graduate student. …Working in an increasing digital space for
                     me has meant that you have to be willing to put yourself out there.
                   By being, as Walsh puts it,
                  public all the time, Digital Humanities has pushed
               Walsh to consider public engagement with his own research. As we’ve argued, a model
               for academic work that is public shouldn’t merely be public-facing; it should
               make visible the intricate connections between people and ideas.
            Friedman too points out in her episode 
               that fields such as Digital Humanities and world literature urge us to rethink and to
               alter our academic practices. Acknowledging the move toward collaborative scholarship
               in the humanities, she states that efforts are currently under way to support more
               communal academic projects.See, for example, the MLA’s Prize for a Scholarly
                  Edition, which supports collaborative projects. However, while journals,
               including PMLA, increasingly feature author
                  interviews, For examples of author interviews in PMLA, see Raymond Williams’s interview with Gabriel García Márquez
                     (The Visual Arts, the Poetization of Space and Writing: An
                     Interview with Gabriel García Márquez in PMLA 104.2: 131-140); Z. Esra Mirze’s interview with Orhan Pamuk
                     (Implementing Disform: An Interview with Orhan
                     Pamuk in PMLA 123.1: 176-180); and Jean E.
                  Howard’s interview with Lynn Nottage (Interview with Lynn
                     Nottage in PLMA 129.4: 847–849).
               which could be compared to the work of podcast interviews (esp. see Circulating Spaces, Episode
                  10, which features an interview with author Amitav Ghosh), these published,
               written interviews are short (generally running between three and six pages) and tend
               to polish the voices of both author and interviewer. Additionally, the work of the
               interviewer in researching and preparing questions often receives only a passing
               acknowledgment. 
            This is precisely where the affordances of digital humanities can come into play.
               Podcasts like Circulating Spaces offer a different take
               on ideas of community engagement and conversation in terms of academic publishing.
               Indeed, the form of conversation afforded by the podcast stands in counterpoint to
               the model of the single-author scholarly monograph, which continues to be the
               gold-standard for academic work despite shrinking university library budgets and
               rising costs associated with traditional publication. The processes of research and
                  publication occur almost simultaneously during the creation of the podcast
               itself. This is significant because the podcast’s immediacy and informality suggest a
               model of publication that is less hierarchical than traditional scholarly
               publishing. Even the sheer number of contributors to Circulating
                  Spaces challenges the traditional model for authorship of traditional
               humanities research. More so, podcast interviews record voice intonation and pauses,
               providing a richer experience and giving voice to both interviewer and interviewee
               alike. The immediacy and informality of the voices in such conversations not only
               distinguish the podcast from the traditional scholarly monograph, but also put into
               relief the otherwise invisible work of drafting and revision that goes into the
               scholarly monograph. In short, the podcast does work that the scholarly monograph
               does not — work that should not replace, but rather stand as a companion to the
               scholarly monograph. 
            Podcasts, given the relative ease of collaboration even across distances, also lend
               themselves well to community or collaborative development. Llinares, Fox, and Berry
               locate the transformative potential of the collaborative podcast within the medium’s hybridity of thought, sound and text
               . These features perhaps
                  even foster a reinvigoration of the dialectic, an exchange of ideas beyond what is
                  possible in purely written form — be it in a magazine or academic journal.
                  Podcasting, for us, taps into something fundamental about oral communication,
                  argument and even the tension between subjective and objective knowledge that has
                  been amplified in the digital age
               . In addition to being visibly co-produced
               projects, the conversational nature of the podcast captures the popularity of oral
               forms of communication in the digital age.
            Taken together, the podcast’s public, communal, and conversational affordances make
               it possible for subsequent episodes to build on the preceding episodes’ conversations
               with relative ease. In this manner, Circulating Spaces
               brings together Favianna Rodriguez, an interdisciplinary artist (Episode 11: Designing Global Activism) and Amitav Ghosh, a novelist and
               climate-change activist (Episode 10: The Climate of World
                  Literature) into conversational proximity. Ghosh expresses surprise and
               dismay at the conspicuous absence of climate change in contemporary global fiction,
               and he stresses the critical need for contemporary fiction to engage in the discourse
               of climate change in the present time .
               During the following episode, with Ghosh’s comments in mind, the co-hosts asks
               Rodriguez to comment upon the role of climate change in her artwork. Rodriguez
               concurs with Ghosh’s assertion that there is a lack of art about non-human subjects
                  . She further states: We can help to transform the current course, and in order to do that
                  we need to just feel our stories in relation to nature...This is why, actually, I
                  am so serious about creating art with plants and with climate, and I am a beacon
                  now because I want to share these stories
               . Rodriguez’s interest in the imagery
               of nature in contemporary art resonates strongly with Ghosh’s call for contemporary
               fiction to wake up to the realities of the time, as evidenced by her enthusiastic and
               hearty endorsement of Ghosh’s emphasis upon the necessity of storytelling in helping
               combat climate change. The conversations in the podcast episodes thus become
               multi-directional, not simply in terms of the movement of ideas and opinions, but in
               the very process of conceptualization. In this way, each conversation can become
               intricately connected to the larger conversation that the podcast series, as a whole,
               constructs. 
            Finally, podcasts such as Circulating Spaces participate
               in the new scholarly digital ethos in another distinct
               way, namely, through their commitment to open access . If
               digital technologies make dissemination relatively easy, and if, as we’ve argued, the
               networks between the academy and neighboring institutions are constituted by
               individuals who circulate between these institutions, do we not have an obligation to
               make the results of our academic labor open and accessible to as broad a public as
               possible? Shouldn’t we honor, through open accessibility, the collaborative
               relationships established by work like Circulating Spaces?
            Brandon Butler, the University of Virginia’s Director of Information Policy, breaks
               down the case for open access in Episode 5: Copyright and Open
                  Access:
               We now have… two things that make possible what was not
                     possible before. We have the technology to make all knowledge instantly and
                     very, very cheaply, essentially freely available to anyone, anywhere. And we
                     have a community of people...who make knowledge for a living and who don’t
                     expect to get paid by the readers who read it... So, we can have a publishing
                     system that does not need to pay authors. All we have to do is find a way to
                     finance the marginal cost of distributing something on the Internet. And it’s
                     nothing!... And so, all [open access does is] put two and two together, and say
                     all scholarly literature should be freely available on the web to anyone with
                     an internet connection.
                   We agree with Butler and
               argue that the open sharing of scholarship will be mutually beneficial, especially as
               it pertains to scholarly work such as a podcast, which can be produced with low
               overhead cost, is relatively cheap to maintain, and can easily be made open access,
               that is, freely available without the cost of subscription.For a foundational
                  manifesto of open access values, see the Budapest Open Access
                     Initiative. Doing so will help encourage collaborative research;
               adequately reflect and make visible the complex network of people and ideas that
               circulate in the broad ecosystem of humanities work; and encourage, as Walsh
               indicated, scholars to consider broader audiences for their research, in a time in
               which the value of the humanities is often debated.This typically conservative
                  view of the role of the humanities is not new, and as referenced in the discussion
                  on the origin of public humanities, was a critique to which the public humanities
                  sought to respond by demonstrating the wide applicability of humanities-based
                  research. Organizations like Humanities in Action, a branch of the National
                  Humanities Center, continue to make the case for the importance of the humanities
                  by highlighting how humanities research and teaching provide valuable perspectives
                  on topics of public concern. See, https://action.nationalhumanitiescenter.org/what-are-humanities/. With
                  that in mind, efforts are underway to develop more open-source platforms. The
                  Manifold Scholarship platform, for example, jointly developed by the University of
                  Minnesota Press, the GC Digital Scholarship Lab at the Graduate Center of the City
                  University of New York, and Cast Iron Coding (Portland, OR), is a particularly
                  promising open-source platform that offers a framework of academic publishing that
                  is focused on community engagement while encouraging discussion between
                  readers. As Walsh, Friedman, and Butler all imply, scholars in fields as
               diverse as world literature, public humanities, and the Digital Humanities are all
               pointing individually toward this conclusion.The material affordances of the
                  digital, of course, are not just limited to the podcast. Picking up the idea of
                  community, open access, and collaboration enabled by digital humanities, in Episode 3: Public and Digital Spaces, Christian
                  Howard-Sukhil relates new developments in digital literature – which she defines
                  as literature that is created on and for digital
                     devices – to the growth of new digital spaces, or the networks of people that are created through technological
                     applications, e.g., communities in spaces such as online chatrooms . In other words, digital
                  humanities and digital literature more broadly open themselves up to community
                  engagement and development. It is a work in progress.
         

            Coda
                     As the outcome of an academic lab model of collaborative research, we have
               not been particularly mindful about the number of subscribers Circulating Spaces gained during the course of its production. While
               statistics detailing subscribers, downloads, etc., can be helpful indicators of the
               growing influence of a podcast, our criteria for success was based on the
               production process itself — the development of the theoretical framework for the
               podcast, constructing the episode outlines and the interview questions, and
               networking and collaborating with a diverse group of individuals all working broadly
               within the humanities. Circulating Spaces has also
               established networks of connection which continue to persist and can be worked upon
               and expanded in the future. 
            While our assessment of the podcast’s participation in this new way of thinking of
               and conducting research has been largely celebratory — indeed, we consider
               collaboration as well as research and publication that is more democratic and
               spontaneous to be of obvious positive value — it is important to consider the
               shortcomings and limitations of such projects as well. We want to be particularly
               cognizant of and transparent regarding how the academy has structured our own social
               networks and therefore the curation of guests on a podcast such as Circulating Spaces. As academic scholars with institutional
               funding, the very creation of Circulating Spaces is
               fundamentally grounded in a North American system of institutional support, which,
               although fortuitous for us, is not accessible to anyone seeking to replicate such a
               project. As a result, we want to acknowledge our own roles in creating these
               networks, which are not neutral, but inflected by our own positions within the
               academy. Indeed, on a practical level, we observed how much easier it was to work
               with guests in a domestic context (and even easier when they were at our home
               institution) than with our international guests: the further the distance, the
               spottier the sound quality, the more difficult to schedule a time to speak or to
               guarantee the compatibility of computer equipment. The inertia of the metropole is
               strong. Our attempts to deconstruct the binary of academic versus its public by
               constructing a more nuanced network of relations were tempered by this gravitational
               pull toward the University of Virginia’s resources, including, most importantly, its
               human resources. We hope, however, that beginning to make connections between
               far-flung guests within our own localized networks here will enable future audiences
               to make similar connections and expand the network out beyond our hub at the
               University of Virginia.
            In Teaching Community, bell hooks writes, One of the dangers we face in our educational systems is the loss...
                  of a feeling of connection and closeness with the world beyond the academy
               . Circulating Spaces
               models a more open, collaborative model for the humanities through the practice of
               the Digital Humanities, the theories of world literature, and the spirit of public
               humanities. We have seen how the affordances of the podcast have shaped our
               conversations — and by extension, our research — while also enabling us to theorize
               and practice more nuanced relationships between what is academic and what is
                  public. We reconnect with the world beyond the academy even as we
               show that this world is not, in fact, separate from the academy. These connections
               are increasingly important for the future of humanistic studies. While Circulating Spaces itself provides a modest, two-season long
               run of conversations between academics, teachers, librarians, artists, and more, as
               we have hoped to demonstrate in this essay, it suggests the potential for much
               broader and robust work with the podcast as a form of research that participates in
               the creation of these feelings of connectivity and closeness.
         
