Title:  A Model for Representing Diachronic
                    Terminologies: the Saussure Case Study
Volume:  015
Issue:  3
Date:  30 July 2021
Abstract:  
                
                The aim of this article is to present a model for representing in an explicit and
                    formal way the diachronic evolution of concepts and terms in a given domain, so
                    that this formalization can be machine-actionable. The approach we here propose
                    is based on Semantic Web technologies in order to guarantee interoperability and
                    reuse across scientific communities of diachronic terminological resources that
                    can be thus easily accessed, interconnected and mutually enriched. More
                    specifically, the representation of dynamic evolution of terms and concepts was
                    performed in OWL using the N-ary relations mechanisms. In addition, a set of
                    SWRL rules was set up, in order to automatically identify the evolution of the
                    concepts evoked within a text, as well as the terms representing these concepts.
                    Our model was adopted to formally represent diachronic aspects of Saussure’s
                    terminology as they emerge from his works. An example will be provided to
                    highlight the potential of such a knowledge structuration for gaining a wider
                    understanding of the profound terminological and conceptual changes brought
                    about by the paradigmatic and epistemological revolutions in sciences.
            
Full Body Text: 


                1. Introduction
                Πάντα ῥεῖ. Everything is subjected to the inexorable law of change: the reality,
                    the categories through which we organize it and the words we use to talk about
                    it.
                This is particularly the case for the history of science. Over the centuries,
                    scholars have built different theoretical models in response to the continuous
                    innovation that emerged from observation sometimes producing a real scientific
                    revolution in the worldview. Needless to say, a change in conceptual level often
                    corresponds to a change in terminologyThe term terminology is here to be
                        understood as the set of lexical items belonging to
                            specialized areas of usage of one or more languages
                        .: new terms can be introduced to
                    express the new system of concepts or old terms can be dismissed when the
                    concept becomes obsolete. The aim of this article is to present a model for
                    formally representing the diachronic evolution of concepts and terms in a given
                    domain, so that this formalization can be machine-actionable. Taking advantage
                    from past experiences conducted in the context of several projectsClavius on the Web
                        , Per un'edizione digitale
                            dei manoscritti di Ferdinand de Saussure
                        , and Totus Mundus
                        ., we propose here an approach based on
                    Semantic Web technologies that guarantees interoperability and reuse of
                    diachronic terminological resources across scientific communities.
                The development of standards for representing and exchanging data has always been
                    a concern in the terminological field. Interoperability across terminological
                    formats is basically ensured by adopting the ISO standard 30042: 2008 TBX
                    (TermBase eXchange), an XML-based family of terminology exchange formats
                    compliant with the Terminological Markup Framework (TMF - ISO 16642: 2003).
                Over the last few years, interesting solutions for interoperability have been
                    offered by the Semantic Web technologies and the Linked Open Data initiative
                    which allow data to be shared, reused across applications and linked with the
                    resources available on the Web, thus benefiting from the whole datacloud of URIs
                    with which reference resources like DBpedia are already networked.
                In terminology, there has been a growing trend towards representing and
                    publishing terminological resources on the Semantic Web according to Linked Open
                    Data principles, as demonstrated for example by the NCBO (National Center for
                    Biomedical Ontology) BioPortal, a repository of more than 300 biomedical
                    ontologies and terminologies converted into RDF ;
                    or by the Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) consortium 
                    aiming to create a family of new or extant ontologies based on shared principles
                    compliant with the Semantic Web technologies. These and other similar
                    initiatives are all driven by the same need, namely to avoid that terminologies,
                    created by proprietary software, exist independently of each other, hidden in
                    isolated databases. The lack of semantic interoperability, indeed, precludes any
                    possibility of progress, as medical data can be exploited to their full
                    potential only if they are interconnected to each other. Sharing large
                    quantities of data structured in ontologies makes it possible to use IT
                    applications and artificial intelligence systems, enabling thus better
                    diagnostics, early disease prevention and, more generally, a deeper
                    understanding of the human biology and health.
                Another initiative deserving to be mentioned is the EuroVoc management based on
                    technologies in line with W3C recommendations and with the latest developments
                    in classification standards. A collaborative project started in 2019 and
                    undertaken by the Publications Office of the European Union and the
                    International Labour Office  aims to align EuroVoc
                    with other controlled vocabularies and publish them as Linked Open Data. The
                    objective is to improve data accessibility and guarantee large-scale
                    interoperability, thus facilitating the authoring-translating-publishing chain
                    as well as the work in public administrations and international
                    organisations.
                Finally, Cimiano et al. (2015) proposed an
                    approach to convert terminological datasets originally stored in TBX format to
                    RDF by means of an online service named TBX2RDF, allowing thereby terminological
                    resources to be used and enhanced across different scientific communities and,
                    in particular, to become part of the great Linguistic Linked (Open) Data cloud
                    (see infra).
                Nevertheless, as we shall see, using these technologies to represent the
                    diachronic evolution of terminological and conceptual data constitutes an
                    interesting challenge, since OWL (Web Ontology Language), the W3C standard
                    language developed to represent ontologies in the Semantic Web, is fundamentally
                    static and monotonic.
            

                2. Terminology and Diachrony
                In the terminological literature, the diachronic dimension has been neglected for
                    a long time. This was mainly due to the onomasiological, prescriptive and static
                    approach underlying the General Theory of Terminology (GTT) elaborated by Wüster
                    in 1968.
                Wüster’s approach to terminology was based on a neo-positivist referential and
                    taxonomic semiotics , according to which concepts
                    take precedence over words. In GTT terms are monosemic and concepts are
                    monoreferential; a perfect correspondence is established between them: each
                    concept corresponds to one and only one term. The term is thus equivalent to a
                    symbol, to a désignateur rigide
                    , since it works in much the same way as the system
                    of proper names works in general language. Conceptual structures, on the other
                    hand, are regarded as universal and static like their referents and any
                    diachronic dimension is neutralised.
                In outlining the theoretical and methodological differences between lexicology
                    and terminology, Cabré (1999: 8) emphasized that
                    terminology is only concerned with synchronic aspects: This
                        view, which today is considered the most systematic, coherent theoretical
                        approach to terms, differs from lexicological theory in three ways: in the
                        priority of the concept over the designation; in being exclusively concerned
                        with the level of the terminological unit and not with the other levels of
                        linguistic description; in excluding any diachronic approach of
                        information.
                Terminology began to open up to diachrony timidly after the odyssée terminotique
                     of the 80s, when an impressive number of term
                    banks, based on the synchronic traditional vision of the Viennese school, were
                    produced and spread (EURODICAUTOM, NORMATERM, UNITERM, TERMIUM, IATE etc.). In
                    1988 a symposium entitled Terminologie diachronique
                    was organized by the Centre de Terminologie of Bruxelles, but ten years after
                    Møller (1998) still regretted a quantitative and / or
                        qualitative deficit in that branch of terminology for which he
                    coined the neologism terminochronie. Over the last twenty
                    years several studies have been conducted focussing on the evolution of concepts
                    and terms in specialized languages (see inter al. van Campenhoudt 1997, Dury 2008, Zanola
                        2014, Kristiansen 2014), as well
                    as on methods for compiling diachronic corpora  and
                    identifying the evolution of knowledge in corpora .
                As underlined by Dury and Picton (2009), this lack
                    of interest for diachronic aspects in terminology was mainly due to technical,
                    pragmatic, psychological, and most of all theoretical and historical obstacles.
                    Diachronic terminology is, indeed, by definition a textual terminology 
                    , a terminology of discourse.
                    Terms must be analysed in their real context of use and must not be seen as
                    abstract and static labels associated with concepts. They should be rather
                    regarded as linguistic signs, which enter into a dynamic relationship both with
                    the concepts and with the other linguistic signs that constitute the
                    terminological system. In a diachronic perspective, terminological work is
                    fundamentally semasiological and descriptive. In order to grasp terminological
                    variation over time, the starting point is the sense that a term acquires within
                    a real linguistic context and the focus is on language as it is actually used
                        (Ist-Norm) in real specialised (con-)texts and not on
                    language as it should be used (Soll-Norm). To use Bourigault
                    and Slodzian words (1999: 31), le texte est le point de départ de la description lexicale à
                        construire. On va du texte vers le terme.
                Texts are usually the unique source that the scholars have at their disposal in
                    order to access disappeared states of languages and more completely understand
                    the history of terms and their evolution over time. Texts play a crucial role to
                    establish when and how words acquire (terminologization) and lose
                    (determinologization) their terminological status, or how a term passes from one
                    specialized field to another or from the intimate pages of a scholar to the
                    entire scientific community.
                Regarding this last aspect, in particular, texts constitute a precious means to
                    record the typical terminological fluctuation that precedes or follows the
                    formation of the so-called normal science state. As a
                    matter of fact, in a phase of normal science, when the
                    development of knowledge is adherent to what Kuhn (1970) calls paradigm, the system of terms is
                    standard, explicitly defined and consensually used within a scientific
                    community. In revolutionary phases, on the contrary, when a revision of existing
                    scientific beliefs or practices is involved, terminology can be characterized by
                    great instability. Texts become thus a conceptual and terminological space of
                    creativity, where scholars think, reflect and give a linguistic form to their
                    ideas. In these cases, ephemeral lexical formations are often attested only in
                    the idiolect of the one who forged them without ever taking root within the
                    scientific community.
                An example of this phenomenon will be illustrated in Section 6 with Ferdinand de Saussure’s terminology.
            

                3. Modelling an Interoperable Terminological Resource
                When modelling a digital scholarly resource, the key point is to choose a model
                    capable of maximizing its usefulness in the community of reference. According to
                    the FAIR guidelines, scholarly data should be
                    Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable . First of all, for data to be findable, they must be referred to using a
                    globally unique and persistent identifier and must also be indexed in a
                    searchable resource. Furthermore, data must be accessible through a standardized
                    protocol and, at the same time, has to be interoperable in virtue of its
                    representation in a formal and shared knowledge representation language.
                    Finally, to be reusable, data must be described with a
                        plurality of accurate and relevant attributes (ibidem: 4).
                In order to pursue the FAIR policies and to build fair diachronic terminological
                    resources, our choice was to adopt the paradigms of Semantic Web technologies
                         and Linked (Open) Data .
                The intuition behind the Semantic Web is to shift from a Web of documents, viewed
                    as separate data silos containing unstructured or semi-structured data, to a Web
                    of data where open repositories of semantically enriched data can be accessed
                    and interlinked. To make this vision concrete, the following technologies -
                    often referred to as the Semantic Web layer cake or Semantic Web technology -
                    are used: Resource Description Frameworkhttps://www.w3.org/RDF/
                    (RDF), RDF Schema (RDFS), Web Ontology Language (OWL), Semantic Web Rule
                    Language (SWRL) and SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language (SPARQL).
                Semantic Web and Linked (Open) Data best practices require datasets to be
                    published using RDF: data is described as triples in the form of Subject -
                    Predicate - Object, where the Subject is a resource, the Object can be either a
                    resource or a data value (such as a string of character or a number), and the
                    Predicate (also called property) relates the Subject and
                    the Object together. Basically, a dataset in the Linked Data world is a set of
                    triples.
                OWL is a family of languages, based on RDF/XML, and recommended by the World Wide
                    Web Consortium since 2004 for representing and sharing ontologiesAccording
                        to Gruber (1991: 199), an ontology is a specification of a conceptualization.
                    on the Web. There are three variants of OWL, with different levels of
                    expressiveness: OWL Lite, which supports a classification hierarchy and simple
                    constraints; OWL DL, which provides the maximum expressiveness while retaining
                    computational completeness and decidability, and OWL Full which allows for
                    maximum expressiveness, resulting nonetheless undecidable.
                In order to publish structured data on the Web in a way that they can be easily
                    linked to each other, a number of rules was set up by Berners-Lee, known as
                    Linked (Open) Data principles. According to them, each entity of a dataset must
                    be uniquely identified by a special address called URI
                    (Uniform Resource Identifier), each URI must be available on the Web via the
                    HTTP protocolhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext_Transfer_Protocol,
                    each look up of a URI must be answered with useful information and using
                    standards, and finally, whenever possible, data should be linked to other
                    data.
                Over the last years, the Linked (Open) Data approach has attracted the attention
                    of a linguistic community becoming more and more sensitive to the question of
                    interoperability between resources. An increasing number of openly available and
                    interconnected linguistic datasets have been published as part of the Web of
                    data, resulting in the so-called Linked Open Data Cloud (LLOD). This trend,
                    nicely visualised in https://lod-cloud.net, is particularly boosted by the Ontology
                    Lexicon (Ontolex) community group, whose activity resulted in the creation of
                        lemonhttps://lemon-model.net/ and https://www.w3.org/2016/05/ontolex/ for details, see McCrae et al. (2017)
                    (Lexicon Model for Ontologies), a meta-model allowing lexical resources to be
                    published in RDF, linked and shared according to Semantic Web principles. At
                    present lemon constitutes a standard de facto,
                    as it is grounded on W3C and ISO standards, such as LMF (Lexical Markup
                    Framework) , Lexinfo  – this latter aligned with ISOCat - and LIR (Linguistic Information
                    Repository) .
                Lemon has been successfully adopted in many different contexts for
                    different purposes, such as, for example, to publish several existing lexical
                    resources as linked data, including DBnary , the
                    Parole-Simple-Clips Italian lexicon , WordNet , UBY  and BabelNet
                        , to represent linguistic resources for
                    sentiment analysis within the EuroSentiment project , to model linguistic annotations in FrameBase, a
                    linked open knowledge base which integrates and interconnects heterogeneous
                    sources of structured knowledge .
                The lemon core module, named ontoLexPlease refer to https://www.w3.org/2016/05/ontolex/#core, is composed of
                    three fundamental elements: i) the Lexical Entry
                    class, in turn specified in Word, Multiword Expression, and Affix; ii) the Lexical Form class
                    where the morphological variants of a lexical entry are described and associated
                    with a written representation (writtenRep); iii)
                    the Lexical Sense class, which constitutes the
                    reification of the relationship between a lexical entry and an ontology entity
                    defined in a given external ontology. In lemon, in fact, concepts, conceived as
                    extra-linguistic entities, receive a formal and explicit description in a
                    separate ontology, according to the principle known as semantics by reference
                    .
                The lemon model has been designed to be modular and extensible: in
                    other words, new modules can be created, if required, to represent a peculiar
                    aspect of a lexical or terminological resource. To manage semantic shifts, for
                    example, a diachronic extension, called lemonDIA,
                    was developed .
            

                4. Models and Tools for the Representation of Diachrony
                Knowledge representation languages underlying Semantic Web technologies are based
                    on binary relations. They typically connect two instances without any temporal
                    information, thus making the representation of time a difficult matter to deal
                    with. In order to tackle this issue, different approaches have been proposed in
                    the literature (see inter al.
                    Flouris 2008, Makri
                        2011): Temporal Description logics 
                    , Versioning , Reification
                         and 4D-fluents . In
                    the following, a brief description of each approach is provided.
                Temporal Description Logics (TDL). Description
                    logics (DLs) 
                    
                     are a family of knowledge representation
                    formalisms underlying the Ontology Web Language (OWL-DL). They are a decidable
                    subset of first-order logic. TDLs extend DL with standard temporal logic
                    operators such as always in the future, and until. Many TDLs have been proposed in the literature
                        
                     with the most expressive of them being undecidable.
                    Extending DL entails to extend OWL, which is based on DL. Since OWL is a W3C
                    recommendation (2004) for publishing and sharing ontologies in a Semantic Web vision, adopting TDL would entail to
                    abandon the Semantic Web framework. On the contrary, the other approaches
                    described in the following can be implemented using OWL directly.
                Versioning. Another strategy commonly adopted to handle and keep
                    track of ontology modifications in time is versioning: whenever a change takes
                    place, a new version of the resource is created (see Figure 1). Several works
                    are grounded on this approach: Grandi (2009)
                    presents a multi-temporal RDF database model employing triple timestamping with
                    temporal elements; Zekri et al. (2017) present an
                    infrastructure and a suite of tools to support the creation and validation of
                    OWL ontologies with time-varying instances; in Tappolet and Bernstein (2009), the usage of Named Graphs is
                    proposed.
                The drawback of versioning approach is mainly twofold. Firstly, the fact that a
                    new version of the whole resource needs to be created every time a change occurs
                    leads to redundant information. Secondly, the more numerous the versions of the
                    resource are, the more complex and time-consuming the performance of exhaustive
                    searches becomes.
                
                    Versioning - when a change takes place, a new version of the
                        resource is created.
                    Shows steps of change from resource r0 to resource rn over
                        time.
                    
                
                Reification. Reification is a technique for representing
                    relationships with arity greater than two.https://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/ Reifying a
                    relationship means representing it as a class of entities. The N-ary Relations
                    pattern, conceived to model a relationship as a resource, is based on
                    reification.
                
                    Example related to the fact that the sense of the term ti denotes the concept cj: (a) example of reification - (b)
                        example of N-ary relation pattern.
                    Two charts showing reification on the left and relation pattern on the
                        right.
                    
                
                Figure 2(a) illustrates how the reification process works: the relation
                        denotes is transformed into a class, here named Reified relation. The subject and the object of
                        denotes, as well as the relation itself, become the attributes
                    of the new class. Let us suppose that the relation denotes links a
                    term ti (in particular its specific sense) to a
                    concept cj at a specific time T0. As shown in Figure 2(b), the relationship denotes(ti, cj, T0) can be reified as the new class DenotationEvent with three binary relations:
                        denotes(ti, de), denotes(de, 
                    cj), and time(de, T0). The first two relations link ti to cj by means of de, which is an instance of the class DenotationEvent. The third relation assigns a temporal
                    extent T0 to de,
                    representing the temporal validity of the original property
                        denotes(ti, cj).
                The main disadvantages of this technique are that: i) the complexity of the
                    ontology increases due to the proliferation of entities, both classes and
                    properties (as a matter of fact, whenever a temporal relation has to be
                    represented, a new object is created); ii) the OWL reasoning capabilities become
                    limited  and can be maintained only by means of
                    time-consuming strategies, since the reified property is transformed into a
                    class and the characteristics which can be added to a property in OWL (such as
                    functionality, inverse functionality, transitivity or symmetry) are no longer
                    associated directly with the relation itself.
                4D-fluents (four-dimensionalist). The basic idea underlying this
                    approach is that each entity has a temporal part, described by a set of time
                    slices. Each slice represents a temporal period, in which all the features of an
                    entity remain constant. Changes affect the properties of the temporal part
                    keeping the entity unchanged. In order to add the time dimension to a resource,
                    the TimeSlice and TimeInterval classes with the timeSliceOf
                    and timeInterval properties need to be introduced,
                    as Figure 3 depicts. Returning to the previous example, in the 4D-fluents
                    approach, the property denotes would connect instances of the
                        TimeSlice class and would hold between slices
                    of entities. The time slices of an entity have a specific lifetime, that is the
                    time interval of the relation they participate in.
                As in the N-ary model so also in the 4-D fluents approach the domain and the
                    range of the property denotes change, both represented by the
                        TimeSlice class. So, this model as well suffers
                    from some limitations in OWL reasoning capabilities. With respect to the N-ary
                    model, the 4-D fluents approach is affected by a wider proliferation of entities
                    (compare the blue objects in Figure 2).
                
                    Example of 4D-fluents representation.
                    Chart showing 4D-fluents representation.
                    
                
                So far, the main mechanisms for representing time evolving information were
                    illustrated. In the next two subsections, we present a vocabulary to represent
                    time-related facts, i.e. OWL-Time, and a set of rules, i.e. SWRL, which operate
                    on temporal relations to infer new temporal knowledge and to detect inconsistent
                    assertions.
                
                    4.1 OWL-Time and Allen’s Relations
                    OWL-Timehttp://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/ is an ontology of
                        temporal concepts, conceived to describe the temporal properties of
                        resources. It provides a vocabulary for expressing facts about topological
                        relations among instants and intervals, together with information about
                        durations and date-time. Figure 4(a) illustrates a diagram of OWL-Time
                        ontology. The properties hasTemporalDuration,
                            hasBeginning, hasEnd, and hasTime provide a
                        standard way to attach time information to ontological entities.
                    Let us consider, for example, that the term ti
                        denotes the concept cj from 1898 to 1903. In this
                        case all the needed temporal facts can be specified using OWL-Time
                        vocabulary.
                    However, if we wanted to answer questions like What are
                            the intervals overlapping the interval 1898-1903?, or what are the relations holding in that interval?,
                        OWL-Time vocabulary would not be enough. James F. Allen (1983) provided then a calculus for temporal
                        reasoning, by introducing thirteen base relations capturing the possible
                        relations between two intervals (see Figure 4(b)). They allow the
                        computation of any relative position or sequence. In the context of the
                        Semantic Web, these rules can be represented by means of the Semantic Web
                        Rule Language (SWRL), described in the following section. The use of this
                        language makes it possible to assert new instances of relationships between
                        the ontology entities.
                    
                        (a) OWL-Time - the core model of temporal entities. (b) Allen’s rules
                            between time periods.
                        Two charts showing temporla entities on the left and Allen's rile
                            between time periods on the right.
                        
                    
                
                
                    4.2 Semantic Web Rule Language
                    Semantic Web Rule Languagehttps://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/ (SWRL) is a
                        language based on a subset of Datalog with both unary and binary predicates,
                        representing the rule layer within the Semantic Web stack. The form of these
                        rules is an implication between an antecedent (body) and a consequent
                        (head), each consisting of zero or a conjunction of more atoms.Rules
                            having conjunctive consequents could easily be transformed into multiple
                            rules each with an atomic consequent. Whenever the conditions
                        specified in the antecedent hold, then the conditions specified in the
                        consequent must hold as well. Atoms can be of the form C(x), P(x,y),
                        sameAs(x,y), differentFrom(x,y), or builtIn(r,x,...) where C is
                        an OWL description or data range, P is an OWL property,
                            r is a built-in relation, x and y
                        are either variables or OWL individuals or OWL data values, as appropriate.
                        For example, the following SWRL rule infers if an instant i1 is before an instant i2, by verifying a set of premises:
                    Instant(?i1) ∧ Instant(?i2) ∧ inXSDDateTime(?i1, ?y) ∧
                            inXSDDateTime(?i2, ?w) ∧
                        swrl:lessThan(?y, ?w) → before(?i2,
                            ?i1)
                    where the built-in swrl:lessThan(?y, ?w) is satisfied when the date
                        represented by the variable ?y is earlier than that represented by
                            ?w.For a complete built-ins list, please refer to Section 8 in
                                https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/. In this case,
                        when temporal information is provided as a date, the qualitative relations
                        are specified using SWRL rules that apply on the quantitative
                        representation. The rules can be applied to qualitative temporal information
                        as well. In the following, a rule about the relation during is
                        provided:
                    ProperInterval(?a) ∧ ProperInterval(?x) ∧ before(?b, ?y) ∧ before(?z, ?c) ∧
                        hasBeginning(?a, ?b) ∧ hasBeginning(?x, ?y) ∧ hasEnd(?a, ?c) ∧
                        hasEnd(?x, ?z) → During(?x, ?a)
                
            

                5. Adding Time to Terminologies
                Given the different approaches to modelling time described in the previous
                    section, we chose to adopt the N-ary model.
                The reason for this choice is twofold. First of all, the N-ary relations approach
                    is supported by the Ontology Engineering and Patterns Task Force of the Semantic
                    Web Best Practices and Deployment Working Group.https://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/ Secondly, with
                    respect to the perdurantist approach, the N-ary model requires the introduction
                    of a smaller number of objects and thus outperforms the
                        4D-fluents representation in terms of required assertions (axioms) and
                        consequently in reasoning time
                    .
                In order to formalize terminology evolution following the N-ary approach, we took
                    inspiration from the model introduced by Preventis et al. (2014)The
                        plug-in for Protégé CHRONOS, devoted to creating and editing temporal
                        ontologies in OWL, is based on this model. to handle temporal
                    ontologies in OWL. In particular, we introduced the following entities: 
                        the class Event, which represents the reification of a
                            property holding in a certain time. To model the class Event we used the relative type dcmitype:Event taken from the Dublin Core
                            Metadata Initiative (DCMI) and defined as a non-persistent, time-based occurrencehttp://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Event;
                        the object property during, having the class dcmitype:Event as domain and the class time:ProperInterval of the OWL-Time ontology
                            as range. The latter is defined as a temporal
                                entity with non-zero extent or duration, i.e. for which the value of
                                the beginning and end are different.https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/#time:ProperInterval
                            during has been modelled as a sub-property of dcterms:date (described as a point or period of time associated with an event in
                                the lifecycle of the resource) of the DCMI
                                    vocabularyhttp://purl.org/dc/terms/date;
                        the object property temporalProperty,
                            which relates individuals of the class dcmitype:Event respectively to the source and to the target
                            individuals of the original property which has been reified. As we will
                            see in detail shortly, the object properties that are converted into
                            temporal ones are formalised as sub-properties of temporalProperty.
                    
                Following the N-ary approach outlined above, the terminological layer of our
                    model was formalised by extending the lemon model. The model does
                    not contain a complete collection of linguistic categories; consequently, it
                    builds on Lexinfo ontologyPlease refer to https://www.lexinfo.net/
                    in order to provide a vocabulary to describe the properties of linguistic
                    objects. More specifically, the four lexico-semantic relationships defined in
                    Lexinfo, namely synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy, hyponymyIn this paper, we
                        considered exclusively these properties. Other lexico-semantic properties
                        can be taken into account as well, for example translation defined in
                        Lexinfo vocabulary (see https://www.lexinfo.net/ontology/3.0/lexinfo). were
                        temporalised (temporalSynonym, temporalAntonym,
                        temporalHypernym, and temporalHyponym) and thus converted into sub-properties of temporalProperty to indicate their involvement in a
                    temporal event. The same was done for the properties ontolex:reference, which links every individual of the ontolex:LexicalSense class to a concept defined in an
                    ontology, and ontolex:sense, linking an individual
                    of the class ontolex:LexicalEntry to a specific
                    sense.
                In addition, each of these relations was reified and converted into subclasses of
                    the class dcmitype:Event: senseEvent representing the reification of sense relation, referenceEvent representing the reification of the
                    relation linking a sense and an ontology concept, equivalentEvent, incompatibleEvent,
                        broaderEvent, narrowerEvent representing respectively the reification of
                    synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy, hyponymy relations holding between two
                    senses.
                The class dcmitype:Event as well as its subclasses
                    mentioned above are related to the class time:ProperInterval through the object property
                    during.
                So, for example, in order to represent the temporal synonymy (Figure 5), the
                    class equivalentEvent is related to the class
                        time:ProperInterval through the relation temporalSynonym, specifying the time period in which
                    the relation of synonymy holds between two senses.
                As we can see, the introduction of an intermediate object, namely the individual
                    of the class equivalentEvent, splits the static
                    relation linking a subject and an object into two parts. Instead of a single
                    triple linking two senses (s1 sense
                            s2), two triples are created, in
                    which the individual of the class equivalentEvent
                    appears as subject in one case and as object in the other.
                
                    Synonymy is represented as a temporal event that occurs during an
                        interval: sense sa of a certain
                        lexical entry is asserted to be synonym of sense sb of another lexical entry in a specific time interval
                            i.
                    A flowchart beginning with the EquivalentEvent.
                    
                
                However, this is not enough. As we underlined above, to define in which period a
                    term is used with a certain sense and to denote a specific concept, scholars
                    need to resort to textual sources.
                As a result, our model is based on the key concept of attestation; more
                    specifically, the senses of a term are linked to the text where they are
                    attested, and for each text the writing time is defined by means of specific
                    relations. To represent texts and attestations, as the main entities
                    constituting the textual layer of our model, we introduced the following
                    entities: 
                        the class Text, which represents every
                            work produced in a written form. As many methodological and theoretical
                            works have underlined over the years, the notion of text is highly
                            complex and culturally rich and, thus, difficult to define and
                            formalize. A detailed discussion is beyond the scope of this article.
                            The term text is to be understood here in a broad
                            sense, including entities that are very different from each other, such
                            as books, published articles, handwritten notes, drafts of unfinished
                            works etc. It can be considered equivalent to the type
                                    Text as defined in the Dublin
                            Core Metadata Initiative Type Vocabulary (dcmitype:Text), namely a resource
                                whose content is primarily words for reading.http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Text If scholars need
                            to use vocabularies providing more subtle distinctions, many models for
                            representing documents in Linked Data have been already proposed,
                            offering an opportunity for high quality bibliographic data to be
                            exposed to the Semantic Web, such as FRBR (Functional Requirements for
                            Bibliographic Records)  or Bibframe
                            (Bibliographic Framework) . Importantly
                            enough, if a different vocabulary is adopted, the validity of our model
                            is not compromised;
                        the object property hasAttestation, which
                            relates a sense, instance of the class ontolex:LexicalSense, to an instance of the class dcmitype:Text; a few works about the modeling
                            of the attestation of a term in a document have been already done 
                            ; for the sake of reuse of existing
                            vocabularies we adopted the hasAttestation property defined by the LAWD
                            (Linked Ancient World Data) ontologyhttp://lawd.info/ontology/hasAttestation;
                        the object property hasWritingTime,
                            defined as a subproperty of dcterms:date,
                            which relates an individual of the class dcmitype:Text to an individual belonging to the class
                                time:ProperInterval of the OWL-Time
                            ontology.
                     It is up to the scholar to define the boundaries of the writing
                    interval, which can be qualitative or quantitative. In fact, only in rare cases
                    he/she can define with certainty the extent of the period in which an author has
                    worked on drafting a text, with the aid of internal elements or external sources
                    (for example, the author explicitly declares that he/she has written that work
                    in a certain period, etc.).
                In most cases, on the contrary, temporal information on the writing process is
                    vague and ambiguous and partially bounded intervals (before
                        X, after Y, etc.) need to be defined.
                    Instead of specifying the exact duration or the starting and ending points in
                    time, scholars describe intervals with respect to their mutual relations, by
                    establishing the terminus post quem or the terminus ante
                        quem, namely the limits of the possible range of dates in which a
                    work has been written.It is important to underline that every relation
                        defined by the scholar is - by default - considered valid for the entire
                        time interval of the reference corpus.
                As for published texts, instead of the hasWritingTime property, the dcterms:issuedhttp://purl.org/dc/terms/issued can be used, with the year
                    of publication constituting the end of the drafting period.
                An overview of the model is illustrated in Figure 6.
                
                    Overview of the proposed model. (a) the textual layer is constituted by
                        texts and attestation. (b) the terminological layer relies on a N-ary
                        version of lemon, where each reified class is an event having a
                        temporal extent. (c) the ontological layer concerns the formal definitions
                        of the concepts denoted by the terms and it is described with OWL.
                    A visualization of layers of the proposed model.
                    
                
                To take maximum advantage of the adoption of OWL as the representation language
                    of the resource, we have also conceived a set of SWRL rules to automatize the
                    attribution of some temporal information.
                The following rule states that, if a sense is attested in a text written in a
                    certain time interval, then that sense exists during the
                    same interval.
                Text(?t) ^ time:ProperInterval(?i) ^ hasWritingTime(?t, ?i) ^
                    ontolex:LexicalEntry(?l) ^ ontolex:LexicalSense(?s) ^ isAttestedIn(?s, ?t)
                    ^ ontolex:sense(?l, ?s) ^ swrlx:createOWLThing(?se, ?s) ⇾
                    senseEvent(?se) ^ temporalSense(?l, ?se) ^ temporalSense(?se, ?s) ^ during(?se,
                    ?i)
                More specifically, given a text t written in a time interval
                        i (defined as an instance of time:ProperInterval),
                    and given a lexical entry l with a lexical sense s
                    (these two related to each other through the synchronic ontolex:sense relation)
                    attested in text t, then l has sense s
                    (in a diachronic perspective) during the interval i. The premise of
                    the rule is composed of the following steps: i) an anonymous individual
                        se is created ex novo in the antecedent part of
                    the rule using the createOWLThing built-in relationhttps://github.com/protegeproject/swrlapi/wiki/ExtensionsBuiltInLibrary;
                    ii) se is defined, in the consequent part, as an event representing
                    the reified relation (in particular by instantiating it as a member of the class
                        senseEvent); iii) the property temporalSense is
                    used to relate the lexical entry l to se and, in turn,
                    to relate se to sense s; iv) finally, the event
                        se is defined as happening in the same time interval
                        i during which the text has been written.
                If the sense of a lexical entry is attested in more than one text (each one
                    written in a specific temporal interval), the rule will be fired for each text,
                    thus relating the lexical entry to that sense in a more complex period
                    constituted of multiple time intervals.
                Similarly, the temporal validity of the ontolex:reference relation,
                    linking each ontolex:LexicalSense to one and only one concept of an
                    ontology, can be inferred from the writing time of the text as well, using the
                    following SWRL rule:
                Text(?t) ^ time:ProperInterval(?i) ^ hasWritingTime(?t, ?int) ^
                    ontolex:LexicalSense(?s) ^ isAttestedIn(?s, ?t) ^ Concept(?c) ^
                    ontolex:reference(?s, ?c) ^ swrlx:createOWLThing(?re, ?c) ⇾
                    referenceEvent(?re) ^ temporalReference(?s, ?re) ^ temporalReference(?re, ?c)
                    ^ during(?re, ?i)
                If a sense s is linked to a concept c through the
                    (synchronic) ontolex:reference property, and if s is
                    attested in a specific text t written in the time interval
                        i, then, in a diachronic perspective, the relation reference
                    holds in the same time interval i as well. In other words, the fact
                    that a word is used with a particular sense in a specific text is equivalent to
                    saying that in that period that term was used to express that specific
                    concept.
                Figures 7 and 8 show respectively how the temporal versions of ontolex relations
                        ontolex:sense and ontolex:reference can be
                    automatically inferred by a reasoner and represented in our N-ary model starting
                    from the writing time of texts.
                
                    Classes and properties appearing in solid lines constitute the synchronic
                        part of the resource. Elements in dashed lines, representing the temporal
                        version of the ontolex:sense relation, can be automatically
                        implied by the firing of the SWRL rule.
                    Flow chart beginning with the SenseEvent.
                    
                
                
                    Temporalization via reification of the ontolex:reference relation.
                    Flow chart beginning with the ReferenceEvent.
                    
                
                We are also working at defining other rules taking into account the relations of
                    synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy, and hyponymy, with the aim of automatizing the
                    creation of their diachronic counterparts, with the addition of Allen’s
                    relations described in Section 4.1.
            

                6. The Construction of a Diachronic Resource: the Saussure Case Study
                Ferdinand de Saussure (Geneva, 1857-1913), the father of general linguistics,
                    never published his theories on general linguistics and semiotics in an organic
                    work. He strove to structure the flow of his thoughts and ideas in handwritten
                    notes, which are often characterized by a synthetic, fragmentary and hermetic
                    nature. These manuscripts display an obsessive and constant search for clear,
                    effective and unambiguous terms, against the ineptie de la
                        terminologie courante (Letter to Meillet written in 1984, see Benveniste 1964). He changed the meaning to
                    some terms over time, assigned additional specific meanings to already existing
                    terms, used some expressions ephemerally, and even forged new words. This
                    terminological fluctuation reflects the difficulties underlying every process of
                    theoretical creation and sheds light on the evolutionary dynamics through which
                    concepts take shape and cut through language to finally find their linguistic
                    expression. This process of rumination
                     is typical when dealing with theoretical
                    terminologies as in the case of Saussure, who tries to revolutionize the current
                    linguistic vision and to lay the foundations of linguistics as a science.
                Saussure’s terminology has been the subject of numerous studies 
                    
                    . In 2011 the first electronic thesaurus of
                    Saussure's terminology, named Simple_FdS
                    , was built as part of the project Per una edizione digitale dei manoscritti di F. de
                        Saussure, coordinated by then President of the Cercle Ferdinand de
                    Saussure Daniele Gambarara.
                The architecture of Simple_FdS was based on the
                    lexical model SIMPLE  and was therefore inspired by
                    the Generative Lexicon theory elaborated by Pustejovsky (1995). The Generative Lexicon theory, mainly
                    applied to general language, has proved to be very effective in the description
                    of specialized language and terminological lexicons as well (for example Aráuz et al. 2012, Sánchez Ibáñez and García Palacios 2014),
                    as it makes it possible to enrich the range of conceptual relations which is
                    traditionally based on generic-specific and part-whole relations.
                Initially, the electronic lexicon was conceived as static and no diachronic
                    aspects were taken into account. Recently, as we shall illustrate in Section
                    6.1, the model here proposed has been adopted to convert this terminological
                    resource from a static repository into a dynamic one.
                As underlined in Section 2, in diachronic terminology the textual dimension plays
                    a crucial role. Consequently, the first step was to build a good corpus, able to
                    represent the diachronic evolution we want to study. The texts included in
                    Saussure’s corpus can be considered as highly representative of diachronic
                    evolution of Saussure’s terminology, embracing all the thirty-seven years in
                    which the intellectual activity of the Genevan linguist unfolded. The period
                    covered by the corpus ranges from 1874 - when Saussure wrote his first Essai pour réduire les mots du grec, du latin & de
                        l'allemand à un petit nombre de racines - until 1911, the year in
                    which he took the third course of general linguistics, the last academic
                    teaching held before his death, which occurred in 1913 after a long illness.
                Let us see in detail an example of the formalisation of the terminological
                    changes occurring in Saussure's writings.
                
                    6.1 Temporalizing Saussure's Terminology: the Case of
                            Signe
                    As is well known, Saussure's theories have been particularly influential in
                        semiotic studies. He emphasized first the dyadic and complex nature of
                        linguistic sign, which consists of two heterogeneous entities: a signifier
                            (signifiant), namely the hearer’s psychological
                        impression of a sound, and a signified (signifié), i.e. a
                        concept, an abstract idea. This terminology - still in use today - was
                        introduced by the Genevan linguist at the end of his life, after a long
                        theoretical reflection emerging in many of his handwritten pages.
                    Here, as an example, the concept of SIGNIFIER was chosen and the formal
                        representation of the different terms Saussure used over time to designate
                        this concept is illustrated, in accordance with the N-ary model we propose
                        here. In the following, the relationships and the classes taken from
                        existing standard vocabularies will be indicated with prefixes of the
                        respective vocabularies.
                    The concept of SIGNIFIER is denoted by many different terms in Saussurean
                        manuscripts, such as signe, image
                            acoustique, image verbale, image
                            vocale, image auditive,
                            son, forme. More specifically, the
                        term signe is attested intermittently from 1891 to 1911 in many works, such
                        as De la double essence du langage, Status et Motus,
                            Notes Item, Troisième Cours de linguistique générale etc. To
                        formally represent this, the instance signe_sense, belonging to
                        the ontolex:LexicalSense class, was created and linked - by
                        means of the relation isAttestedIn - to the instances of the
                        class dcmitype:Text representing all the works where the term
                        occurs. The writing period of each text was formally defined. Here the case
                        of Double Essence du language is shown. The
                        instance Double_Essence_Writing_Time of the class
                            time:ProperInterval (subclass of
                        time:Interval) was created and linked to the instance
                            Double_Essence through the relation
                            hasWritingTime. The writing interval of this work, which is
                        supposed to range from 1891 to 1892,See Saussure’s letter to Gaston
                            Paris (30 December 1891). On the date of this manuscript, see Gambarara
                                (2009). was formally
                        defined by linking the instance Double_Essence_Writing_Time
                        through the relation time:hasBeginning to an instance of the
                        class time:Instant, defined by the Data Property
                            XSDDateTime with value 1891-01-01T00:00:00 as well as through the relation
                            time:hasEnd to an instance of the class
                            time:Instant, defined by the Data Property
                            XSDDateTime with value 1892-12-31T00:00:00. The same formalisation was performed for
                        each work where this sense of signe was attested.
                    As described in Section 5, on the basis of the N-ary approach here adopted,
                        ontolex relations were reified and the following classes were introduced as
                        subclass of dcmitype:Event: broaderEvent
                        (reification of the hypernym relation); narrowerEvent
                        (reification of the hyponym relation); incompatibleEvent
                        (reification of the antonymy relation); equivalentEvent
                        (reification of the synonymy relation), referenceEvent
                        (reification of the inter-level relation reference) and finally
                            senseEvent (reification of the relation linking a lexical
                        entry to its senses).
                    By firing the two rules illustrated in Section 5, the classes
                            referenceEvent and senseEvent were
                        automatically populated. More specifically, in accordance with the first
                        rule, the instance signe_sense_ts was created and linked by
                        means of the relation temporalSense both to
                            signe_sense (individual of the
                            ontolex:LexicalSense class) and to signe_entry
                        (individual of the ontolex:LexicalEntry class). Similarly, by
                        firing the second rule, the individual
                            signe_sense_ref_signifiant_concept was created and linked
                        by the relation temporalReference both to
                            signe_sense and to an ontology concept, described in the
                            Simple_FdS ontology.
                    As underlined above, a terminological fluctuation can be observed in
                        Saussure's work as regard to the designation of the concept SIGNIFIER.
                    An attempt to completely renew semiotic terminology is attested in the
                        so-called Notes Items. In these handwritten
                        pages, defined by Stetter (1979) as a
                            fragment sémiologique central, Saussure’s
                        reflection upon linguistic sign achieved extraordinary theoretical heights.
                        Many heterodox neologisms were introduced, such as sème,
                            sème linguistique, aposème,
                            kenôme, sôme,
                            contre-sôme etc. Here the
                            material part of linguistic sign, namely the
                            signifier, is denoted in certain passages by the
                        term aposème. This terminology is abandoned later and the
                        term signe continues to be used to indicate at the same
                        time the material part of the linguistic sign and the
                        whole, namely the combination of SIGNIFIED (concept) and SIGNIFIER (acoustic
                        image). In order to avoid the confusion that the polysemy of the term
                            signe generated in his students, Saussure introduced
                            in extremis the term signifiant,
                        during his last course on general linguistics in 1911. He proposed thus to
                        retain the word signe to designate the linguistic entity
                        as a whole, and to replace the dyad signe and
                            concept respectively by signifiant and
                            signifié.
                    To formalise this terminological fluctuation, the instance
                            signe_sense_syn_aposème_sense of the
                            equivalentEvent class was created and the static triple
                            (signe_sense
                        lexinfo:synonymy aposème_sense) was split into the following
                        two triples in accordance with the N-ary model: (signe temporalSynonym
                            signe_sense_syn_aposème_sense) and
                            (signe_sense_syn_aposème_sense temporalSynonym aposème).
                        The instance signe_sense_syn_aposème_sense was then linked to
                        the interval Notes_Item_Writing_Interval by means of the
                        relation during.
                    In a similar way, the instance signe_sense_syn_signifiant_sense
                        of the equivalentEvent class was created and linked via
                            temporalSynonym to the individual signifiant.
                        The instance signe was in turn linked - by means of the same
                        relation - to the instance signe_sense_syn_signifiant_sense,
                        belonging to the reified class equivalentEvent. Finally, the
                        instance was linked to the interval troisième_Cours_Interval
                        (with beginning 1910 and end 1911) by means of the relation
                            during.
                
                
                    6.2 Querying Saussure's Diachronic Terminology
                    Such a formalization, even if complex and redundant, makes it possible to
                        reconstruct on a timeline the evolution of the lexical-semantic
                        relationships between senses as well as the relations holding between senses
                        and concepts, and then to answer complex and sophisticated queries. Here are
                        just a few of the many queries which can be performed: 
                            Which are the terms used over time to denote a concept
                                    c?
                            Which are the terms attested in a specific time interval
                                    i and used to denote a concept
                                c?
                            Which are the terms attested in a specific time interval
                                    i which are synonym (antonym or hypernym or
                                hyponym) of the term t?
                            Which are the terms synonyms of the term t in a
                                specific text T?
                            Which are the concepts denoted by the term t over
                                time?
                            Which are the concepts denoted by the term t in a
                                specific time interval i?
                        
                    Returning to our Saussure’s case study, let us suppose, for example, that
                        scholars would like to know which terms have been used by the Genevan
                        linguist over time as synonyms of the term signe (in the
                        sense of signe linguistique, namely l’union de l’idée avec ce produit phonatoire).
                    The query results are represented here in the form of a graph (Figure 9), as
                        they appear in LexO, a collaborative web editor of lexical and
                        termino-ontological resources, developed by the Institute of Computational
                        Linguistics of the Italian National Research Council (ILC-CNR) and already
                        used within several research projects, such as DiTMAO  and Totus Mundus .For the time being, LexO supports the uploading of diachronic
                            resources, which are built according to the N-ary model, and offers a
                                Question Answering system, implemented
                            as a user-friendly interface composed of several controlled natural
                            language templates. Each template makes it possible to formulate a query
                            in controlled natural language thanks to dropdown menus. For further
                            extensions of the tool LexO, see Section 7.
                    
                        The synonyms of the term signe used by Saussure
                            between 1890 and 1911
                        Screenshot of interface showing synonyms of
                                signe.
                        
                    
                    As clearly appears in the graph, the formalization previously described makes
                        it emerge immediately Saussure’s unceasing and obsessive work in search for
                        the term that best represented the concept.
                    In an initial period, spanning approximately from 1891 and 1892, Saussure
                        introduces three interesting neologisms: signe-idée,
                            son-idée and forme-sens. These
                        three nominal compounds well reflect the fact that the linguistic sign is
                        composed of two parts that are closely connected as the two sides of a piece
                        of paper. In effect, the bipartite structure of the terms mirrors the dyadic
                        nature of the linguistic sign. Each element of the compound denotes one of
                        the two parts composing the linguistic sign. More specifically, the first
                        constituent of the compound refers to the signifier, i.e. the sound-image
                            (signe, son,
                            forme), while the second element denotes the
                        conceptual side, the idea conveyed by the sign (idée,
                            sens).
                    Later, in a time span ranging from 1899 to 1903, Saussure renames
                            signe as sème and distinguishes it
                        from its material constituent, named
                            aposème or sôme and from its
                        conceptual part, designated as parasôme or
                            contre- sôme, thus introducing a constellation of
                        neologisms derived from ancient Greek, as is usual in scientific
                        terminology. All these neologisms are abandoned and no longer adopted by the
                        Genevan linguist who prefers to continue using more traditional terms such
                        as mot, terme, signe
                            linguistique. These terms are all attested in the third course
                        of general linguistics held by Saussure in Geneva between 1910 and 1911.
                        Here Saussure definitely chooses the term signe to
                        indicate the whole resulting from the association of form, named
                            signifiant, and meaning, named
                            signifié, thus resolving the ambiguity that until
                        then had characterized the term signe: L'ambiguïté disparaîtrait si l'on désignait les trois
                            notions ici en présence par des noms qui s'appellent les uns les autres
                            tout en s'opposant. Nous proposons de conserver le mot signe pour
                            désigner le total, et de remplacer concept et image acoustique
                            respectivement par signifié et signifiant; ces derniers termes ont
                            l’avantage de marquer l’opposition qui les sépare soit entre eux, soit
                            du total dont ils font partie. [...]
                        .
                    Another query focussing on the period of attestation of the term
                            signe in all its meanings brings out this ambiguity
                        more clearly, as illustrated in Figure 10.
                    
                        The attestation period of the term signe in its
                            three meanings.
                        Screenshot of the interface showing the meaning
                                signe during its attestation period.
                        
                    
                    The green bar represents the period in which every sense is attested;
                        clicking on it in LexO interface the complete list of all the works where
                        the term occurs is provided.
                    As the graph shows, signe is used in the same period - and in
                        the same texts - with two different meanings, namely to indicate the most
                            concrete part of the linguistic sign
                            (signe sense-2) as well as to denote the union of a
                        concept and a form (signe sense-3).Signe
                                sense-1 refers to any material entity to which we
                            associate a sense. This meaning is not taken into account here, as not
                            relevant for the purposes of this discussion. This polysemy
                        generates ambiguity, and – as we know – ambiguity should be strongly avoided
                        in terminology where, according to GTT, the term must be monosemic and the
                        concept unambiguous. Saussure is aware of this and therefore during his last
                        course on general linguistics – and more precisely on May 19 1911 – proposes
                        to preserve the term signe in its third sense and to
                        replace it with the neologism signifiant as for the
                        second meaning.
                    As Saussure’s case study demonstrates, models and tools devoted to
                        representing and querying diachronic terminological resources play a crucial
                        role in order to better understand the terminological fluctuation and the
                        mobile and progressive conceptualisation which characterize some unstable
                        phases of science.
                
            

                7. Conclusion and Next Steps
                Representing the diachronic evolution of terminological and conceptual data in a
                    formal way constitutes a challenge, since standard formalisms adopted in the
                    Semantic Web for the representation of data have mainly been conceived for
                    static and monotonic information.
                In this work we have proposed a Semantic Web-based model for representing in an
                    explicit and formal way the diachronic evolution of concepts and terms in a
                    given domain, accompanied by a concrete use case focussing on the evolution of
                    linguistic terminology as attested in Ferdinand De Saussure’s writings. The
                    temporalization approach illustrated here is domain independent and can be
                    virtually applied to any RDF data model. The main drawback is that such an
                    approach requires a significant design effort in modelling and encoding specific
                    sets of temporal rules. In addition, the properties to be temporalized need to
                    be already known at the modelling time. However, in slightly
                        controlled domains like terminology and lexicography,
                    our approach turns out to be effective to describe the historical development of
                    a language, and its many temporal variations.
                The next research objectives are: i) the enrichment of the model, ii) the
                    exploitation of the resource, iii) the extension of the tool LexO to support the
                    construction of diachronic resources .The
                        most recent stable version of LexO is available at https://github.com/andreabellandi/LexO-lite.
                As far as the enrichment of the model is concerned, we plan to design new SWRL
                    rules for the automatic temporalization of lexico-semantic properties holding
                    between senses, such as synonymy, antonymy etc.
                In addition, in order to manage the cases when the writing period of a text is
                    uncertain, we intend to develop an algorithm exploiting the resource for
                    automatic dating suggestion: the behaviour of terms in those texts, whose
                    writing time is known, will be used to advance hypotheses on the uncertain (or
                    even unknown) writing time periods of the other texts belonging to the corpus
                    under analysis. Needless to say, the accuracy of suggested time periods will be
                    proportionate to the amount of (certain) temporal information already encoded in
                    the diachronic resource.
                Finally, we are working to extend the tool LexO as to include the management of
                    texts and temporal information. The tool will be designed to relieve scholars
                    from the time consuming (and prone to errors) task of formalising the large
                    amount of entities required to represent the temporal information according to
                    the N-ary model. In addition, thanks to LexO scholars will not be required to
                    manage the formalisms and the languages underlying the Web Semantic technologies
                    such as RDF and OWL.
                The first extension of the tool LexO aimed at the inclusion of temporal
                    information will involve the integration of functions for the management of
                    text. As discussed in Section 2, diachronic terminology is a textual
                    terminology, and terms have to be analysed in their contexts of use. For this
                    reason, LexO will be equipped with a module through which users will be able to
                    import their documents and the relative time information (writing time, date of
                    publishing, etc.), organize them into folders, browse them and link each encoded
                    term to the relative attestations in the corpus.
            
