Title:  Prison Writer
                    as Witness: Can DH Read for Social Justice?
Volume:  015
Issue:  3
Date:  October 15, 2021
Abstract:  
                
                Drawing from a largest and first fully-searchable digital archive of non-fiction
                    essays by incarcerated people writing about their experience inside US prisons
                    and jail, the article proposes that there exists a broad, well established, but
                    underappreciated mid-range manner of reading that stands between traditional
                    close reading and computer-aided distant reading of first-person witness
                    testimony.  This mid-range or “cellular” reading method attends both to the
                    singularity of each text, and ventures widely enough to grasp that each text
                    gains credence and expository authority as one among aggregates of witness
                    testimony; it is, moreover, in facilitating such mid-range reading that DH can
                    provide readers with the foundation for moving from secondary witness and into
                    acting for social change.  
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                At 2.23 million, the inhabitants of US prisons and jails constitute a population
                    larger than Houston’s and just behind Chicago’s — a larger population than
                    sixteen American states.These states are represented by nearly one third
                        of the members of the senate; incarcerated people can vote only in Maine and
                        Vermont. Post-release re-enfranchisement policies make up a patchwork across
                        the other states . The collection,
                        archiving, and dissemination of prison witness described below is in part an
                        effort to raise the voices of incarcerated people from de facto civil death.
                     Nearly one quarter of the earth’s incarcerated human beings, and close
                    to one third of the earth’s incarcerated women, are drawn from the less than 5%
                    of people residing inside the US. 
                    . A notoriously race-driven system, poor people of
                    color live these numbers , while over 6,000-US confinement facilities, as well as the police,
                    courtrooms and prisons stand virtual lightyears away from moneyed white living
                    rooms where they appear as subjects of uncounted television dramas (and regular
                    humor) . As long as incarcerated people remain either
                    data points without faces or voices, or the criminal habitués of fearful popular
                    imagination, they are easily dismissed as 2.23M units of a type, rather than
                    being perceived as the nation’s fourth largest city of fathers and mothers,
                    brothers and sisters, grandparents and grandchildren, wives and husbands. 
                The aim of this essay is to describe one instance of digital humanities practices
                    working not only in contradistinction from retro-humanism
                     — the replication of traditional canons on line —
                    but as an irruptive, discursive intervention into the dis-equalizing social
                    practices from which retro-humanism might be counted as one distraction. It
                    describes an instance in which DH’s signature ability to close spaces between
                    people and archives seeks to close the social distance
                    between those populations that determine criminal punishment and those upon whom
                    punishments land, a distance that has been shown to mark nations where penal
                    practice is most harsh . The essay will
                    describe the organic emergence and growth of The American Prison Writing
                    Archive, an archive of first-person non-fiction essays by incarcerated people
                    that continues a 231-year history of American literary resistance to a
                    dis-equalizing institution that over the past forty years has grown into the
                    unprecedented American penal state
                    . While the regular calls for DH to engage with
                    inequality, social injustice, and cultural critique assume DH as an extant
                    practice that needs to reassess its premises and methods 
                    
                    
                    
                     , this paper describes an instance of marginalized
                    voices forcing a break out of prisons and into DH, and of their driving the
                    metadata behind the search facets availed to archive visitors. Roopika Risam
                    notes that Without attention to the omissions that exist
                        within digital humanities scholarship, the field risks replicating the
                        exclusions of a dominant culture that already relegates difference to its
                        margins
                    . Here I describe a project that grew not from a
                    decision to address such DH omissions but that evolved into the digital in the
                    effort simply to keep up with the insistent will of those omitted by state
                    confinement to press their case for inclusion in, and thus expansion of public
                    discussion of US carceral practice. The APWA evolved from the labor of actors
                    among the very populations that have historically been marginalized by criminal
                    justice involvement — a testimonial action that, like other witness literatures,
                    demands its own manner of reading. Amid debates surrounding traditional close
                    and computation-enabled distant reading 
                    , this essay documents the inception and rapid
                    growth of a literary corpus that demands what I will describe as mid-range or
                    cellular reading — a position that not only has a well-established history as a
                    means of intervention in dis-equalizing social practices, but that is the apt
                    response to what incarcerated writers do: write for 2.23 million others while
                    making singular statements. The essay suggests that DH's definitive work of
                    closing material distances is the work to which incarcerated and otherwise
                    confined writers have always aspired: to broach walls (material, social,
                    cultural, of prisons, plantations, death camps) and thus to expose life inside
                    to readers outside, creating public interfaces in resistance to the prison’s
                    founding purpose in legal quarantine from the public sphere’s discursive life
                        
                    . My claim is that whenever DH engages directly with
                    social injustice — let alone when those whose inequality has been socially and
                    legally sanctioned demand a place on digital platforms — DH is best assessed by
                    what it does or aspires to enable among social agents; and such enabling cannot
                    come solely through text analysis, text mining, or close reading, but must come,
                    if it seeks to affect change in practice, through a mid-range reading that
                    receives texts and affects readers as these texts are intended by documentary
                    witnesses: as singular statements that assume and offer context-dependent
                    representative testimony for a collective body. Witness literatures are by
                        nature representative in this way , even where
                        the witnessed event is not one seated in collectively sanctioned practice.
                        See, for example, Our Marathon [2013] at https://marathon.library.northeastern.edu/. When
                    witness-based, text-driven DH projects venture into social justice work, they
                    step onto a well-warn path behind those who have helped to disseminate slave,
                    Holocaust, and other witness literatures, whose reception incurs concrete social
                    effects. These effects have in the past been achieved without the benefits of
                    data mining or enlisting close reading techniques. They have, rather, come about
                    with acknowledgment of the singular human dignity of each witness, at the same
                    time that these witnesses have joined into a testamentary chorus of those on the
                    receiving end of dis-equalizing and dehumanizing practices . It is this mid-range reading that DH can aspire
                    to enable and accelerate as a social justice project. Computational methods can
                    help us to decide where to look and help us to look deeper and wider in the
                    archive; they cannot reveal to us how to feel, react, or take action in the face
                    of direct testimony to what the law looks like from the ends of fists and batons
                    inside walled and razor-wired institutions; and it is the moral choice to act
                    that is the beginning of changed practice. Computation can, however, atomize the
                    foundation in human witness that the archive can provide for action. Our primary
                    trust must and can confidently reside in the incarcerated (and the
                    detained, the enslaved…); the voices from inside generously usher us forward
                    into America’s Fourth City. These are teachers who want us to learn everything
                    we can about closed spaces where the law’s violence is always on open display.
                    The archive thus makes possible text analysis that will be of most concrete
                    value when, beyond mining the words of incarcerated people, it is guided by the
                    intentions of those inside. From the start, the APWA has prioritized respectful
                    and non-discriminating posting of incarcerated people’s first-person witness to
                    carceral experience; its faceted search capacities have been built exclusively
                    upon metadata provided by incarcerated people, who complete a questionnaire that
                    welcomes unprogrammed responses. (The questionnaire is linked at the APWA site.
                    See https://apw.dhinitiative.org/collection-description.) Other than a
                    signature granting one-time publication rights and contact information, all
                    information is voluntary. The archive accepts this compromise regarding
                    identifying information in face of the need for contributors to protect
                    themselves and to be given full control over their representation. Writers can
                    publish anonymously or under pen names. As described below, search terms for
                    text analysis are now in development with a consultant who has served
                    thirty-eight years in prison and who is helping to build a team of incarcerated
                    and formerly incarcerated advisors. Every step taken outside prison walls has
                    been and will continue to be guided by those inside.In this spirit, the
                        preliminary list of search terms has been drawn from the index of Fourth City, described below. Early planning for
                        and work on text analysis has been conducted at DePaul University, whose
                        mission is to serve marginalized populations  and whose library has a history of thoughtful handling of prison-born
                        texts 
                    
                
                Enlisting DH platforms for concrete social interventions is now vigorous
                    practice,  See, for example, Cong-Huyen 2013, the Ferguson Syllabus at
                            https://sociologistsforjustice.org/ferguson-syllabus/in, and the
                        Mellon-supported April 2018 Our (Digital) Humanities
                        Conference at Le High University, a three-day meeting of social justice
                        organizations working through (or substantially supplemented by) digital
                        platforms http://wordpress.lehigh.edu/odh2018/about/. and such work
                    requires ongoing theoretical revision and questioning. Yet it may also be
                    under-explicated. Martha Nell Smith asks regarding DH projects, How have these items of knowledge and the organizations and
                        working groups who made them come into being?
                    . This question should invite theoretical
                    consideration; here the question is addressed as literally as possible, as a
                    question about inception, sources, aspirations, outcomes, and potentials; and I
                    suggest that it is in historicizing the trajectory of DH social practice that we
                    set the grounds for the questions that theory might ask and address, thus
                    extracting theory from practice. 
                As Barbara Christian reminds us, theory not based in practice is bound to remain
                    elitist . In describing the analog birth and
                    into-digital growth of the APWA, I present an instance of DH serving not simply
                    as a means to expose and study a dis-equalizing institution, but to provide a
                    platform where incarcerated and free people can meet to begin setting the
                    grounds to generate new terms for critical legal and penal theory, and for
                    planning (or conceiving an end to) new penal practice. When theory grows out of
                    practice, it not only avoids elitism; it sets the stage for intervention. In
                    helping broach the walls of prisons (or detention centers, or other
                    state-sponsored lines of confinement), DH practice can constitute a
                    transformative, political action, thus shift[ing] the focus
                        of DH from technical processes to political ones
                    .  The need for expository action
                        regarding prisons is particularly acute when traditional journalism has been
                        largely barred from such work .  This
                    essay suggests that DH can — as methodology — not only host witness born from
                    the lived experiences of difference in the U.S.
                     , but can also, if read as the dis-equalized direct
                    us, facilitate moving the incarcerated to the front lines of efforts to uncloak
                    the work of an institution built to enforce all manner of inequalities and to
                    censor the dis-equalized. The distant v. close reading debate in DH  replicates questions around how to balance addressing
                    mass incarceration as a statistical fact — as a data set — and/or as a human and
                    humanly articulated condition experienced and documented by discrete individuals
                        . I want to argue for a plenum of reading
                    proximities by advocating for the neglected middle-range of reading as more than
                    a space of transition between close and distant reading.  Franco Moretti
                        himself writes in support of the radical diversity of
                            intellectual positions
                        
                     What I will call cellular reading is the most apt manner of reception of
                    what incarcerated writers — like other literary witnesses — do day by day,
                    decade by decade, over millions of cumulative human years: create paths for
                    readers to follow on the way to precipitating change in practice. Distant
                    reading can aid in mapping the landscape of testament to law’s violence so that
                    we know where to begin in tracking particular, and potentially class-actionable
                    paths through the daily violations of human, constitutional, and civil rights
                    and human decency inside the earth’s largest prison state; it remains in
                    mid-range reading, however, that we will see outside hearts and minds moved to
                    act.
                In the spirit of drawing theory from practice, I build my argument upon the back
                    of a biography of the project in point.
            

                The Distance from Here to There
                In the winter of 2006, I initiated a creative writing workshop inside Attica
                    Correctional Facility. The class was entirely voluntary. It offered no college
                    credit. It would not bolster anyone’s appeals for parole. Only the will to learn
                    to write had brought thirteen men serving twenty to twenty-five-to-life
                    sentences to the room. Over the ensuing ten years, the stories I read and heard
                    painted an unrolling panorama of urban battlegrounds, rural poverty, and the
                    occasional scene of suburban desperation — nearly all marked by some form of
                    addiction or mental illness — as the backdrops to the booby-trapped road that
                    runs from arrest, plea bargains or the very rare occurrence of a jury trial, to
                    incarceration in a place built to produce pain, suffering, and rural employment
                        
                    . Their stories regularly reinforced and echoed each
                    other, at the same time that each story was seated in an individual biography.
                    In turn, I could not avoid hearing their reports both closely and at some
                    distance: from the details of life in a home on a particular Bronx or Rochester
                    city block, to the public pretenders nearly all had hardly
                    spoken with before arriving in court. Over these ten years, dozens of men passed
                    through that workshop. No two were much alike. Yet they held many things in
                    common.  A core group of six men attended for most or all of ten years.
                        Such groups are never a random sampling. Prisons screen those permitted into
                        such classes, by behavior record and mental condition (inside what have
                        become America’s default mental institutions 
                        , and writers are always a subset of any
                        population.  Thus began to appear a testimonial corpus seemingly
                    pre-staged for text analysis: denial of freedom denies unlimited randomness in
                    experience. The men who joined the class were Black, Latino, Native-American,
                    Asian, and White, from large and small cities, and came from poor,
                    working-class, and, in one instance, from an affluent background. Together, they
                    offered stories of institutionalized degradation, of coping, and of unimaginable
                    resilience. But these, of course, are not the impressions one gains from
                    outside. 
                From its inception in 1790, the aim of the American penitentiary was less to cut
                    off lawbreakers from the public than the reverse 
                    
                     . In his Enquiry into the
                        Effect of Public Punishment Upon Criminals and Upon Society, Dr.
                    Benjamin Rush addressed the dangerous effects of letting the condemned speak to
                    or even be seen by the public 
                     This was not an unfounded fear. Gallows and other criminal confessions,
                        biographies, and autobiographies turned a healthy trade in colonial America.
                        As Jodi Schorb notes, Cotton Mather and (Rush’s friend) Ben Franklin both
                        profited by selling these texts (purely for moral edification, of course) to
                        colonials and to readers in England .; imprisonment would not only stanch such communication; it would
                    deter crime by allowing the images of penal suffering to expand to the limits of
                    public imagination . Prisons today have become
                    less a holding place for offenders than one relay in a closed circuit: we do not
                    need prisons in order to contain deviancy, Foucault notes; we need them to mark
                    a deviant class and thereby justify security apparatuses that both model and
                    enforce behavioral norms . Over the past forty
                    years, the abandonment of rehabilitation and embrace of punishment, or the
                        new penality, as the prison’s raison d’etre
                    , has been built on the premise that
                    incarcerated people — these (black and brown) monsters and
                        animals — simply aren’t like us
                     . The art of
                        punishing, Foucault reminds us, must rest on a
                        whole technology of representation
                    . Prison walls, today
                    as in 1790, represent law’s monopoly on legitimate violence, they contain and
                    recycle criminalized demographics, they silence the condemned, and in turn they
                    allow fantastic images of the criminalized to be spread without intervention by
                    incarcerated people themselves. The ruse that this is about public safety
                    (incarceration has a marginal effect on crime rates 
                    ) can be maintained only as long as the public is not
                    apprised of the full, if often wounded humanity of those inside. At the end of a
                    forty-year US punishment wave, Rush’s fear of incarcerated people speaking to
                    those outside is warranted not only by fear of evoking public sympathy; it would
                    rip the screen upon which an eighty-billion-dollar prison industry and popular
                    media have cast all incarcerated people as not-fully-human 
                    
                    . Their voices might dissolve public
                    moral pretense, revealing an industry built on the backs of caged and fully
                    human beings.  The national prison strike staged from August 21 to
                        September 9, 2018, was largely about just such exposure, as reflected in
                        strike demands .  Facilitating public
                    access to what goes on inside through the testimony of incarcerated people is
                    about shorting such closed circuits. It’s about revealing
                        monsters as the very able, primary witnesses to, and
                    most competent critics of the lie beneath claims of the threat that all
                    imprisoned people pose, as well as the lies of due process, judicial equity, and
                    respect for human rights. It’s about confronting and exposing the final, legally
                    sanctioned enforcer of institutionalized racism, classism, gender-ism, etc.
                The bars to the public serving as secondary witnesses to the primary witnesses of
                    prison conditions are not only made of steel; they have been forged by the
                    courts , congress , and over two generations inside American minds. From the myth of the jury
                    trial promulgated by Law and Order while only
                    2% US criminal cases ever goes to trial , to
                    the carceral soap operas of OZ and
                    Orange is the New Black, to the latest episode of
                    the human zoo carefully staged for Lockup, American
                    media have made fortunes selling misrepresentations of incarcerated people.
                The critical literature on writing by incarcerated people is growing but is still
                    in its early phase 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    . There is only one broad historical survey of US
                    prison writing, H. Bruce Franklin’s pioneering Prison
                        Literature in America: The Victim as Criminal and Artist, which
                    offers decade-by-decade readings of this work from 1798 to 1989 . This book and the texts it explicates make
                    evident, however, that for as long as the US has presented itself as a bastion
                    of liberty, equal opportunity, and judicial fairness, prison witnesses have
                    documented the nation’s working state of intersecting penal apartheids. Prisons
                    isolate. They exile. They quarantine. Yet prison witness makes clear that these
                    messages have never been simply from in there. They unearth for us the
                    silent chambers beneath the nation Americans call here.
                        Computational work on the full canon of US prison writing is thus
                        overdue.
                Franklin’s history ends in 1989, only a decade into the era of true mass-scale
                    incarceration (commonly dated from 1980). Important collections of essays by
                    political and politicized prisoners have appeared since then 
                    ; and Franklin himself has edited a survey of US
                    prison writing in the twentieth century, reaching to 1995  . But in summer 2009, as I found (again) in
                    searching out new texts for the second iteration of an undergraduate course on
                    US prison writing, there existed no broad national sampling of non-fiction
                    writing by people then living behind bars. In attending national and
                    international conferences for legal scholars and social scientists, I found that
                    even researchers who had conducted surveys or scripted interviews with
                    incarcerated people virtually all crunched this testimony into statistical
                    charts and graphs (which, for their purposes, were certainly of vital
                    importance). I heard no open ended, witness-driven testimony about carceral
                    life. I had not set out to become an editor of prison witness (let alone a
                    digital humanist), but the need — on campus and in the profession — became very
                    clear. 
                With the help of a research assistant, the first call for essays by imprisoned
                    people went out in fall of 2009. On February 1, 2014, Fourth City: Essays from the Prison in America was published,
                    including seventy-one essays from twenty-seven states . The title reflects the total population of US prisons and jails. More
                    importantly, as a first sampling of what a national gathering of contemporary
                    prison witness might reveal, the title indicates a collective experience as
                    cohesive as we might expect from citizens writing of their experience of New
                    York, LA, or Chicago. 
                From among the first forty-five essays received, eleven stable categories of
                    subject matter emerged and persisted into the final organization of the book.
                    This occurred despite the fact that incarcerated people have virtually no means
                    to communicate between facilities, let alone states, and often even between
                    cells blocks inside any one facility Facilities block communication in
                        order to thwart organization, such as that seen inside Attica in 1971 , and amid the recent prison strike, the latter
                        facilitated by contraband cell phones . ;
                    so the consistency of subjects was striking: autobiographical sketches of the
                    paths to prison, coping with prison life, slice-of-life examples of everyday
                    challenges inside, ways to seek peace, the damage incarceration does to
                    families, the injustices perpetrated inside, critiques of criminal justice
                    policy, the inadequacy of mental and physical health care, activism from inside,
                    prison reentry programs, and messages of warning or hope shouted out to kids on
                    the street or others inside. Take the state names off these essays and it is
                    impossible to tell they are not reporting from one institution committed to
                    vengeance and willful dehumanization, and where the residents struggle mightily,
                    day by day, to make lives worth the name.  One broad division is that
                        incarcerated women (roughly one tenth of the prison population) face
                        gender-specific depredations and routinized sexual threats and assault from
                        male officers, as well as disproportionate discipline for petty offenses
                            
                         among the fastest growing sector of the prison
                        population . These challenges also cross state
                        and regional lines. What the project revealed is that our Fourth City
                    is a metropolis of both willful debilitation and miraculous acts of human
                    resistance, not the least of which is the very act of bearing witness. These are
                    traits that anyone who has worked with incarcerated people might gather; one
                    could do so, however, without gaining the basis for attributing common struggles
                    and victories to a national population. But in gathering this work in a
                    relatively short period of time, from across the nation, the outline of
                    America’s carceral metropolis began to take shape.  Several of the tropes
                        found in US prison witness are also transnational — crossing biographical,
                        local, national, continental, political, and criminal boundaries and
                        conditions .
                In her 2012 essay, Why are the Humanities so White?
                    Tara McPherson distinguishes a lenticular view, in which two discrete images can
                    be seen in one frame but never at the same time (her model for the
                    separate-but-equal divide between the histories of computing and social justice
                    activism since the 1960s); and a stereoscopic view, which layers distinct
                    viewpoints on the same subject to create a sense of depth . What I had experienced inside Attica
                    and what emerged from the Fourth City solicitation
                    was stereoscoping of deeply singular voices, each implicitly demanding — like
                    the human face for camp survivor Emmanuel Levinas, like Holocaust witness for critic
                    D.G. Myers 
                     — an ethical response to the witness borne by
                    individual human beings who are also all exemplars among a mass population; such
                    ethical response, moreover, is asked of a human listener or reader equally
                    implicated in the legal order that concretely and morally marks the distance
                    between the law-breaker and the law-abiding, the condemned and the protected,
                    and those subjected to or spared by the law. Here, stereoscopicism occurs in a
                    mirror: the layered depths of witness’ testimony to law’s violence reveal the
                    degree and manners in which those outside are either spared and protected by the
                    law (especially the white middle and upper classes) or co-objects of criminal
                    justice involvement (especially poor people of color). As in reading witness
                    texts from slavery, the Holocaust, or truth and reconciliation tribunals, it is
                    impossible to hear or read prison witness without hearing echoes across
                    biographies and texts, across razor-wired facility and state (and national)
                    boundaries. It is impossible to ignore abiding tropes generated from spaces that
                    hold those stripped of civil and basic human rights and effective citizenship
                    status — spaces the absence from which marks readers as those in the name of
                    whose security such quarantine exists, or as co-subjects of policing practices
                    outside (much as looking into original stereoscopes impresses us as much with a
                    view of a past, and with location of ourselves in a present, as with
                    the subject at hand). Readers are asked at once to bear secondary witness, and
                    to accept their own positions as either those in the name of whose protection
                    incarcerated people are forced to struggle to regain their discursive existence,
                    or as the similarly hyper-policed. The light cast by prison witness casts
                    silhouettes around readers outside — silhouettes deepened as readers are exposed
                    to each successive text, in contrast to the limited effects of close reading or
                    pixilated reading at distance.
                Stereoscopism better approximates but is not, however, fundamentally adequate to
                    representing this situation, in which disparate and discrete biographies
                    intersect at singular angles with the enervating spaces of the prison and with
                    the legal positions of readers outside . Prison witness texts — in their non-interchangeability
                        and their clear linkages among themselves and in the minds of
                    readers — are best figured by a term that is at once literal and figurative, at
                    once metaphor and not, and that replicates the enunciatory moment of meeting
                    between witness and reader. This is a meeting that is not so much stereoscopic
                    as cellular, at-once literally of the body and of
                    architecture, of vulnerable flesh like the reader’s and of the stone and steel
                    that divide writer from writer and writer from reader, while each text carries
                    traces of the DNA of the next and yet remains distinct, as the condition of
                    identity and of life. Cellular reading is mid-range reading; it is reading at
                    proximal distance. No text is the whole, but the whole gains its status as
                    witness as an aggregate of each with each when each is read and held in the mind
                    as a singular whole, rather than as a mere yet-to-be-aggregated and mined data
                    vessel; authority lies in the “typical” moments across texts, while each text
                    remains absolutely authoritative regarding the experience, anger, aspirations,
                    hope, or hopelessness of its author — an author whose testimony, at the same
                    time, is shaped by widely experienced conditions: conditions implicating the
                    reader as part of the public in the public safety rationale for a city in cages. 
                Computation can accelerate location of common veins in this corpus; it can reach
                    reading communities at rates unimagined by previous witness writers in their
                    own time. DH can, in this way, facilitate a shift of authority from scholarship (or
                    state agencies) to the communities that any work can garner, as Kathleen
                    Fitzpatrick has observed . The APWA
                    also makes clear, however, the need to mind the ethical stakes here. As the
                    archive grows and computational methods are applied, the danger rises of
                    reducing back to data points the testimony of writers struggling to assert their
                    human dignity and singular integrity from among the data piles gathered by state
                    agencies and research. Computational analysis should complement and aid cellular reading; my claim is that, between academically inclined
                    close reading, and computationally enabled distant reading, it is from
                    mid-range, cellular reading that human readers will be moved to social action.
                    It is cellular reading that allows us to participate in the communities that can
                    complete the witness transaction, recognizing voices that never stand alone or
                    outside the legal matrix upon which we are all located; voices that are never
                    effective until embraced by others, and that work directly in the face of
                    organized authority that is often invisible to those outside. 
                Cellular reading is an irreversible process of revelation. Close reading one
                    piece of prison witness (or slave or Holocaust narrative) is qualitatively
                    distinct from reading five, and twenty, and a hundred; and while few readers can
                    commit to reading thousands of essays, cellular reading can set the ethical
                    context for data mining among much greater numbers.We need simply read enough to
                    see how our ability to doubt, to find excuses for testimony that reveals the
                    collective damage of collectively sanctioned and supported institutions thins
                    and vanishes as we read repeated reports on, for example, lethal medical
                    neglect, or feel the human toll paid by female victims of staff rape that
                    research shows occurs in numbers that rival reported instances of rape outside
                        . Amid multiple interfaces, some
                    readers will discover cellular links that surround and mark them as the
                    virtually law-immune or legally protected, while others will feel solidarity as
                    those living outside prison yet in subjection to the law’s pathologies.
                        Case in point: The media attention given to Henry Louis Gates’ arrest
                        for breaking into his own home, and later sharing a beer with the president
                        and the arresting officer, shows the social distance commonly assumed
                        between Harvard professors (as effectively enforcement immune) and Black men
                        (as the default objects of policing) .
                    Such cellular reading sets the grounds for what Jamie Skye
                    Bianco calls a relational ethics
                     both between writers and between writers
                    and readers, where context, affect, and embodiment …remain
                        viably dynamic and collaborative
                    . Johanna Drucker notes that situatedness and enunciation are intimately bound to each
                        other
                    . Reading prison witness reveals a causal
                    exchange relation between these moments: when incarcerated writers write of
                    their situation, the reader — as a co-subject of policing systems, or their
                    beneficiary — sees revealed their own legal situation within the current order.
                    If cultural influence is indeed at play in every act of interpretation , the interpretation of prison witness is
                    irrevocably influenced by the position of the reader within legal culture.
                    Unveiling the complexities of a city in cages, each text retains its singularity
                    even as its uniqueness is dispersed across the whole. Close reading can
                    acknowledge any one text’s ethical demand; but as the numbers of exposures grows
                    an osmotic leak occurs; we hear the reverberations of beating on one steel wall,
                    pouring and echoing into the next across facilities, and state borders, and
                    across the affective interface of writers and readers. While we may then find
                    bracing patterns in data mining the archive, it is the base in cellular reading
                    that reveals that such witness is not like reading fiction or other literary
                    texts bound by time or subject. Here, writing is not representation; it is human
                    and (re)humanizing witness to the legal and extra-legal conditions that surround
                    and demark citizenship and fully human status inside a carceral regime that, as
                    Colin Dayan notes, metes out state-sanctioned degradation …
                        propelled by a focus on personal identity [and] the terms by which
                        personality is … threatened, or removed
                    . Or, as a man from Texas writes, Ah to be a human being again! Worthy of respect and affection,
                        capable of dignity and contribution, to have a valuable life...
                    . 
                 The following excerpts are offered as examples of how closely prison witnesses
                    speak to one another’s experience, of cellular testimony to
                        state-sanctioned degradation, and as practicum in
                    readerly response: 
                
                    From Alabama:
                    In tiny surreptitious doses anesthesia is dripped into my heart — a formerly
                        complacent heart that is slowly beginning to resemble my dreadful
                        surroundings. An ache settles somewhere deep inside of me, pain linked to
                        the realization that something once deeply cherished has been stolen from me
                        during my outrageous two plus decades of incarceration. Years of sensory
                        deprivation has withered my ability to respond with anything resembling an
                        emotional reaction. 
                
                
                    From Connecticut:
                    Lately I feel like I'm suffocating. Each minute of every day is a slow
                        asphyxiation. The worst death sentence in this country is being buried alive
                        in prison without hope…. I know that in me there must be a human being
                        beneath all this agony. It is a faith belief. 
                
                
                    From Georgia:
                    After more than 10 years of continuous incarceration, I am slowly losing the
                        will to re-enter a society that has abandoned me. Contemplating this is a
                        symptom of institutionalization - I am cognizant of this fact while unable
                        to do anything to alleviate the downward spiral I'm currently experiencing.
                            
                
                
                    From California:
                    Lately I’ve been seriously deteriorating… [A]t times I get this very primal
                        urge to attack the walls, attack my captors, and try to run free.… Sometimes
                        I’ll go days without leaving the cell, without eating or showering, just
                        paralyzed over the mattress and staring at the walls and having bad dreams.
                        Or I’ll go days unable to sleep, tackling ten projects at once, punching the
                        obscene walls, talking to myself and having hallucinations and wrecked with
                        anxiety. In desperate lapses I’ll hang from a sheet around my neck for a
                        moment, or cut a vein open. 
                

                
                    From South Carolina:
                    My life was as different from Laura's [a recent suicide] as it could possibly
                        be. Two years later I was proven wrong when an officer emptied a full can of
                        pepper spray through the flap in my lock up door while I stood on the sink
                        trying to cut my wrist on the fire sprinkler. I hadn't eaten or drank
                        anything in nine days. My own girlfriend was in the cell next door loudly
                        urging me to kill myself. I am proof and testimony that if you do enough
                        time and allow yourself to become lonely enough you will turn to whatever
                        outlet you can find to ease that loneliness a little. If you are addicted
                        and obsessive by nature, as I am, then that addiction and obsession, left
                        unaddressed, will transfer itself to whatever target is available. Be it
                        starving, bingeing, exercise, purging, sex, self mutilation, I've engaged in
                        them all obsessively during the past years. 
                
                Some readers may feel in these passages a seamless continuum with the accepted
                    legal and public safety aims of incarceration. For others, such witness
                    resituates the reader vis-a-vis the law’s magnetic center in state-sponsored
                    violence . As revealing as distant
                    reading might prove, it also risks atomizing such an existential moment. This is
                    a case in which, as Cuban digital activist Ernesto Orozo remarks, answers ooze from the circumstances, and Renewed answers will always come from the resistance
                    .
                
            

                Growing into Silicon; or, They Came, so We Built It.
                The final deadline for Fourth City passed in the
                    fall of 2012. But work never stopped coming. Cover letters apologized for
                    arriving late and offered thanks for our willingness to read pages the authors
                    assumed would never see print. The initial pool of 154 essays grew to two
                    hundred, three hundred, then five hundred… Incarcerated people, given the
                    slimmest chance, were willing to risk their safety in order to get word out.
                         Incarcerated people have limited first amendment and virtually no
                        privacy rights, and courts have traditionally handed prison oversight —
                        including decisions about constitutional rights — over to prison
                        administrators themselves . See also, Robert
                        Saleem Holbrook’s essay, From Public Enemy to Enemy of
                            the State [2014] in which he
                        documents how much harsher his treatment became after he gave up violent
                        behavior and turned to writing and activism from inside. Each day
                    that I walked from the college mail center to my office, I carried yet more
                    envelopes from California and Texas, from Alabama, Oregon and Maine. 
                        Incarcerated people have no direct access to the internet; all CFEs appear
                        in hard copy print. But it was not easy finding a publisher for
                        Fourth City (which one agent called a book for people who can’t afford to buy it
                    ); in fact, I was still seeking that publisher. I had
                    tapped a vein that would not be stanched. Happily, colleagues had secured a
                    Mellon grant to start up and support digital humanities projects through
                    collaborations between Hamilton Library and Information Technology Services
                    (LITS), a newly minted Digital Humanities Initiative (DHi), and national
                    collaborators . At the end of 2012, we began our
                    conversations.
                Credit for building the platform, storage capacities, and the sustainability of
                    DHi-APWA lies with the funders and the DHi-APWA team and LITS in an ongoing,
                    layered Venn relationship; but its inception, the populating of its metadata
                    contents and resulting search facets, and the growth of its content are due to
                    the unrelenting will of those inside to bear witness.  The APWA receives
                        continuing support from DHi, the Hamilton Dean of Faculty, and, from July 1
                        2017, until June 30 of 2021, a major grant from the NEH. The APWA
                    currently hosts 3,307 essays, the equivalent of over fourty-six volumes the
                    size of Fourth City. It grows by approximately seven
                    additional volumes each year (500 essays); and that rate is largely the result
                    of a single, quarter-page solicitation in the pages of Prison Legal News, a monthly magazine dedicated to legal cases,
                    legislation, and investigative reporting of interest to incarcerated people.
                    That we receive this number of essays from a small ad is testament to the sheer
                    size of the prison population; it is that size and scale that has allowed the
                    statistical skills of the social sciences to lead the national discussion of
                    mass incarceration ; it is scale that also creates the
                    ethical dilemma that the APWA itself now poses. 
                Incarcerated people and the writers among them are the subjects of intersecting
                    statistical and documentary determinations: from so-called hot-spot policing, to
                    sentencing guidelines that determine years of punishment from a grid; from the
                    recording of their every demographic trait upon entering jail and prison, to
                    psychological profiling, to the marking of every violation they incur inside, to
                    prison, block, and cell assignment, to whether they recidivate upon release —
                    release decisions increasingly influenced by risk assessment algorithms 
                    . Such mapping and examination, Foucault writes,
                        engages [penal subjects] in a whole mass of documents
                        that capture and fix them
                    . Incarcerated people are rightly wary of
                    becoming the subjects of yet further datafication.
                At the same time that we can use computation to help map the carceral landscape,
                    socially responsible and responsive text analysis must align itself with, and
                    serve to further the struggle of incarcerated people to be heard and read on
                    their own terms, thus avoiding the danger of refracting and deflecting the work
                    of prison writers — who are themselves the select representatives for other
                    incarcerated people — through our own presumptions. In this vein, we might use
                    computational tools primarily to locate, amid a mass of essays, those subject
                    clusters that incarcerated writers make salient: such as the prison industry’s
                    financial exploitation of incarcerated people, staff assault, damage to family
                    ties, etc. Such indexing can help readers to see the pervasiveness of such
                    concerns across the nation, respect the integrity of individual writers, and
                    create the basis for focused advocacy. Text analysis can thus work for the kind
                    of social justice action that incarcerated writers
                    seek to forward. Socially conscientious data mining must recognize that witness
                    texts are not mere data, they are not simulacra. They are the literary corpus of
                    bodies and minds struggling amid the “penal harm” that the carceral state and
                    the American public has embraced for nearly have a century as an explicit aim
                        
                    . Text analysis can serve this corpus and
                    amplify its voices by maintaining to it less an analytical than an indexical
                    relationship. 
                At the other extreme from distant reading, meticulously close reading will also
                    not bring us to the understanding of prison texts and practice that prison
                    writers overwhelmingly intend. Incarcerated people know they are held inside a
                    mass-scale system. Even when they focus on their own situations, they clearly
                    understand and articulate those situations as examples, not isolated instances.
                    The image of a city in cages — while it reflects the cohesiveness of subjects
                    and themes among prison texts — moves in the direction of better focusing our
                    views of that mass into the diversity and distinctiveness of a major metropolis.
                    The APWA’s facetted and key word searches allow further granulation — by
                    demographic categories, locations, keywords, and layering of these factors.
                    Computational work, as Moretti observes, offers not an
                        obstacle, but a specific form of knowledge: fewer elements, hence a
                        sharper sense of their overall interconnection. Shapes, relations,
                        structures
                    . From their beginning in 1790, as Michael
                    Meranze points out, prisons have been spatial answers to social problems  . They are shapes and structures
                    that, as Dr. Rush intended, alienate human relations. What we should be seeking
                    from computer-aided text analysis are mappings of these shapes, structures, and
                    relations as they are reflected in their counter-discourse, in humanizing,
                    mass-scale literary resistance. This is a literature that turns the prison’s
                    shapes and structures inside out: a literary corpus that exposes the
                    denaturalizing angles, shapes, and structures of penal confinement; a corpus of
                    textualized bodies and minds and hearts, presenting for mutual exchange and
                    transformation, the shared, fluid, and ineradicably interactive humanity of
                    those whose freedom outside and unfreedom inside are built upon, and have been
                    warped by, over two hundred years of broken relationships.
                My conviction is that this damage will not be repaired by analysis alone.
                    Instead, we might approach our work as that of curation, what I would term,
                    “thick curation” — or, in a more text friendly term thick
                        indexing. The attempt here is not to follow our
                    interests in the archive, but to learn to see, and engage computation to aid our
                    learning to see law and justice as imprisoned people see them — to see, for
                    example, the wreckage that furnishes the path to so-called justice, and the ways
                    in which the law and a broken civil society have created that wreckage. Thick
                    curation and indexing will us to follow the branches of subjects and concerns
                    among incarcerated people. One model for this work is Darwin’s sketch of
                    speciation, reproduced in Moretti’s Graphs, Maps,
                        Trees (Figure 1; ).


                
                     
                    image of Darwin's sketch of speciation from Moretti's Graphs, Maps, Trees
                    
                


                Translated into a register of texts, this graph becomes an index. The following
                    lines are excerpted from a list — based on the experience of the archive’s
                    front-line readers of incoming essays, with the consultation of a formerly
                    incarcerated person — that will serve to seed further work in text analysis.


                
                    Autobiographical Paths to Prison: Social and
                                economic disadvantages; Absentee
                                        parents/damaging parenting style;
                                    Abuse;
                                    Incarcerated parents
                            Peer group or gang conformity;
                            Alcohol/drug abuse
                    Prison Damage to Family Relations: Exile from
                                family; Damaged parenting (of
                                        children);
                                    Damaged partnerships;
                                    Abandonment by loved ones;
                                    Strained relations
                            Adverse visiting conditions;
                            Resolve, steps and/or attempts to heal/maintain; Partnerships;
                                    Parenting;
                                    W/ mothers, fathers, siblings,
                            etc.
                




                Text analysis can help to populate these tiers with whole essays. Rather than
                    atomizing prison witness, this indexing model recognizes each essay, as a whole,
                    as an organic element of any map of life inside, and capable of presenting its
                    own purposes. It is important to note that nowhere does the archive suggest that
                    its makers presume to speak for incarcerated people, or presume to suggest what
                    readers will or should find there. This may be why, as the archive grows, the
                    rate of submissions increases . The APWA’s
                    credibility deepens in the eyes of incarcerated people (with the aid of
                    internet-enabled allies outside) simply because it has been trusted by other
                    incarcerated people to treat their work in whole, without editing, and without
                    secondary purposes.
                Amid a highly politicized, national debate on mass incarceration,This
                        debate involves, among others, prison abolitionists [e.g. Critical
                        Resistance], a bipartisan push to reduce prison populations and attendant
                        costs , a victim’s rights lobby largely
                        supported by prison guard unions [Page 2011], and a Trump era Department of
                        Justice seeking to restart the War on Drugs that helped bring incarceration
                        to mass scale . the archive is built on
                    trust in incarcerated people and archive visitors; it is not intended to make
                    new arguments — as Tom Scheinfeldt once claimed it may not yet be time for DH to
                    do  — but to provide a meeting place
                    where new questions can be asked about the human effects and costs of the
                    current legal order. Incarcerated people have been spoken for (and objectified,
                    medicalized, and demonized) for too long, including by academics. A thick
                    indexing method seeks to disentangle branches of consensus that appear among
                    prison witnesses even while imprisoned writers are denied communication with
                    their peers. The APWA’s sole presumption is that it can present the cells of
                    those branches and, in future, using computational aids, offer readers places to
                    start on the path of extended cellular reading. 
                While DH work shrinks physical spaces, it does not necessarily change the
                    direction of Supply (campus scholarship) to Reception (by other scholars, students, and the broader public).
                    The APWA attempts to serve as the mediating facilitator of an ambi-valent,
                    carceral margins-mainstream meeting point and
                    conversation that, among other effects, sidesteps the hack v.
                        yack I use this binary here in its crudest sense, one
                        unraveled by Nowviskie . dyad at the moment
                    theory assumes a secondary role to — and indeed grows from — an extra-academic
                    dialogic. Sociologist Bruce Western observes that the public safety returns on
                    incarceration are now badly outweighed by the social damage it imposes . The APWA offers visitors (including
                    voters) the opportunity to measure the human breadth and depth of carceral
                    damage. The project does not pose arguments but allows us to ask by implication
                    what new materialist epistemologies
                     might be possible if we resituate
                    incarcerated people from their current place in public discourse as a mass
                    deficit, to positions as our foremost authorities on what imprisoned people are,
                    what prisons actually do, the real effects of the politics and economics of the
                    criminal justice industry as a whole, and how we might proceed on the path
                    toward greater humanity in addressing all the social, civil, economic,
                    political, and ethical failures that surround crime and racialized punishment.
                    The archive allows us to consider what happens when we shift authority from
                    prison administrators, law-makers, judges, prosecutors, police, and outside
                    scholars, into the hands of the community of organic intellectuals among
                    incarcerated people. It suggests that DH social justice work is what DH/SJW
                    enables: demystification of historically dis-equalizing institutions, laying new
                    grounds for newly goaled public policy and growing consensus about the
                    practicality and moral imperative for a range of abolitions: from judicial
                    misconduct, to police violence, the knowing creation of employment deserts,
                    domestic violence, poverty, failing schools, to prisons themselves. 
                Continuing the literary legacy documented by Franklin, these writers are creating
                    what may well become one of the largest bodies of witness literature in human
                    history  Since that first call for essays in 2009, the APWA has
                        accumulated approximately 41% of the word count that The University North
                        Carolina’s Wilson Library holds in North American Slave Narratives  — narratives produced over more than a full
                        century — and at the current rate, it will double in around six years.
                     — a literary corpus only possible on a platform that can sidestep the
                    censors (market-sensitive agents, editors, and sales reps) of commercial and
                    academic analog publishing. Unlike the most salient on-line witness archives —
                    at the US Holocaust Memorial Museum [USHMM] and the University of North
                    Carolina’s Documenting the American South’s archive of slave narrative  — the APWA is a repository of primary witness
                    that expands as you read this sentence, as incarcerated people bear testimony to
                    their experience. Though already the largest such archive, it is clearly in its
                    early growth. Yet even now, its promise is clear: These writers are not only
                    getting word out about what life is like inside; many write about their lives
                    from birth to arrest, as well as through cumulative millennia of incarceration.
                    What DH work has done in this case is to build a platform not only for those
                    outside to look inside, but for those outside to see, from inside, the contours
                    of US policing, judicial, and carceral practices, as well as from the interiors
                    of the homes and communities affected by poverty, untreated addiction and mental
                    illness, unemployment, crime, and the damaging feedback loop of mass-scale
                    punishment that criminalizes poor people of color, the gender non-conforming,
                    and the mentally ill — punishment that can exacerbate the very problems that
                    precipitate crime . That closed loop is only possible
                    as long as the prison’s walls are reinforced by political and cultural circuits
                    that remain unbroken, as long as the public sees its social distance from the
                    condemned as based in moral virtue (rather than the chances of birth) and thus
                    lives complacently with walls of concrete while consuming the salacious media
                    misrepresentations used by tough on crime prosecutors,
                    judges, and law makers to garner votes despite a steady, twenty-six-year decline
                    in rates of crime . Breaking such circuits and
                    dismantling such walls will not be achieved by close reading of a handful of
                    essays, nor by reading data hit lists and clusters (however useful such reading
                    methods clearly are to particular purposes and, again, to helping us determine
                    where to read at greater depth). These simply are not how incarcerated writers
                    conceive of their work or intend it to be read; and if incarcerated lives
                    matter, so should the intentions among their representatives.
                Legal scholar Robert Cover famously noted that Legal
                        interpretation takes place in a field of pain and death
                    : the law suppresses violence by casting
                    legal sanction over the acts of violence carried out by the police, courts, and
                    prisons. Since the deaths of Michael Brown, Tamir Rice, Eric Garner, Sandra
                    Brown, George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, and too many others, and the rise of the Black Lives Matter movement, the
                    cost-benefit balance of this sanctioning (Black costs v. white benefits) have
                    been called into question. Cover did not live to see his claims brought home by
                    cell-phone videos, and he only tentatively pointed toward the corollary to his
                    own claim: Without understanding both the breadth and the depth of human
                    suffering experienced on the receiving end of legalized violence, we can never
                    understand the full human cost of, let alone understand our location within the
                    current legal order. This is a cost and location that prison witness, on a scale
                    that only a digital platform can provide, makes clear. 
                As a social justice enterprise, new here are the technologies that offer rapid
                    dissemination, facetted searching, and the rich rewards (and temptations) of
                    distant reading that create the close v. distant, either/or dilemma. What is not
                    new is the cellular or mid-range reading that the APWA helps to make possible,
                    at an accelerated scale, for prison witness. 
            


                The History of the Present
                A first major proof of the power of a peculiarly American literary corpus,
                    subjected to cellular reading, to foment social change came with the rise of
                    slave narratives. First-person testimony by former slaves would prove one of the
                    most effective weapons in the abolitionist arsenal .
                    While documenting previously unimaginable conditions of degradation, and thus
                    confronting southern propaganda, the witness borne by former slaves presented
                    depths of moral and intellectual acuity, emotional allegiance and social
                    alliances that few white readers had to practice in their own lives.  For
                        print collections of slave narratives, see  and ; for
                        comprehensive archives, see  Like
                    incarcerated people today, former-slaves countered popular misrepresentation of
                    a dehumanizing institution, protesting their condition by bearing witness to the
                    dignity of the objects of popular invective. This was not achieved by close
                    reading of a handful of texts, nor, of course, with data sets, but by cellular
                    reading, in which every whipping taken by one author stood proxy for a thousand,
                    including those whose experience never saw print, and thus exposing the moral
                    culpability of passive compliance. All witnesses speak for the muted, for the
                        musselmanner, as the living called the walking dead inside
                    Auschwitz 
                    ; and all witness recipients are (at least
                    potentially) morally repositioned by such reception. The aim of the APWA, after
                    231 years, is to open precisely that public, affective
                        exchange that Benjamin Rush sought to block in fear that exposure
                    of human suffering would evoke sympathy and desire to relieve that suffering
                        ; an exchange much like that which
                    slave narrative helped to precipitate war and the abolition of slavery. With
                    this aim, the argument here is, again, not against data analysis. It is for a
                    plenum and balance of reading proximities, from close, into cellular reading
                    (with its tried historical precedents), to those generated by computation, and
                    for an ethically responsible complementarity of reading proximities that never
                    loses sight of the primacy of whole statements by whole individuals. Stephen
                    Ramsey remarks that DH is strongest when it resists seeing data as
                        more valid than humanistic inquiry . My claim is that such a balance — and
                    embrace of the broad, deep, and morally engaging middle ground between the close
                    and the distant — is best suited to affect change in social practice. History
                    and prison witnesses themselves have rushed the gates of analog publication and
                    into DH; we must take care to avoid atomizing their testimony. 
                Witness literatures are resistance literatures, and The
                        literature of resistance sees itself…as immediately and directly involved in
                        a struggle against ascendant or dominant forms of ideological and cultural
                        production
                    ; they are grounded in concrete and whole
                    human experiences of the effects of these forms of productions — including the
                    production forms of digital computation used by state agencies — and they are
                    collectively dialogic: duty, propriety, right and wrong, justice, and equity
                    bear different denotations to a slave and to an incarcerated person than they do
                    to slave masters and prison guards. Acts of prison testimony document not only
                    how failures in public policy, civil services, mental and physical health care,
                    foster care, public education, policing and court and prison practices are
                    translated into broken lives; they instruct us in how to retain our humanity in
                    the face of legally organized suffering, which also includes retaining human
                    status in a world beset by datafication. As Jill Stauffer writes, …understanding what dehumanizes also helps us determine what
                        we take a human being to be
                    . For even while prisons strip
                    incarcerated people of other means of attempting to make good of their pasts,
                    they are doing the work of restorative justice, offering up what they have
                    learned from their lives, their crimes, and from our punishments. This is the
                    reason why we must pick our steps carefully between the ironies that line the
                    path of (re)datafication of voices struggling to break free from the data piles
                    gathered by the administrators of state violence, and by researchers outside. As
                    noted, APWA writers provide the contents of the archive’s metadata; they can
                    also choose to withhold that information, not only for their own protection, but
                    as an exercise of freedom. 
            

                From Analog to Digital Witness
                Commitment to individual witnesses starts with granting full discretion over the
                    metadata they provide. It continues with the hard-copy documents we receive, scanning
                    pages so that visitors can see (as far as flat screens are able to convey) the
                    material condition of individual texts. These include hand writing (in about
                    half of all submissions; Fig. 2); texts typed on manual typewriters and word
                    processors — the latter available to those few with access to computer stations
                    in classrooms or who have white collar jobs inside (Fig. 3 and 4); and, less
                    frequently, texts previously published in prison newsletters and newspapers (the
                    latter by third parties outside; Fig. 5, 6). 

                
                     
                    Handwritten text on notebook paper
                    
                

                
                     
                    Typed text. The header reads 2nd Class Citizen
                            Asser 1st Amendment Rights
                    
                

                
                     
                    Typed text on a word processor
                    
                

                
                     
                    Typed newspaper written by ROnash Marshall
                    
                

                
                     
                    Typed newsletter by Kenneth Hartman
                    
                


                While the value of all prison witness is in principle equal, the conditions of
                    composition clearly are not. Prison-composed texts show evidence of
                    state-imposed resistance in the materials; but rather than
                        reveal[ing] opportunity, as Bethany Nowviskie
                    claims  , this manner of resistance
                    shows the unequal distribution of opportunities inside. A text composed with a
                    ballpoint pen filler (the plastic cylinders prohibited since they can be turned
                    into tattoo guns, syringes, or weapons) and a library staff clerk’s
                    word-processor indicate different opportunities in the very act of composition.
                    A newspaper article necessarily indicates outside support. The graphic state of
                    texts offers one consistently distinguishing material indicator of what it is
                    for the writer at hand to write from inside. As Paul Fyfe claims (in another
                    context) the accidents are often essential
                    . The accidents of prison-witness documents
                    announce their emergence from the unequal conditions of writers in willfully
                    low-to-no-tech environments. 
                This, of course, is lost amid big data, along with the voice of the individual,
                    and the distinct conditions inside each prison, prison block, and prison cell;
                    and such documentation is, after all, largely the point for these writers. Life
                    with an aggressive, schizophrenic cellmate in a grossly understaffed prison is
                    quite different from a tenth year in solitary confinement, and from life with a
                    cellmate with whom one shares interests in, say, Scrabble and historical
                    fiction. Only mid-range reading can account for such differences in the way that
                    these writes intend, and in the ways that can affect the ethical agents lighted
                    up inside witness readers — however well text analysis might supplement any such
                    effect. 
                The next level of individuation of these writers is, of course, the voices of the
                    texts, which range from desperate, semi-literate cries for help, fact-based
                    policy critiques, and hip-hop inflected shout outs, to structured legal briefs,
                    angry diatribes, wistful pleas, clinical treatment proposals, and everything
                        between. Like other research archives, the APWA does not discriminate.
                        All work is posted, unless it advocates violence, names names in ongoing
                        legal cases, or libels named individuals. (Such cases are rare since
                        incarcerated people know what they can and cannot say and remain safe.)
                        These limits are imposed largely to protect incarcerated people from
                        retribution. Whenever possible, we simply redact identifying information. Beyond single voices, there is the subject matter of
                    these essays, which, as noted, narrows the range from all included voices to a
                    recognizable set of issues (though often multiple and mixed inside individual
                    essays) inside facilities whose basic mission is the same: to confine human
                    beings against their will and do them damage. While we mine for broad sets of
                    words, sentiments, syntactical patterns, etc., cellular reading reveals that
                    even when general subject matter may be similar, and the language similar enough
                    to fall together in text analysis, each writer brings their individual
                    biographies, conditions, and experience to these issues in distinct settings;
                    each writes at once to document and protest their particular conditions, and to
                    represent US incarceration en masse. (Even in the small sampling above
                    in figures 2 through 6, note how often writers assume the authority to address
                    the prison system as a whole.) Mass incarceration dehumanizes by treating
                    individuals as mere units of a mass. Data mining can no doubt reveal
                    important and telling patterns in such statements, and it can lead us to rich
                    sites for closer reading; but it can also — like state actors — reduce
                    imprisoned people and their discourse to types. We cannot undo mass
                    incarceration by the massification of prison witness; nor, even as it helps us
                    map, can we expect data points to evoke the affective responses needed to
                    motivate advocacy for changes in penal conditions, thinking, or policy. These
                    writers write at their risk, in order both to distinguish themselves from and to
                    witness for a mass population. The mid-range reading for which I’m advocating is
                    a practice that contributors assume. Lexical patterns and word frequencies can
                    reveal broad trends within a corpus; they are not what prison witnesses intend
                    to create, and it is with respect for and to seek guidance from the incarcerated
                    that the APWA was built, as a basis for policy critique and activism aimed at
                    concrete changes in practice. The other side of this project is, of course, in
                    the hands of readers using the search capacities availed to them by the site and
                    populated by information provided by incarcerated people.
                Visitors will come to the archive with a range of motives and curiosities. It is
                    in the aggregate of visitor reading patterns and purposes and outcomes where
                    there unfolds the critical mirror effect, the
                    greater-than-individual/less-than-mass-scale balance point (>
                        <) that serves as a fulcrum for the demassifying of mass-scale
                    witness while fully cognizant (as are prison writers) of a mass-scale backdrop.
                    One can, for example, select out essays by writers who self-identify as African
                    American, as male, and as confined in Michigan, thus curating, for the first
                    time, a cellular network of men who can speak to racial and legal conditions in
                    that state. This is the point (both critical moment and purpose) of cellular or
                    proximal reading aided by search capacities. The many ways in and subjects about
                    which incarcerated people write become animated by the many ways of searching,
                    reading, and curating this work. Daniel J. Cohen notes that Curation becomes more important than publication once
                        publication ceases to be limited
                    . Working with prison witness, curation
                    becomes inextricably political; it expands, into social and legal practice, Alan
                    Liu’s claim that DH can establish new communities between the humanities and the
                    public . One community that has been created
                    of necessity around the APWA — creating a new opportunity from the
                        resistance in the materials — is that of transcribers
                    of handwritten essays into internally searchable texts.
                        Transcribe-athons held at libraries, courses that offer
                    transcription as a requirement option, and people outside of academia
                    volunteering their time have joined in the work of making carceral witness
                    available to search. At their best, such projects refocus DH on the intersection of digital production and social
                        transformation
                    . On the other, big-data side of this
                    meeting point, computational analysis is, as noted, now in progress, and it will
                    open a range of reading, research, and secondary witness methods to view and to
                    multiplication. 
            

                Conclusions
                In the final chapter of Michelle Alexander’s 2010 best-selling The New Jim Crow — a book that helped raise the
                    conversation about mass incarceration into a national debate 
                     — the author warns: Isolated
                        victories can be won — even a string of victories — but in the absence of a
                        fundamental shift in public consciousness, the system as a whole will remain
                        intact
                    . Political scientist Marie Gottschalk
                    echoes Alexander’s conclusion and (inadvertently) suggests where such a shift
                    might begin, modelled on an earlier literary revolution:
                The slave narratives of the antebellum period, which graphically
                    rendered the physical pain that slaves suffered and made it widely visible,
                    helped to propel the abolitionist cause. Today, what happens in prison stays
                    mostly in prison, making it harder to draw connections in the public mind
                    between justice on the inside and justice on the outside. The ability to
                    identify with an offender — or not — is a key predictor of why people differ in
                    their levels of punitiveness. The invisibility of the millions of people behind
                    bars has made it extremely difficult to alter the negative portrait that members
                    of the general public have in their heads of people who have been convicted of a
                    crime. They are simply prisoners and criminals. As such, they often are denied
                    their humanity and any right to democratic accountability, much as slaves were
                    in the United States.
                

                The aim of the APWA is to unveil the prison and imprisoned people from centuries
                    of intentional invisibility and willful misrepresentation, as well as to invite
                    humanists of all stripes — with their highly nuanced, diverse, and diversifying
                    manners of reading — back into the work of helping to understand what US prisons
                    actually do, what the full, rich range of imprisoned people encompasses, and to allow
                    and invite the general public, as well as lawmakers and the families of
                    incarcerated people, to meet those who are arguably our most incisive guides to
                    a world beyond prisons. My hope is that the APWA, as well as other DH workers
                    and especially those working with first-person witness corpora, will use the
                    powerful tools now at hand to amplify and arrange, as witness voices dictate,
                    rather than merely to datify the testimony of those on the receiving end of
                    collectively organized, silencing, and too often silently suffered institutions
                    of legal quarantine. 
                For every man, woman, or trans person recorded on video while dying at police
                    hands, thousands of Americans are quietly disappeared into US prisons. These
                    people are now speaking in mass because DH/SJW has allowed them to speak from
                    across state boundaries, from city and country, raising a chorus that sounds out
                    every pothole on the road of opportunity supposedly open to every American.
                    Reading of the suffering demanded for stumbling upon that road, we are forced to
                    reassess whether any concrete facts lie behind the language we use to discuss
                    rule of law, due process, and justice. No political representative, no social
                    scientist, and no one else speaking from outside can provide what direct witness
                    to legally sanctioned suffering offers. No other platform can open that witness
                    to a world that today needs to learn humility before the voices of those on the
                    receiving end of populist and demagogic rhetoric, which saw its recent
                    inception in the rhetoric of law and order.
                    Republican presidential candidate Barry Goldwater started this trend in
                        1964, but Democrats quickly joined the drumbeat in a forty-year,
                        tougher-on-crime-than-you arms race that culminated under Bill Clinton (the
                        only president to toughen sanctions while crime rates were falling 
                        
                        ). The fear-mongering politics of today have a
                        bipartisan lineage.  Countering the dehumanizing, tribal nationalism
                    we see rising today, witness literatures offer the chance to strengthen as we
                    test the common terms we use to understand our humanity; and this is
                    understanding that we need in order to underwrite democratic institutions.
                This is what empathic revolutions do: they open one lexicon in order to
                    recalibrate another, humbling unquestioned presumptions about what constitutes
                    the human. Prison witness has the potential to dismantle and reset the terms of
                    discussion of a nation that regularly claims itself a model to the world of
                    humane, democratic, and egalitarian practices, offering a new vision of how we
                    might proceed. It illuminates, as the testimony of former slaves once did, just
                    where and how civil life, its capital means, cultural and social assumptions,
                    and majoritarian tyrannies — once translated into legal enforcement — have
                    worked to sustain an American underclass. On its basis — gathered, archived,
                    disseminated, read, curated, as well as analyzed, and mined at scale — we might
                    be positioned to recalibrate how we theorize and practice law, punishment, and
                    even nationhood.  Dylan Rodriguez (echoing ideas in 
                        
                        ) notes that, rather than the prison being one
                        among other state practices, …it is the prison regime
                            that possesses and constitutes the state
                        . This confluence was present at the
                        nation’s founding, such that [T]he history of the
                            United States and the history of incarceration have been joined in a
                            fundamental way ever since
                        .
                
                My conviction is that readers willing to read prison witness will find spread
                    before them not only a richly illustrated map of our failures to care for each
                    other — civic, political, ethical, economic, and social — but a map as well for
                    building a nation empathic at last to all of its members: citizens and
                    non-citizens of all races and ethnicities, all classes, genders, creeds,
                    abilities, and sexualities… In response to calls for DH to address inequality
                    and social injustice, digital humanists can seek to build platforms for activism
                    modeled on proven reading methods of the past while keeping their eyes on the
                    yet untouched horizon of a more humane and equitable future.
            
