Title:  Can an author style be unveiled through word
                    distribution?
Volume:  015
Issue:  1
Date:  21 May 2021
Abstract:  
                
                 The inclusion of semantic features in the stylometric analysis of literary texts
                    appears to be poorly investigated. In this work, we experiment with the
                    application of Distributional Semantics to a corpus of Italian literature to
                    test if words distribution can convey stylistic cues. To verify our hypothesis,
                    we have set up an Authorship Attribution experiment. Indeed, the results we have
                    obtained suggest that the style of an author can reveal itself through words
                    distribution too. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                 Stylometry, that is the application of the study of linguistic style, offers a
                    means of capturing the elusive character of an author’s style by quantifying
                    some of its features. The basic stylometric assumption is that each writer has a
                        human stylome
                    , that is a set of certain stylistic
                    idiosyncrasies that define their style. Analysis based on stylometry is often
                    used for Authorship Attribution (AA) tasks, since the main idea behind
                    computationally supported AA is that by measuring some textual features, it is
                    possible to distinguish between texts written by different authors . One of the less investigated stylistic features
                    is the way in which authors use words from a semantic point of view, e.g. if
                    they tend to use more, when dealing with polysemous words, a certain sense over
                    the others, or senses that differ (even slightly) from the one that is more
                    commonly used (as it happens, typically, in poetry). It would then be
                    interesting to discover if the semantics an author bestows to words is actually
                    part of its human stylome. Computing semantics,
                    though, is far from easy.
                 A possible approach to the analysis of this characteristic is to consider the
                    textual contexts in which certain words appear. According to Distributional
                    Semantics (DS), certain aspects of the meaning of lexical expressions depend on
                    the distributional properties of such expressions, or better, on the contexts in
                    which they are observed 
                    . The semantic properties of a word can then
                    be defined by inspecting a significant number of linguistic contexts,
                    representative of the distributional behavior of such word.
                 In this work, we would like to investigate if the analysis of the distribution
                    of words in a text can be exploited to provide a stylistic cue. In order to
                    inspect that, we have experimented with the application of DS to the stylometric
                    analysis of literary texts belonging to a corpus constituted by texts pertaining
                    to the work of six Italian writers of the late nineteenth century. In the
                    following, Section 2 both provides a brief survey on the works related to
                    stylometry and introduces the fundamental Distributional Semantics concepts on
                    which this works relies upon. Section 3 describes the approach together with the
                    corpus used to conduct our investigation and Section 4 discusses results.
                    Finally, Section 5 draws some conclusions and outlines some possible future
                    works. 
            

                Background Knowledge

                
                
                    Stylometry
                     Even if the first attempt at computing the writing style of an author dates
                        back to the first half of the 20th century (
                        
                        ), the work that is believed to be the starting
                        point of the so-called non-traditional Authorship Attribution is a
                        study by Mosteller and Wallace
                            (1964). They conducted an investigation on the authorship of the
                            Federalist Paper, a series of political
                        essays written by John Jay, Alexander Hamilton, and James Madison, 12 of
                        which have ambiguous paternity, being claimed by both Hamilton and Madison.
                        From then on (to, at least, the end of the 1990s), research in AA mainly
                        coincided with stylometry, i.e. defining features to quantify the
                        style of an author by using measures based on counting frequencies of words,
                        characters, and sentences 
                        .
                     Despite their working well, these systems followed a methodology that
                        underwent some limitations, such as the little statistical homogeneity of
                        the analyzed texts or the fact that the evaluation of the developed methods
                        was mainly intuitive, using corpora that were not controlled for topic;
                        moreover the lack of benchmark data made it difficult to compare different
                        methods. These problems were partially overcome at the end of the 1990s,
                        when the internet made a vast amount of electronic texts available, also
                        highlighting all different areas in which AA could be useful, beyond that of
                        literary research (i.e. intelligence ,
                        criminal and civil law 
                        , computer forensic  and so on). Nowadays, the main emphasis on AA tasks regards the objective
                        evaluation of the proposed methods using common benchmark corpora .
                     As previously stated, the very first attempts to analyze the style of an
                        author were mainly based on lexical features, such as sentence length count
                        or words length count, which can be applied to any language and corpus
                        without additional requirements 
                        
                        
                        . Character measures, too, have been proven to
                        be useful in quantifying the writing style. A text can then be viewed as a
                        sequence of characters on which various measures (such as alphabetic, digit,
                        uppercase and lowercase characters count) can be defined 
                        
                        . A more elaborate text representation method is
                        based on the assumption that authors tend to use similar syntactic patterns,
                        so syntactic information is employed, being considered a more reliable
                        authorial fingerprint than lexical information 
                        
                        
                        
                        .
                     Very few attempts to exploit high-level features for stylometric purposes
                        have been made, due to the fact that tasks such as full syntactic parsing,
                        semantic analysis, or pragmatic analysis cannot yet be handled adequately by
                        current NLP technologies. The most important method of exploiting semantic
                        information, so far, was based on the theory of Systemic Functional Grammar
                        (SFG)  and consisted on the definition of a set
                        of functional features that associate certain words or phrases with semantic
                        information, as described in Argamon
                        (2007).
                     However, the goal of our work is to use only information about words
                        distribution, in order to discover if a correlation between an author's
                        style and words distribution exists. In order to analyze words distribution,
                        we rely on the Distributional Hypothesis and, consequently, on
                        Distributional Semantics. Their theoretical basis will be presented in the
                        next subsection. 
                
                
                
                    Distributional Semantics
                     The assumption behind all distributional semantics models (DSMs) is that the
                        notion of semantic similarity can be defined in terms of linguistic
                        distributions. This is known as the Distributional Hypothesis, which is
                        stated as follows: The degree of semantic similarity between two
                            linguistic expressions a and b depends on the similarity of the
                            linguistic contexts in which a and b can appear. In accord with this
                        definition, certain aspects of the meaning of lexical expressions depend on
                        the contexts in which they are observed. The semantic properties of a word
                        can then be defined by inspecting a significant number of linguistic
                        contexts, representative of the distributional behavior of such word.
                     Despite the huge consensus reached lately by this theory in Computational
                        Linguistics, its origins reside in the context of Zellig Harris’ proposal of
                        Distributional Semantics as the bedrock of linguistics as a scientific
                        discipline . Harris’ proposal was conceived for
                        phonemic analysis and later turned into a general methodology to be applied
                        at every linguistic level. The distribution procedure was regarded as a way
                        for linguists to give a methodological base to their analysis. He then, not
                        only extended his theory to meaning but assumed that meaning could actually
                        be explained on distributional grounds. The Distributional Hypothesis can be
                        considered a cognitive hypothesis about the form and origin of semantic
                        representations . Some of the most
                        influential models for distributional semantics, such as Latent Semantic
                        Analysis (LSA; ) and Hyperspace Analogue
                        to Language (HAL; ) have been developed for
                        cognitive and psychological research, meant to represent how semantic
                        representations are learned by extracting co-occurrence patterns . 
                    Within the corpus linguistics tradition, there was no need to motivate the
                        Distributional Hypothesis as a methodological principle for semantic
                        analysis. This is better summarized in the well-mentioned slogan by Firth:
                            You shall know a word by the company it
                            keeps
                        . In corpus linguistics, the Distributional
                        Hypothesis is often claimed to be the only possible source of evidence for
                        the exploration of meaning.
                    Distributional Semantics has gained popularity in computational linguistics
                        starting from the late 1980s when there was the progressive predominance of
                        corpus-based statistical methods for language processing. Within this new
                        paradigm, statistical methods were naturally applied to the lexical-semantic
                        analysis. Corpora are indeed connected to Distributional Semantics since
                        they can be used as repositories of linguistic usages, then representing the
                        primary source of information to identify the world distributional
                        properties. Their role has been enhanced by the current availability of a
                        huge collection of texts, contextually with increasingly sophisticated
                        computational linguistics techniques to process them and extract the
                        relevant context feature to build distributional semantic representations.
                        Despite its currently being corpus-based, distributional semantics is not
                        prevented to underline aspects of the format and origin of word meaning and
                        the issue of how and to what extent features extracted from the linguistic
                        input actually shape meaning. 
                    The way in which it is possible to proceed in order to infer a geometric
                        representation starting from distributional information can be originated
                        from Harris (1970), who writes that the distribution of an element will be understood as the
                            sum of all its environments. In linguistics, an environment is
                        called a context, and we here assume a context to be the setting of a word,
                        phrase, etc., among the surrounding words, phrases, etc., often used for
                        helping to explain the meaning of the word, phrase, etc. 
                    One way to collect this information is to tabulate the contextual
                        information, so that for each word we provide a list of the co-occurrents of
                        the word and the number of times they have co-occurred. In a second step, we
                        take away the actual words and only leave the co-occurrence counts. Also, we
                        make each list equally long by adding zeroes in the places where we lack
                        co-occurrence information. We also sort each list so that the co-occurrence
                        counts for each context come in the same places in the lists. The
                        mathematical backbone of Latent Semantic Analysis , is Singular Value Decomposition, a
                        well-known linear algebra technique aimed at extracting the most informative
                        dimensions in a matrix of data and here used to reconstruct the latent
                        structure behind the distributional hypothesis . The names vector semantics, word or semantic spaces merely highlight
                        specific mathematical techniques used to formalize the notion of contextual
                        representation. This information can then be modeled as vectors, as
                        described in Schütze (1992), Schütze (1993), who builds context vectors
                        (which he calls term vectors or word vectors) in the following way: co-occurrence
                        counts are collected in a words-by-words matrix, in which the elements
                        record the number of times two words co-occur within a set window of word
                        tokens. 
                    Context vectors are then defined as the rows or the columns of the matrix
                        (the matrix is symmetric, so it does not matter if the rows or the columns
                        are used). A cell fij of the co-occurrence matrix records the frequency of
                        occurrence of the word i in the context of the word j or of the document j,
                        as shown in Figure 1. 
                            Words-by-words co-occurrences matrix.
                            Words-by-words co-occurrences matrix
                            
                         Context vectors do not only allow us to go from distributional
                        information to a geometric representation, but they also make it possible
                        for us to compute proximity between words. Thus, the point of the context
                        vectors is that they allow us to define (distributional, semantic)
                        similarity between words in terms of vector similarity. There are many ways
                        to compute the similarity between vectors, and the measures can be divided
                        into similarity measures and distance measures. The difference is that
                        similarity measures produce a high score for similar objects, whereas
                        distance measures produce a low score for the same objects: large similarity
                        equals small distance, and conversely. A convenient way to compute
                        normalized vector similarity is to calculate the cosine of the angles
                        between two vectors x and y, defined as: $$ sim_{cos(\vec x,\vec y)} = \frac{x \cdot y}{|x| \cdot
                            |y|}=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^n x_{i} \cdot y_{i}}{\sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^n x_{i}^{2}}
                            \cdot \sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^n y_{i}^{2}}}$$ The cosine measure
                        corresponds to taking the scalar product of the vectors and then dividing by
                        their norms. It is the most frequently utilized similarity metric in
                        word-space research. It is attractive because it provides a fixed measure of
                        similarity: it ranges from 1 for identical vectors, over 0 for orthogonal
                        vectors. Figure 2 shows an example of the
                        graphical representation of words vectors related to the matrix depicted in
                        Figure 1. The words cat and dog in the matrix above are
                        depicted as never appearing together in the same context. This does not mean
                        the ey are not semantically similar, because they can actually happen in
                        really similar contexts, it just means they don't appear together in the
                        context windows we defined. Anyway, here, we represent cat and
                            dog as dissimilar, being the angle between their vector of almost
                        90 degrees. The vector representative of the word animal is instead
                        as similar to that of dog than to that of cat, while the
                        vector representative of the word canine is closer to the vector
                        representative of dog than to cat and the vector
                        representative of feline is closer to cat than to dog
                        meaning that canine is more semantically similar to dog and
                            feline is more semantically similar to cat. Also, the
                        vectors of canine and feline are both close to animal,
                        suggesting that the two words are often used in similar contexts in the
                        texts analyzed to generate the co-occurrence vectors here represented. Of
                        course, this example is not representative of the linguistic and semantic
                        reality of things, but entirely indicative and apt to properly describe and
                        illustrate the concept of vectorial representation of semantic similarity.
                            
                            Vector Similarity.
                            Vector Similarity
                            
                        
                    
                
            

                Experimental Setup
                First, we want to specify that it is not our purpose to propose new ways to
                    improve state-of-the-art AA algorithms. Indeed, our aim is just to verify the
                    hypothesis that the distribution of words can provide an indication of a
                    distributional stylistic fingerprint of an author. To do this, we have set up a
                    simple classification task. Subsection 3.1 briefly depicts the data set we used,
                    Section 3.2 describes why and how we chose the authors that would constitute our
                    dataset and Section 3.3 depicts the steps implemented in our experiment. 

                
                    
                    Data Set Construction
                    In order to build the reference and test corpora, we started from texts
                        pertaining to the work of six Italian writers working at the turn of the
                        20th century, namely, Luigi Capuana, Federico De Roberto, Luigi Pirandello,
                        Italo Svevo, Federigo Tozzi and Giovanni Verga. We chose contiguous authors
                        in a chronological sense, whose texts are available in digital format (in
                        fact we could not do a similar survey on the narrative of the 1990s because
                        it is still under copyrights). Indeed, we used texts freely available for
                        download from the digital library of the Manunzio project, via the
                        LiberLiber website (www.liberliber.it). Since they were encoded in various formats,
                        such as .epub, .odt, and .txt, our pre-processing consisted in converting
                        them all in .txt format and getting rid of all XML tags, together with
                        footnotes and editors’ notes and comments. 
                
                
                    
                    Authors and Texts Choice
                    In between the 1875 and the early 1900s, a literary movement peaked in Italy:
                        Verismo (meaning realism, from Italian vero, meaning true).
                        The main exponents of this literary movement, as well as the authors of its
                        manifesto, were Giovanni Verga and Luigi Capuana. Verismo did not constitute
                        a formal school, but it was still based on specific principles, its birth
                        being influenced by a positivist climate which put absolute faith in
                        science, empiricism, and research and which developed from 1830 until the
                        end of the 19th century.
                    All the authors selected to build the corpus used for this work pertained to
                        the temporal span in which the Literary Verismo developed, but not all of
                        them are proponents of such genre. Indeed, three of the selected authors are
                        considered to be Verist Authors (Giovanni Verga, Federico De Roberto, and
                        Luigi Capuana) while three (Luigi Pirandello, Federico Tozzi, and Italo
                        Svevo) are representative of another Literary Movement: Modernism. We
                        decided to choose texts pertaining to those authors and literary movements
                        firstly because of their being all written in the same temporal span. This
                        allowed us to get rid of any eventual lexical bias, due to the difference in
                        languages of works published in different epochs.
                    Also, the selection was performed having in mind an eventual future evolution
                        of this work. Using texts pertaining to the same period, but to different
                        literary movement, would allow us to investigate the ability of our method
                        in recognizing the literary movement the texts pertain to, instead of the
                        author that wrote them. This style-based text categorization tasks, known as
                        genre detection, is quite similar to authorship attribution, even if there
                        are characteristics that distinguish the one from the other. An important
                        question to investigate, then, is how it would be possible to discriminate
                        between two basic factors: authorship and genre, and if semantics could be
                        useful not only for recognizing the author of a literary work but also the
                        literary genre it pertains to.
                    Another line of research that has not been adequately examined so far is the
                        development of robust attribution techniques that can be trained on texts
                        from one genre and applied to texts of another genre by the same authors.
                        The way we selected and balanced the texts composing the corpus could be
                        useful for this task, too. 
                
                
                
                    Experiment Description
                    According to Rudman (1997), a striking
                        problem in stylometry is due to the lack of homogeneity of the examined
                        corpora, in particular to the improper selection or fragmentation of the
                        texts that might cause alterations in the writers’ style. As already
                        depicted in the previous section, the corpus has been built according to
                        this assumption, trying to use texts pertaining to the same time span and
                        balanced between the two selected literary movements. Also, in order to
                        create balanced reference corpora, i.e. covering all the authors’ different
                        stylistic and thematic phases, for each author, as shown in Figure 3, we built a reference corpus as the
                        composition of the 70% of every single work (usually a novel). The same
                        technique was used to create the test corpus by using the remaining 30% of
                        each work. Typical AA approaches consist of analyzing known authors and
                        assigning authorship to previously unseen text on the basis of various
                        features. Train and test sets should then contain different texts. Contrary
                        to the classical AA task, our train and test sets contain different parts of
                        the same texts. Indeed, with this experiment, we wanted to understand if the
                        semantics that an author bestows to a word, is peculiar to his writing. To
                        prove this, we wanted to cover all the different stylistic and thematic
                        phases an author can go through during his activity, hence the partition of
                        all his texts in a reference and a test portion.
                    Our work relies on the assumption that the works of an author are
                        representative of the author's thought, so it is assumed that the semantics
                        that an author associates with certain words are representative of its
                        thoughts. One possible flaw of this kind of approach is that if an author
                        changes the semantics that he associates with concepts in different works
                        overtime, the method might not work. It can happen that an author who has a
                        long career changes its point of view on things and this should obviously
                        reflect on its works. This is one of the main reasons why we decided to use
                        all the works from each author as training text. We wanted to take into
                        account each different phase an author may go through during its career,
                        especially considering changes in the semantics associated with concepts. 
                    Using all the works of each author allows us to have complete photography of
                        the author itself, and allows to understand the semantics associated with
                        concepts through all its work, even accounting for changes. In fact, the
                        association between words extracted using our method would highlight changes
                        in semantics by changing the score associated with a pair of words. Let’s
                        hypothesize that a strong association for the young Verga (i.e. for Verga in
                        his first works) is sun and joy, while later on the strongest association
                        is, let’s say, moon and joy. Our hypothesis would be that, while in first
                        works Verga associated the concept of sun with that of joy,
                        later on, is the concept of moon that is associated with that of
                            joy. Deciding to use some works of Verga as train as some other
                        as tests might then be deceiving, because what is semantically true for his
                        first work is not true later on. Using our method, if an association is true
                        just for some works, and not for all its score is evened out and the pair of
                        words is not that semantically relevant, and thus is not used for
                        classification. Pair with high score are those for which the association
                        between the concepts are true throughout all the work of an author, or
                        reports a score that is so high in one or more work, that is could not be
                        evened out from the score reported in all the other association from all the
                        other works from that particular author. 
                    We then analyzed each reference and test corpora with a Part-of-Speech (PoS)
                        tagger and a lemmatizer for Italian . For
                        every author, we built two lists of word pairs (with their lemma and PoS),
                        one relative to the tagged reference corpus (reference pairs) and the other
                        to the tagged test set (test pairs), where each word was paired with all the
                        other words with the same PoS. We also filtered the pairs to leave only
                        nouns, adjectives and verbs. Starting from the tagged corpora, we built two
                        words-by-words matrixes of co-occurrence counts for each author. Being the
                        corpus relatively small and not having particular computability issues, we
                        chose not to apply decomposition techniques to reduce the size of the
                        matrixes (and thus not losing any information). We performed different
                        empiric setup of the window’s size and chose the one that showed more
                        suitable results, according to what is stated by Kruszewski and Baroni: the
                        context window was then set to 3 words prior and 3 words following the one
                        under examination . The chosen DS model
                             was applied to each matrix to calculate
                        the cosine between the vectors representing the two words of each pair. This
                        allowed us to evaluate the semantic relatedness between the words by
                        assessing their proximity in the distributional space as represented by the
                        cosine value: as explained in Section 2.2, the more this value tends to 1,
                        the more the two words of the pair are considered to be related. We then
                        obtained two related word pair (RWP) lists for each author A: RWPrefA and
                        RWPtestA. Figure 3 depicts the process described above. 
                            RWPref and RWPtest creation process for an author.
                            RWPref and RWPtest creation process for an author
                            
                        
                    
                
            

                Hypothesis and Discussion
                 Since we wanted to focus on the analysis of the semantic distribution of words,
                    we decided to exclude any possible lexical bias. For this reason, we
                    restricted the analysis on a common vocabulary, i.e. a vocabulary constituted by
                    the intersection of the six authors’ vocabularies. In this way, we prevent our
                    classifier to exploit, as a feature, the presence of words used by some (but not
                    all) of the authors. Moreover, we removed from the RWPtest lists all those pairs
                    of words occurring frequently together in the same context, since they might
                    constitute a multiword expression that, once again, could be pertaining with the
                    signature lexicon of each author. To remove them, we computed the number of
                    times (#co-occ in Figure 4) they appeared together
                    in the context window, as well as their total number of occurrences (#occa and
                    #occb) and we excluded from the analysis those pairs for which the ratio between
                    the number of co-occurrences and the total occurrences of the less frequent word
                    was higher than the empirically set threshold of 0.5. The first two pairs of
                    Figure 4 would be removed as probable multiword (PM column in Figure 4):
                        scoppio (burst) and risa (laughter) could mostly co-occur in
                        scoppio di risa (meaning burst of laughter) and the words
                        man and mano (both meaning hand) could mostly co-occur
                    in man mano (meaning little by little, or progressively).
                        
                        An example of co-occurring RWPs from Pirandello’s test list: the first
                            two pairs would be removed.
                        An example of co-occurring RWPs from Pirandello’s test list: the
                            first two pairs would be removed
                        
                     Finally, we reduced the size of the six RWPref and RWPtest lists by
                    sorting them in decreasing order of the cosine value and then by keeping the
                    pairs with the highest cosine, selected using a percentage parameter θ as a
                    threshold. We chose to introduce the parameter θ for two reasons: first of all
                    we wanted to avoid the classification algorithm to be disturbed by noisy (i.e.
                    not significative) pairs which would not hold any relevant stylistic cue, also,
                    we would like to ease a literary scholar in the interpretation of the results by
                    having to analyze just a limited selection of (potentially) semantically related
                    word pairs. For the last phase of our experiment, we defined a classification
                    algorithm to test the effective presence of stylistic cues inside the obtained
                    RWPtest lists. We defined a classifier using a nearest-cosine method to
                    attribute each test list to an author. The method consisted in searching for a
                    pair of words contained in the test list inside each reference list and
                    incrementing by 1 the score of the author whose reference list included the pair
                    with the more similar cosine value (i.e. having the minimum difference): the
                    chosen author was the one with the highest score. Figure 5 shows the
                    classification results for θ = 5%. 
                        Classification results, obtained via the nearest-cosine method for θ =
                            5%.
                        Classification results, obtained via the nearest-cosine method for
                            θ = 5%
                        
                     As summarized in Figure 6, the correct classification of all RWPs in
                    RWPtest lists has been obtained with a θ value of 5%. 
                        Results of the classification. Classification errors are
                            highlighted.
                        Results of the classification. Classification errors are
                            highlighted
                        
                     To help in interpreting the failure of the algorithm in classifying
                    Tozzi’s test list for θ values lower than 5% (as shown in Figure 6) we
                    calculated the cardinality of the RWPtest lists for each author with the change
                    in θ value (Figure 7). 
                        Cardinality of RWPtest for each author and for each θ value.
                        Cardinality of RWPtest for each author and for each θ
                            value
                        
                     It is possible to observe how the choice of θ influences the correct
                    classification of Tozzi’s test list. Indeed, the use of a θ sense below 5% has
                    the effect of remarkably reducing an already small test list (RWPtextTozzi) as
                    shown in Figure 7. It is apparent that increasing the value of θ and
                    consequently the number of significant RWPs that are analyzed, the system is
                    able to correctly classify RWPtestTozzi (see the values in Tozzi’s row of Figure
                    6). 
            

                Conclusion and Next Steps
                 In this paper, we investigated the possibility that an analysis of the semantic
                    distribution of words in a text can be potentially exploited to get cues about
                    the style of an author. In order to validate our hypothesis, we conducted the
                    first experiment on six different Italian authors. Of course, it is not our
                    intent, with this paper, to define new methods for enhancing state-of-the-art
                    authorship attribution algorithms. However, the obtained results seem to suggest
                    that the way words are distributed across a text, can provide a valid stylistic
                    cue to distinguish an author’s work. In light of what we have shown up to this
                    point, the direction of our next steps can be twofold. On the one hand, our
                    research will focus on detecting and providing useful indications about the
                    style of an author. This can be done by highlighting, for example, atypical
                    distributions of words (e.g. with contrastive methods) or by analyzing their
                    distributional variability. Furthermore, it could be interesting to use a
                    different distributional measure than the cosine, to test our hypothesis. On the
                    other hand, it would be interesting to confront the computational task of
                    authorship attribution, by measuring the effective contribution that a feature
                    based on distributional semantics would provide to a canonical classification
                    process. Also, as highlighted in Section 3.2.3,
                    another interesting development of this work would regard the investigation of
                    the ability of our method in recognizing the literary movement the texts pertain
                    to, instead of the author that wrote them. 
            
